Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


T IMES N ET: T EMPORAL 2D-VARIATION M ODELING
FOR G ENERAL T IME S ERIES A NALYSIS

 Haixu Wu∗, Tengge Hu∗, Yong Liu∗, Hang Zhou, Jianmin Wang, Mingsheng LongB
 School of Software, BNRist, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China
 {whx20,liuyong21,htg21,h-zhou18}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
 {jimwang,mingsheng}@tsinghua.edu.cn



                                               A BSTRACT

             Time series analysis is of immense importance in extensive applications, such as
             weather forecasting, anomaly detection, and action recognition. This paper focuses
             on temporal variation modeling, which is the common key problem of extensive
             analysis tasks. Previous methods attempt to accomplish this directly from the 1D
             time series, which is extremely challenging due to the intricate temporal patterns.
             Based on the observation of multi-periodicity in time series, we ravel out the com-
             plex temporal variations into the multiple intraperiod- and interperiod-variations.
             To tackle the limitations of 1D time series in representation capability, we extend
             the analysis of temporal variations into the 2D space by transforming the 1D time
             series into a set of 2D tensors based on multiple periods. This transformation can
             embed the intraperiod- and interperiod-variations into the columns and rows of
             the 2D tensors respectively, making the 2D-variations to be easily modeled by 2D
             kernels. Technically, we propose the TimesNet with TimesBlock as a task-general
             backbone for time series analysis. TimesBlock can discover the multi-periodicity
             adaptively and extract the complex temporal variations from transformed 2D ten-
             sors by a parameter-efficient inception block. Our proposed TimesNet achieves
             consistent state-of-the-art in five mainstream time series analysis tasks, including
             short- and long-term forecasting, imputation, classification, and anomaly detection.
             Code is available at this repository: https://github.com/thuml/TimesNet.


1       I NTRODUCTION

Time series analysis is widely used in extensive real-world applications, such as the forecasting of
meteorological factors for weather prediction (Wu et al., 2021), imputation of missing data for data
mining (Friedman, 1962), anomaly detection of monitoring data for industrial maintenance (Xu et al.,
2021) and classification of trajectories for action recognition (Franceschi et al., 2019). Because of its
immense practical value, time series analysis has received great interest (Lim & Zohren, 2021).
Different from other types of sequential data, such as language or video, time series is recorded
continuously and each time point only saves some scalars. Since one single time point usually cannot
provide sufficient semantic information for analysis, many works focus on the temporal variation,
which is more informative and can reflect the inherent properties of time series, such as the continuity,
periodicity, trend and etc. However, the variations of real-world time series always involve intricate
temporal patterns, where multiple variations (e.g. rising, falling, fluctuation and etc.) mix and overlap
with each other, making the temporal variation modeling extremely challenging.
Especially in the deep learning communities, benefiting from the powerful non-linear modeling
capacity of deep models, many works have been proposed to capture the complex temporal variations
in real-world time series. One category of methods adopts recurrent neural networks (RNN) to
model the successive time points based on the Markov assumption (Hochreiter & Schmidhuber,
1997; Lai et al., 2018; Shen et al., 2020). However, these methods usually fail in capturing the long-
term dependencies and their efficiency suffers from the sequential computation paradigm. Another
category of methods utilizes the convolutional neural network along the temporal dimension (TCN)
    ∗
        Equal Contribution


                                                      1
                                                                                  ŏ
                    Intraperiod-variation


Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023



                                                                                         Interperiod-variation
             Period 3
                                                                      Period 3
         Period 2
        Period 1

                                                                                                      Intraperiod-
                                                                                                        variation
Value

                                                       Period 2



                                                Time

                                          Period 1
             Time points at the same
                                                                  ŏ
             phase of different periods

             Interperiod-variation                       ŏ
                                                                                 ŏ
             Intraperiod-variation



Figure 1: Multi-periodicity and temporal 2D-variation of time series. Each period involves the
intraperiod-variation and interperiod-variation. We transform the original 1D time series into a set of
2D tensors based on multiple periods, which can unify the intraperiod- and interperiod-variations.

to extract the variation information (Franceschi et al., 2019; He & Zhao, 2019). Also, because of the
locality property of the one-dimension convolution kernels, they can only model the variations among
adjacent time points, thereby still failing in long-term dependencies. Recently, Transformers with
attention mechanism have been widely used in sequential modeling (Brown et al., 2020; Dosovitskiy
et al., 2021; Liu et al., 2021b). In time series analysis, many Transformer-based models adopt the
attention mechanism or its variants to capture the pair-wise temporal dependencies among time points
(Li et al., 2019; Kitaev et al., 2020; Zhou et al., 2021; 2022). But it is hard for attention mechanism
to find out reliable dependencies directly from scattered time points, since the temporal dependencies
can be obscured deeply in intricate temporal patterns (Wu et al., 2021).
In this paper, to tackle the intricate temporal variations, we analyze the time series from a new
dimension of multi-periodicity. Firstly, we observe that real-world time series usually present
multi-periodicity, such as daily and yearly variations for weather observations, weekly and quarterly
variations for electricity consumption. These multiple periods overlap and interact with each other,
making the variation modeling intractable. Secondly, for each period, we find out that the variation of
each time point is not only affected by the temporal pattern of its adjacent area but also highly related
to the variations of its adjacent periods. For clearness, we name these two types of temporal variations
as intraperiod-variation and interperiod-variation respectively. The former indicates short-term
temporal patterns within a period. The latter can reflect long-term trends of consecutive different
periods. Note that for the time series without clear periodicity, the variations will be dominated by
the intraperiod-variation and is equivalent to the ones with infinite period length.
Since different periods will lead to different intraperiod- and interperiod-variations, the multi-
periodicity can naturally derive a modular architecture for temporal variation modeling, where
we can capture the variations derived by a certain period in one module. Besides, this design makes
the intricate temporal patterns disentangled, benefiting the temporal variation modeling. However,
it is notable that the 1D time series is hard to explicitly present two different types of variations
simultaneously. To tackle this obstacle, we extend the analysis of temporal variations into the 2D
space. Concretely, as shown in Figure 1, we can reshape the 1D time series into a 2D tensor, where
each column contains the time points within a period and each row involves the time points at the
same phase among different periods. Thus, by transforming 1D time series into a set of 2D tensors,
we can break the bottleneck of representation capability in the original 1D space and successfully
unify the intraperiod- and interperiod-variations in 2D space, obtaining the temporal 2D-variations.
Technically, based on above motivations, we go beyond previous backbones and propose the TimesNet
as a new task-general model for time series analysis. Empowering by TimesBlock, TimesNet can
discover the multi-periodicity of time series and capture the corresponding temporal variations in a
modular architecture. Concretely, TimesBlock can adaptively transform the 1D time series into a set
of 2D tensors based on learned periods and further capture intraperiod- and interperiod-variations
in the 2D space by a parameter-efficient inception block. Experimentally, TimesNet achieves the
consistent state-of-the-art in five mainstream analysis tasks, including short- and long-term forecasting,
imputation, classification and anomaly detection. Our contributions are summarized in three folds:
              • Motivated by multi-periodicity and complex interactions within and between periods, we
                find out a modular way for temporal variation modeling. By transforming the 1D time series
                into 2D space, we can present the intraperiod- and interperiod-variations simultaneously.


                                                                             2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


       • We propose the TimesNet with TimesBlock to discover multiple periods and capture temporal
         2D-variations from the transformed 2D tensors by a parameter-efficient inception block.
       • As a task-general foundation model, TimesNet achieves the consistent state-of-the-art in five
         mainstream time series analysis tasks. Detailed and insightful visualizations are included.

2     R ELATED W ORK
As a key problem of time series analysis, temporal variation modeling has been well explored.
Many classical methods assume that the temporal variations follow the pre-defined patterns, such as
ARIMA (Anderson & Kendall, 1976), Holt-Winter (Hyndman & Athanasopoulos, 2018) and Prophet
(Taylor & Letham, 2018). However, the variations of real-world time series are usually too complex
to be covered by pre-defined patterns, limiting the practical applicability of these classical methods.
In recent years, many deep models have been proposed for temporal modeling, such as MLP, TCN,
RNN-based models (Hochreiter & Schmidhuber, 1997; Lai et al., 2018; Franceschi et al., 2019).
Technically, MLP-based methods (Oreshkin et al., 2019; Challu et al., 2022; Zeng et al., 2023; Zhang
et al., 2022) adopt the MLP along the temporal dimension and encode the temporal dependencies
into the fixed parameter of MLP layers. The TCN-based (2019) methods capture the temporal
variations by convolutional kernels that slide along the temporal dimension. The RNN-based methods
(Hochreiter & Schmidhuber, 1997; Lai et al., 2018; Gu et al., 2022) utilize the recurrent structure and
capture temporal variations implicitly by state transitions among time steps. Note that none of these
methods consider the temporal 2D-variations derived by periodicity, which is proposed in this paper.
Besides, Transformers have shown great performance in time series forecasting (Zhou et al., 2021;
Liu et al., 2021a; Wu et al., 2021; Zhou et al., 2022). With attention mechanism, they can discover the
temporal dependencies among time points. Especially, Wu et al. present the Autoformer with Auto-
Correlation mechanism to capture the series-wise temporal dependencies based on the learned periods.
In addition, to tackle the intricate temporal patterns, Autoformer also presents a deep decomposition
architecture to obtain the seasonal and trend parts of input series. Afterward, FEDformer (Zhou
et al., 2022) employs the mixture-of-expert design to enhance the seasonal-trend decomposition and
presents a sparse attention within the frequency domain. Unlike previous methods, we ravel out the
intricate temporal patterns by exploring the multi-periodicity of time series and capture the temporal
2D-variations in 2D space by well-acknowledged computer vision backbones for the first time.
It is also notable that, different from previous methods, we no longer limit to a specific analysis task
and attempt to propose a task-general foundation model for time series analysis.

3     T IMES N ET
As aforementioned, based on the multi-periodicity of time series, we propose the TimesNet with a
modular architecture to capture the temporal patterns derived from different periods. For each period,
to capture the corresponding intraperiod- and interperiod-variations, we design a TimesBlock within
the TimesNet, which can transform the 1D time series into 2D space and simultaneously model the
two types of variations by a parameter-efficient inception block.

3.1    T RANSFORM 1D- VARIATIONS INTO 2D- VARIATIONS

As shown in Figure 1, each time point involves two types of temporal variations with its adjacent area
and with the same phase among different periods simultaneously, namely intraperiod- and interperiod-
variations. However, this original 1D structure of time series can only present the variations among
adjacent time points. To tackle this limitation, we explore the two-dimension structure for temporal
variations, which can explicitly present variations within and between periods, thereby with more
advantages in representation capability and benefiting the subsequent representation learning.
Concretely, for the length-T time series with C recorded variates, the original 1D organization is
X1D ∈ RT ×C . To represent the interperiod-variation, we need to discover periods first. Technically,
we analyze the time series in the frequency domain by Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) as follows:

                                                                               T
A = Avg Amp FFT(X1D ) , {f1 , · · · , fk } = arg Topk (A) , pi =                    , i ∈ {1, · · · , k}.
                                                    f∗ ∈{1,··· ,[ T2 ]}        fi
                                                                                                     (1)

                                                   3
    Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                           1D-variations                                    Frequency 1


                                                                Amplitude
                                                                              Frequency 2
                                                                                                                            Capture Temporal 2D-variations

     Value
                                                                                  Frequency 3 …
                                                                                                                                    by 2D Kernels

                                                         Time                                              Frequency                             …
             Frequency 1               Reshape                                        Temporal 2D-variations

                                                  Reshape
                            Period 1
                                           Frequency 2                       Reshape        …        Reshape
                                                                                                                 …


                                                                                                                                                            tio d-
                                                                                                                                                         ria io
                                                                                                                                                               n
                                                                 Period 2


                                                                                                                                                     va per
                                                                                          Frequency 3


                                                                                                                 Period 3


                                                                                                                                                        tra
                                                                                                 …


                                                                                                                                                     In
                                                                                                                             Interperiod-variation


    Figure 2: A univariate example to illustrate 2D structure in time series. By discovering the periodicity,
    we can transform the original 1D time series into structured 2D tensors, which can be processed by
    2D kernels conveniently. By conducting the same reshape operation to all variates of time series, we
    can extend the above process to multivariate time series.
    Here, FFT(·) and Amp(·) denote the FFT and the calculation of amplitude values. A ∈ RT
    represents the calculated amplitude of each frequency, which is averaged from C dimensions by
    Avg(·). Note that the j-th value Aj represents the intensity of the frequency-j periodic basis function,
    corresponding to the period length ⌈ Tj ⌉. Considering the sparsity of frequency domain and to avoid
    the noises brought by meaningless high frequencies (Chatfield, 1981; Zhou et al., 2022), we only
    select the top-k amplitude values and obtain the most significant frequencies {f1 , · · · , fk } with
    the unnormalized amplitudes {Af1 , · · · , Afk }, where k is the hyper-parameter. These selected
    frequencies also correspond to k period lengths {p1 , · · · , pk }. Due to the conjugacy of frequency
    domain, we only consider the frequencies within {1, · · · , [ T2 ]}. We summarize Equation 1 as follows:
                                                 A, {f1 , · · · , fk }, {p1 , · · · , pk } = Period(X1D ) .                                                     (2)
    Based on the selected frequencies {f1 , · · · , fk } and corresponding period lengths {p1 , · · · , pk }, we
    can reshape the 1D time series X1D ∈ RT ×C into multiple 2D tensors by the following equations:
ŏ                                           Xi2D = Reshapepi ,fi (Padding(X1D )) , i ∈ {1, · · · , k},                                                          (3)
    where Padding(·) is to extend the time series by zeros along temporal dimension to make it compati-
    ble for Reshapepi ,fi (·), where pi and fi represent the number of rows and columns of the transformed
    2D tensors respectively. Note that Xi2D ∈ Rpi ×fi ×C denotes the i-th reshaped time series based on
    frequency-fi , whose columns and rows represent the intraperiod-variation and interperiod-variation
    under the corresponding period length pi respectively. Eventually, as shown in Figure 2, based on the
    selected frequencies and estimated periods, we obtain a set of 2D tensors {X12D , · · · , Xk2D }, which
    indicates k different temporal 2D-variations derived by different periods.
    It is also notable that, this transformation brings two types of localities to the transformed 2D tensors,
    that is localities among adjacent time points (columns, intraperiod-variation) and adjacent periods
    (rows, interperiod-variation). Thus, the temporal 2D-variations can be easily processed by 2D kernels.

    3.2          T IMES B LOCK

    As shown in Figure 3, we organize the TimesBlock in a residual way (He et al., 2016). Concretely,
    for the length-T 1D input time series X1D ∈ RT ×C , we project the raw inputs into the deep features
    X01D ∈ RT ×dmodel by the embedding layer X01D = Embed(X1D ) at the very beginning. For the l-th
    layer of TimesNet, the input is Xl−1
                                     1D ∈ R
                                             T ×dmodel
                                                       and the process can be formalized as:

                                   Xl1D = TimesBlock Xl−1   1D    + Xl−1
                                                                      1D .                           (4)
    As shown in Figure 3, for the l-th TimesBlock, the whole process involves two successive parts:
    capturing temporal 2D-variations and adaptively aggregating representations from different periods.
    Capturing temporal 2D-variations Similar to Equation 1, we can estimate period lengths for deep
    features Xl−1
              1D by Period(·). Based on estimated period lengths, we can transform the 1D time series


                                                                                             4
          Process for Period i                                                                                                                                                                                                         … Block m
                                 N                                                                                                               +                                                   k          informative
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Block 2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       AvgPool      Block 1features      from the k different Xl,i            reshapedfitime
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       = Reshape              ⇥pi series
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Paddi
                                                                                                                                                          b l,1 , · · · , X
                                                                                                                                                         {X               b l,k }                               where         Xl,i        2 R(fipart) ⇥pi )⇥dmodel
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       is the    2D
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  transformed           2D normalized
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ⇣tensor.   ⌘ Afte
Periods   Softmax                                                                                                                                           2D              2D
                                                                                                                                                                FFT for Periods      Softmax                    2D     kernels      2D (right               and     fuse
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Attention      them      based on the
                                                                                                                                            TimesBlock                                                           2D tensor by a parameter-efficient               …           binception
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              X  l,i              block (Szegedy
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 2D = Inception X2D , i 2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    l,i     et a
                                                                                                                            {X  b ,··· ,X
                                                                                                                                   l,1             b }
                                                                                                                                                     l,k
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 2D     kernels           and     is  one    of   the     most      well-acknowledged  ⇣               vision
                                                                                         Under review as a conference1Dpaper at ICLR                 1D 2023                                                    can conducted representation                             learning
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    b back
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       l,i    b l,i =1D  by    parameter-efficient
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             b 2 RT ⇥in
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                l,i
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 processed 2D feature into X                           2D X1D to                 tensorReshape
                                     Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023                                           Adaptive aggregation Finally, we fuse the k different                                     Alprocessed
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 truncate      1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ,the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     {f1padding     , fkseries
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            , · · ·features       1into
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          }, {pw.r.t         original
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    , · · ·their
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Trunc
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       = length.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Period Note
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             , pk }corresponding
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            X   1D
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Xl1Dthat1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1⇥(fi
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       , benefi
                                                                                                                            amplitudes of the estimated periods as follows:                                      time series,
                                                                                                                                                                                                               where          Xl,i  2D 2   theR(f 2Di ⇥pkernels
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         i )⇥dmodelin inception block can aggregate t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        is the l,i transformed 2D tensor. Afte
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 (columns)              and      interperiod-variation        X2D(rows)= Reshape  simultaneously.       Paddi
                                                                                                                                                                                                               2D      tensor         by     a parameter-efficient              inception block                         ⌘ etBa
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           f(Szegedy
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             i ⇥pi
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ⇣                                     ⌘                                                ⇣
                                                                                                                                                                      b l 1, · · · , A
                                                                                                                                                                      A                 b l 1 = SoftMax        2Dmakes    Athe
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        kernels  l 1model
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ,and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           · · · is,size
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Aonel invariant
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            1of the most   toXbthe    selection
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  l,iwell-acknowledged
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       = Inception    of the X   number     , io2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     l,ivision
                                                                                                  +
                                                                                                                                                                         f                 f                                     f                      f                         2D                                 2D
                                                                                                                                                                           1                 k
                                                                                                                                                                                                               processed
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       l,1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2D l,k
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          k
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               feature into X       b l,i back to 1D tensor             ⇣ X  b l,i 2 RT ⇥
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 {X         ,  ·  · ·  ,  X       }                    2D                                        1D
                                                                                             TimesBlock        TimesBlock
                                                                                                                                                               +
                                                                                                                                                                            MSUnit
                                                                                                                                                                                                     X+k       truncate2D          the padding2D         series into original b = length.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              X   l,i
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Trunc Note    (6) that bene
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Reshape
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  1D                                      1⇥(f
                                                                                                                                                                                          Xl1D =            b ltime
                                                                                                                                                                                                            A        1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ⇥series,b l,i .bthe   l,k 2D kernels in inception block can aggregate t
                                                                                                                                  MSUnit
                                                                                                                                                                                                               f{iX b l,1   ,X · · l,i
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ·1D, X …2D(f  }
                                            +                                                    +
                                                                                                                                                                               1x1 Conv    3x3 Conv
                                                                                                                                                                                                      i=1
                                                                                                                                                                                                         5x5 Conv 2D
                                                                                                                                                                                                               (columns)
                                                                                                                                                                                                               where     7x7 Conv
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              X         and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          2   R  interperiod-variation
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    i ⇥p i )⇥d  model
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        is  the       (rows) simultaneously.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   transformed          2D     tensor.      AftB
                                                     TimesBlock                                                                                                       Adaptive Aggregation                          b l,1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2D
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           bal,kparameter-efficient
                                                                                                                                                                                                               makes        , the      model        size invariant to the              selection of the           numbereto
                                        TimesBlock                                           TimesBlock                     Since
                                                                                                                             1D Space           temporal variations are involved in the 2D
                                                                                                                                         theReshape                                                                    tensor
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 {multiple
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   X   1D      · · · by       1D }
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ,highly-structured
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          X                                2Dinception
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    tensors,block   the de- (Szegedy
                                                                                                          +          Reshape                                                                                    2D      kernels           and     is  one    of   the     most       well-acknowledged                  vision
                                                                   Parameter-efficient                                      sign of TimesBlock  Back            can fully capture the multi-scale              {Xtemporal
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       l,1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       , Xl,k
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2D , · · · aggregation
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              2D-variations
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  }                 b l,ifrom        multiple views
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Adaptive
                                                                                                                                                                                                                processed              2D2D    feature intoFinally,X          we fuse the k different
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2D back to 1D tensor X1D 2 R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              b l,i process   T⇥
                                                                     Inception block             +                          simultaneously, making         k         the representatin          learning
                                                                                                                                                                                             Reshaped         more
                                                                                                                                                                                                       Time Series        effective.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 amplitudes              of    the} estimated        periods        as follows:
                                                                                                                                                                                                               {truncate
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   b l,1 , · · the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   X                ·  ,  bpadding
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          X   l,k        series into         original        length. Note that bene
                                            +                                                                     FFT for Periods         Softmax                                                                      2D                     2D                                                                   ⇣
                                                                                             TimesBlock                                                                     Inception Block     ,           ŏ time series, , ŏ the                2D kernelsl in
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               b into
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           inception
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     b space,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              block can aggregate
                                                                                                                            Generality in 2D vision backbones Since we transform                                   b l,1 , · ·the
                                                                                                                                                                                                               (columns)            · ,andb1D l,k time series  A   f1 , · · ·2D
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ,A     l 1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    we can Alf1 1 ,B·
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        fk = simultaneously.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   SoftMax
                                                                                                                                                                                                               {X      1D                 X   1Dinterperiod-variation
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  }                                   (rows)
                                        TimesBlock                                 Reshape                                  also
                                                                                                                             2D Space
                                                                                                                                     choose        various      vision    backbones         to  replace      themakesinception the     model module size    for   representation
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           invariant        to  the    selection learning,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     k of the number o
                                                            Reshape                                                                                                                                                                                                                                X
                                                                                     BackFigure 3: Overall architecture     such asofthe          widely-used
                                                                                                                                            TimesNet.                ResNet (He(left
                                                                                                                                                              The TimesBlock           et al.,   2016)
                                                                                                                                                                                             part)   can and
                                                                                                                                                                                                           extract ResNext
                                                                                                                                                                                                               Adaptive  the various
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       l,1               (Xie l,k et al., 2017),
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      aggregation              Finally,    advanced
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              we fuse Xl1D the ConvNext
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               = k different
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Ab l 1 ⇥proces Xb l,i .
                                                                                         informative features from(Liu         the ketdifferent
                                                                                                                                          al., 2022b) reshaped
                                                                                                                                                             and time     series by a shared
                                                                                                                                                                   attention-based          models MSUnit(Liuwith
                                                                                                                                                                                                                {Xet al.,
                                                                                                                                                                                                               amplitudes
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2Dmulti-scale
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ,  ·  · ·
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                2021b).,  X
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         of 2D    }
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               theThus,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    estimatedour periods
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      temporal       as 2D-variation
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         follows:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             fi             1D
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   i=1
                                            +                                            2D kernels (right part) and            fuse    them     based   on   the normalized       amplitude      values.
                                                                                                     k                      design also bridges the 1D time series and the booming                        … {Since b l,1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   X    2D  ,  ·  vision
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  · ·  ,  Xb  l,kbackbones, making the time series
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  }
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ⇣
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2D the temporal        2D        variations
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               b l 1 , are
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               A                  ,involved
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     b l 1 = in
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           · · · conduct
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     A                 the multiple
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   SoftMax             Alf1 1hi,
                                                                                                                            analysis take advantage of the development of visionsign                              community.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          of TimesBlock        For efficiency,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        can fully
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   f1 we
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         capture
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        fk       the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        the multi-scale main temporal
                                        TimesBlock       FFT for Periods       Softmax can conducted representation learning by parameter-efficient inception block conveniently.                                  b l,1                   b l,k
                                                                                                                            experiments based on the parameter-efficient inception                                     1Dblock
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            , · · · ,as
                                                                                                                                                                                                                {simultaneously,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   X                      X    Equation
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1D  }
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  making       5. representatin learning
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              the                                  X k      more      effectiv
                                                                                                                             1D Space
                                                                                            Al 1 , {f1 , · · · , fk }, {p1 , · · · , pk } = Period Xl1D1 ,                                                                        Time                                                Xl1D =              bl 1 ⇥ X
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          A   fi
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         b l,i .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1D
                                                                                                                                                                                                                Adaptive
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Generality           aggregation
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          in    2D   vision    Finally, we fuse
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               backbones                 Sincethewe k different
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        transform      proces
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          the 1
                                                                                                                                         Xl,i     =  Reshape               Padding(X       l 1
                                                                                                                                                                                                )  , i  2  {1,   · · ·
                                                                                                                                                                                                            5 amplitudes, k}                                                                       i=1
                                                                                                                                            2D                   fi ⇥pi
                                                                                                                                                                   ⇣        ⌘
                                                                                                                                                                                           1D
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 also choose             of    the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           various   estimated        periods
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        vision backbones             as   follows:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         to replace       themultiple
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 inception
                                                                                                                                                                                                               Since          the temporal  (5)         variations         are involved            in the           ⇣          hi
                                     Figure 3: Overall architecture of TimesNet. TimesNet isXbstacked
                                                                                                                                            l,i                         l,i
                                                                                                                                            2D = Inception
                                                                                                                                                              ⇣
                                                                                                                                                               by XTimesBlocks
                                                                                                                                                                        2D , i 2 {1, · · · , k}in a residual
                                                                                                                                                                                          ⇣       ⌘⌘
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 such of
                                                                                                                                                                                                               sign       as TimesBlock    way. canResNet
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 the widely-used               fully        (He etb al.,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               b l 1 ,capture
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               A                         l 1 2016)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         the            and ResNext
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               multi-scale
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   f1 · · · , Afk = SoftMax Af1 ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   temporal 1(X
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 (Liu     et
                                                                                                                                                                                                               simultaneously,  al.,    2022b)        and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  making    attention-based
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              the    representatin       models
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              learning(Liu     et
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            more  al.,   2021
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       effectiv
                                     TimesBlocks can capture various temporal 2D-variations                                              X  1D from
                                                                                                                                          b l,i =    Trunc kReshapedifferent 1⇥(fi ⇥pi )reshaped
                                                                                                                                                                                            b l,i , i 2 {1,
                                                                                                                                                                                            X  2D             tensors · · · ,also
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 design         k} bridges by a the 1D time series and the X                        booming
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      k             2D visio
                                     parameter-efficient inception block inwhere            2DXspace           (fiand
                                                                                                                   ⇥pi )⇥dfuse           them         based         on     normalized                amplitude   analysis take      values. advantage
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               2D visionofbackbones
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 the development                of we
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    vision b lcommunity   b l,i .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           l                      1
                                                                                                     l,i                                                                                                       Generality                 in                                          XSince
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1D =           A   fi ⇥ X
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         transform         the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1D 1
                                                                                                     2D 2 R
                                                                                                                             model
                                                                                                                                    is the transformed 2D tensor. After the transformation,                        we process
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 experiments               the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            based     on   the   parameter-efficient               inception         block as
                                                                                         2D tensor by a parameter-efficient inception block (Szegedy et al., 2015), which involves multi-scale                 also       choose           various      vision      backbones             to  replace
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    i=1 the inception

                                                                                         2D kernels and is one of the most well-acknowledged vision backbone. Then we                                          such
                                                                                                                                                                                                                Since     asthe
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    transform    thetemporal
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         widely-used
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           the               ResNet are
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        variations          (Heinvolved
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    et al., 2016)  in theand multiple
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ResNext h(X
                                     into 2D space and obtain a set of 2Dprocessed         tensors,          frominto
                                                                                                        2D feature         whichb l,i back
                                                                                                                                X  2D       we       can
                                                                                                                                                 to 1D        obtain
                                                                                                                                                         tensor   Xb l,i 2 R
                                                                                                                                                                     1D       informative
                                                                                                                                                                                T ⇥dmodel
                                                                                                                                                                                          for aggregationrepresentations
                                                                                                                                                                                                               (Liu
                                                                                                                                                                                                                sign      et
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          of al.,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  by Trunc(·)
                                                                                                                                                                                                               design
                                                                                                                                                                                                                simultaneously,also
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        2022b) and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 TimesBlock  to
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         bridges
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         can
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  making
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            attention-based
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            1D
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               fully capture the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              the  time     series
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      representatin    and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          models
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      (Liu et al.,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                multi-scale
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     booming
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              learning       more    2D
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         2021
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    tempora
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           visio
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       effecti
                                                                                         truncate the padding series into original length. Note that benefiting from the transformation of 1D
                                     by parameter-efficient inception block              timeconveniently.
                                                                                                series, the 2D kernelsThe                  process
                                                                                                                                  in inception       block can is formalized
                                                                                                                                                                    aggregate the multi-scaleas follows:       analysis take advantage of the development of vision community
                                                                                                                                                                                                         intraperiod-variation
                                                                                        (columns) and interperiod-variation l−1
                                                                                                                                       (rows) simultaneously. Besides, the parameterexperiments                 Generality
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    sharing deign         inbased     on thebackbones
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                2D vision        parameter-efficient      Since we  inception
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         transform    blockthea
                                        Al−1 , {f1 , · · · , fk }, {p1 , · · · , pk }makes  = the  Period
                                                                                                        model sizeX         1D to,the selection of the number of periods k.
                                                                                                                        invariant                                                                               also choose various vision backbones to replace the inception
                                                                                                                                                                                                                such as the widely-used ResNet (He et al., 2016) and ResNext (
                                                                                         {Xl,1              l,k                                                                                                                                                                                           5
                                                                                   Xl,i2D b=
                                                                                             2D , · · · , X2D }
                                                                                                   Reshape              pi ,fi Padding(X1D ) , i ∈ {1, · · · ,design
                                                                                                                                                                    l−1                                        (Liu et al., 2022b) and attention-based models (Liu et al., 2021
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  k} also bridges the 1D time series and the booming 2D visi
                                                                                             l,1          b l,k
                                                                                         {X2D , · · · , X2D }
                                                                                    b l,i{Xb=
                                                                                                                                                                                                                analysis take advantage         (5) of the development of vision community
                                                                                   X         1D , ·Inception
                                                                                             l,1
                                                                                                    ·· ,X b l,k }
                                                                                                            1D     2D           Xl,i , i ∈ {1, · · · , k}      2D
                                                                                                                                                                                                                experiments based on the parameter-efficient inception block a

                                                                                                                   Adaptive aggregation Finally, we fuse the k different processed features w.r.t their corresponding
                                                                                                              b l,iamplitudes                                         b l,i , i ∈ {1, · · · , k},                                                                                                           5
                                                                                                              X 1D = Trunc Reshape1,(pi ×fi ) X
                                                                                                                              of the estimated periods as follows:
                                                                                                                                                                       ⇣ 2D               ⌘
                                                                                                                                                         b l 1, · · · , A
                                                                                                                                                         A              b l 1 = SoftMax Al 1 , · · · , Al 1
                                                                                                                                                           f1             fk             f1             fk
                                     where Xl,i
                                              2D ∈ R
                                                     pi ×fi ×dmodel
                                                                    is the i-th transformed 2D tensor. After               Xk     the transformation, we process            (6)
                                                                                                                               bl 1 ⇥ Xb l,i .
                                     the 2D tensor by a parameter-efficient inception block (Szegedy               Xl1D = et A
                                                                                                                           i=1
                                                                                                                               al.,
                                                                                                                                f    2015)
                                                                                                                                         1D     as Inception(·), which                      i


                                     involves multi-scale 2D kernels and Since is one    of thevariations
                                                                                    the temporal   most well-acknowledged                      vision backbones.
                                                                                                             are involved in the multiple highly-structured 2D tensors, theThen
                                                                                                                                                                            de-
                                                                                          Xb
                                                                              sign of TimesBlock
                                     we transform the learned 2D representations                  back     to  1D    space     Xb
                                                                                              l,i can fully capture the multi-scalel,i
                                                                                                                                    temporal 2D-variations
                                                                                                                                       ∈     R T ×dmodel from multiple views
                                                                                                                                                           for aggregation,
                                                                                              2D
                                                                              simultaneously, making                               1Deffective.
                                                                                                     the representatin learning more
                                     where we employ Trunc(·) to truncate the padded series with length (pi × fi ) into original length T .
                                                                                                                     Generality in 2D vision backbones Since we transform the 1D time series into 2D space, we can
                                                                          also choose various vision backbones to replace the inception module for representation learning,
                                     Note that benefiting from the transformation            of 1D
                                                                          such as the widely-used  ResNettime
                                                                                                            (He et series,      the
                                                                                                                   al., 2016) and       2D(Xie
                                                                                                                                   ResNext    kernels        inadvanced
                                                                                                                                                  et al., 2017),  the inception
                                                                                                                                                                         ConvNext
                                     block can aggregate the multi-scale intraperiod-variation
                                                                          (Liu                                 (columns)
                                                                               et al., 2022b) and attention-based   models (Liu and       interperiod-variation
                                                                                                                                  et al., 2021b).                             (rows)
                                                                                                                                                  Thus, our temporal 2D-variation
                                                                          design also bridges the 1D time series and the booming 2D vision backbones, making the time series
                                     simultaneously, covering both adjacent    time
                                                                          analysis take points     and
                                                                                         advantage of      adjacentof periods.
                                                                                                      the development                      Besides,
                                                                                                                           vision community.               we we
                                                                                                                                               For efficiency,   adopt
                                                                                                                                                                   conductatheshared
                                                                                                                                                                               main
                                                                          experiments based on the parameter-efficientl,k  inception block as Equation 5.
                                     inception block for different reshaped 2D tensors {Xl,1           2D  , · · · ,  X   2D  }  to   improve         parameter        efficiency,
                                     which can make the model size invariant to the selection of hyper-parameter               5                  k.

                                     Adaptive aggregation Finally, we need to fuse k different 1D-representations {X     b l,1 , · · · , X
                                                                                                                                         b l,k }
                                                                                                                           1D              1D
                                     for the next layer. Inspired by Auto-Correlation (Wu et al., 2021), the amplitudes A can reflect the
                                     relative importance of selected frequencies and periods, thereby corresponding to the importance of
                                     each transformed 2D tensor. Thus, we aggregate the 1D-representations based on the amplitudes:

                                                               A                b l−1 = Softmax Al−1 , · · · , Al−1
                                                                b l−1 , · · · , A
                                                                  f1              fk             f1             fk
                                                                                                                                         k
                                                                                                                                         X                                                                                                                  (6)
                                                                                                                        Xl1D =                    b l−1 × X
                                                                                                                                                  A       b l,i .
                                                                                                                                                    fi      1D
                                                                                                                                          i=1
                                     Since the variations within and between periods are already involved in multiple highly-structured
                                     2D tensors, TimesBlock can fully capture multi-scale temporal 2D-variations simultaneously. Thus,
                                     TimesNet can achieve a more effective representation learning than directly from 1D time series.

                                     Generality in 2D vision backbones Benefiting from the transformation of 1D time series into
                                     temporal 2D-variations, we can choose various computer vision backbones to replace the inception
                                     block for representation learning, such as the widely-used ResNet (He et al., 2016) and ResNeXt
                                     (Xie et al., 2017), advanced ConvNeXt (Liu et al., 2022b) and attention-based models (Liu et al.,
                                     2021b). Thus, our temporal 2D-variation design also bridges the 1D time series to the booming 2D
                                     vision backbones, making the time series analysis take advantage of the development of computer
                                     vision community. In general, more powerful 2D backbones for representation learning will bring
                                     better performance. Considering both performance and efficiency (Figure 4 right), we conduct the
                                     main experiments based on the parameter-efficient inception block as shown in Equation 5.


                                                                                                                                                  5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


4       E XPERIMENTS
To verify the generality of TimesNet, we extensively experiment on five mainstream analysis tasks,
including short- and long-term forecasting, imputation, classification and anomaly detection.
Implementation Table 1 is a summary of benchmarks. More details about the dataset, experiment
implementation and model configuration can be found in Appendix A.
                        Table 1: Summary of experiment benchmarks.
              Tasks                             Benchmarks                                                                                                                           Metrics                                      Series Length
                                                Long-term: ETT (4 subsets), Electricity,                                                                                                                                              96∼720
                                                                                                                                                                            MSE, MAE
         Forecasting                            Traffic, Weather, Exchange, ILI                                                                                                                                                    (ILI: 24∼60)
                                                Short-term: M4 (6 subsets)                                                                                SMAPE, MASE, OWA                                                                    6∼48
         Imputation                             ETT (4 subsets), Electricity, Weather                                                                                       MSE, MAE                                                             96
       Classification                           UEA (10 subsets)                                                                                                              Accuracy                                                  29∼1751
    Anomaly Detection                           SMD, MSL, SMAP, SWaT, PSM                                                                             Precision, Recall, F1-Socre                                                               100

Baselines Since we attempt to propose a foundation model for time series analysis, we extensively
compare the well-acknowledged and advanced models in all five tasks, including the RNN-based mod-
els: LSTM (1997), LSTNet (2018) and LSSL (2022); CNN-based Model: TCN (2019); MLP-based
models: LightTS (2022) and DLinear (2023); Transformer-based models: Reformer (2020), Informer
(2021), Pyraformer (2021a), Autoformer (2021), FEDformer (2022), Non-stationary Transformer
(2022a) and ETSformer (2022). Besides, we also compare the state-of-the-art models for each
specific task, such as N-HiTS (2022) and N-BEATS (2019) for short-term forecasting, Anomaly
Transformer (2021) for anomaly detection, Rocket (2020) and Flowformer (2022) for classification
and etc. Overall, more than 15 baselines are included for a comprehensive comparison.
                                 Long-term Forecasting                                                                                                                                    Anomaly Detection
                                         (MSE)
                                                  0.50
                                                                                                                                     87.0
                                                                                                                                       87.0

                                                                                                                                                                      ConvNext
                                                                                                                                                                     2.196MB, 39.2ms                                                            ResNext
                                                      1.10                                                                                                                                                                                   0.103MB, 103.9ms
                                                                                                                                     86.5
                                                                                                                                       86.5
     Short-term Forecasting                                                           Classification
            (SMAPE)                                                                    (Accuracy)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            SwinBlock
                                                                                                                          F1-Score


                     11.00                                                          75.00
                                                  1.70                                                                               86.0
                                                                                                                                       86.0                                    Inception (independent)
                                                                                                  TimesNet (Ours)                                                                                                                      0.052MB, 103.6ms
                              14.20                                    69.00
                                                                                                                                                       Inception (sharing)             0.331MB, 60.2ms
                                          17.40              63.00                                ETSformer (2022)
                                                                                                                                                          0.067MB, 43.2ms
                                                                                                  LightTS (2022)
                                              79.00      0.17                                                                        85 5
                                                                                                                                       85.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Params Count
                                                                                                  DLinear (2022)

                                                                                                  Stationary (2022)
                                      83.00                     0.11
                                                                                                                                     85 0                                                                       0.63MB    0.25MB 1 00MB       4.00MB
                                                                                                  FEDformer (2022)
                                                                                                                                       85.0



                                                                                                  Autoformer (2021)                                  ResNet
                              86.00                                    0.05
                                                                                                                                              0.024MB, 30.5ms
          Anomaly Detection                                                    Imputation         Informer (2021)
                                                                                                                                     84.5
                                                                                                                                       84.5
                                                                                                                                              0.03            0.04            0.05          0.06         0.07            0.08        0.09           0.10
             (F1-Score)                                                          (MSE)            Reformer (2020)                             30              40              50            60           70              80          90             100

                                                                                                                                                                                       Training Time (iter/ms)


Figure 4: Model performance comparison (left) and generality in different vision backbones (right).

4.1        M AIN R ESULTS

As a foundation model, TimesNet achieves consistent state-of-the-art performance on five mainstream
analysis tasks compared with other customized models (Figure 4 left). The full efficiency comparison
is provided in Table 11 of Appendix. Besides, by replacing the inception block with more powerful
vision backbones, we can further promote the performance of TimesNet (Figure 4 right), confirming
that our design can make time series analysis take advantage of booming vision backbones.
4.2        S HORT- AND L ONG - TERM F ORECASTING

Setups Time series forecasting is essential in weather forecasting, traffic and energy consumption
planning. To fully evaluate the model performance in forecasting, we adopt two types of benchmarks,
including long-term and short-term forecasting. Especially for the long-term setting, we follow the
benchmarks used in Autoformer (2021), including ETT (Zhou et al., 2021), Electricity (UCI), Traffic
(PeMS), Weather (Wetterstation), Exchange (Lai et al., 2018) and ILI (CDC), covering five real-world
applications. For the short-term dataset, we adopt the M4 (Spyros Makridakis, 2018), which contains
the yearly, quarterly and monthly collected univariate marketing data. Note that each dataset in the
long-term setting only contains one continuous time series, where we obtain samples by sliding
window, while M4 involves 100,000 different time series collected in different frequencies.


                                                                                                                      6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Table 2: Long-term forecasting task. The past sequence length is set as 36 for ILI and 96 for the
others. All the results are averaged from 4 different prediction lengths, that is {24, 36, 48, 60} for ILI
and {96, 192, 336, 720} for the others. See Table 13 in Appendix for the full results.
           TimesNet ETSformer       LightTS     DLinear FEDformer Stationary Autoformer Pyraformer Informer             LogTrans    Reformer
Models
            (Ours)    (2022)         (2022)     (2023)    (2022)   (2022a)     (2021)    (2021a)    (2021)               (2019)      (2020)

Metric MSE MAE MSE MAE MSE MAE MSE MAE MSE MAE MSE MAE MSE MAE MSE MAE MSE MAE MSE MAE MSE MAE
 ETTm1 0.400 0.406 0.429 0.425 0.435 0.437 0.403 0.407 0.448 0.452 0.481 0.456 0.588 0.517 0.691 0.607 0.961 0.734 0.929 0.725 0.799 0.671

 ETTm2 0.291 0.333 0.293 0.342 0.409 0.436 0.350 0.401 0.305 0.349 0.306 0.347 0.327 0.371 1.498 0.869 1.410 0.810 1.535 0.900 1.479 0.915

 ETTh1 0.458 0.450 0.542 0.510 0.491 0.479 0.456 0.452 0.440 0.460 0.570 0.537 0.496 0.487 0.827 0.703 1.040 0.795 1.072 0.837 1.029 0.805

 ETTh2 0.414 0.427 0.439 0.452 0.602 0.543 0.559 0.515 0.437 0.449 0.526 0.516 0.450 0.459 0.826 0.703 4.431 1.729 2.686 1.494 6.736 2.191

Electricity 0.192 0.295 0.208 0.323 0.229 0.329 0.212 0.300 0.214 0.327 0.193 0.296 0.227 0.338 0.379 0.445 0.311 0.397 0.272 0.370 0.338 0.422

 Traffic 0.620 0.336 0.621 0.396 0.622 0.392 0.625 0.383 0.610 0.376 0.624 0.340 0.628 0.379 0.878 0.469 0.764 0.416 0.705 0.395 0.741 0.422

 Weather 0.259 0.287 0.271 0.334 0.261 0.312 0.265 0.317 0.309 0.360 0.288 0.314 0.338 0.382 0.946 0.717 0.634 0.548 0.696 0.602 0.803 0.656

Exchange 0.416 0.443 0.410 0.427 0.385 0.447 0.354 0.414 0.519 0.500 0.461 0.454 0.613 0.539 1.913 1.159 1.550 0.998 1.402 0.968 1.280 0.932

   ILI    2.139 0.931 2.497 1.004 7.382 2.003 2.616 1.090 2.847 1.144 2.077 0.914 3.006 1.161 7.635 2.050 5.137 1.544 4.839 1.485 4.724 1.445


Table 3: Short-term forecasting task on M4. The prediction lengths are in [6, 48] and results are
weighted averaged from several datasets under different sample intervals. See Table 14 for full results.
          TimesNet N-HiTS N-BEATS ETSformer LightTS DLinear FEDformer Stationary Autoformer Pyraformer Informer LogTrans Reformer
Models
           (Ours) (2022) (2019)    (2022) (2022) (2023) (2022)         (2022a)    (2021)     (2021a) (2021) (2019) (2020)
SMAPE       11.829   11.927    11.851     14.718   13.525 13.639      12.840     12.780     12.909     16.987    14.086    16.018    18.200
 MASE        1.585    1.613    1.599      2.408    2.111 2.095        1.701       1.756     1.771       3.265    2.718      3.010     4.223
 OWA        0.851     0.861    0.855      1.172    1.051 1.051        0.918       0.930     0.939       1.480    1.230      1.378     1.775


Results TimesNet shows great performance in both long-term and short-term settings (Table 2–3).
Concretely, TimesNet achieves state-of-the-art in more than 80% of cases in long-term forecasting
(Table 13). For the M4 dataset, since the time series are collected from different sources, the temporal
variations can be quite diverse, making forecasting much more challenging. Our model still performs
best in this task, surpassing extensive advanced MLP-based and Transformer-based models.

4.3      I MPUTATION

Setups Real-world systems always work continuously and are monitored by automatic observation
equipment. However, due to malfunctions, the collected time series can be partially missing, making
the downstream analysis difficult. Thus, imputation is widely-used in practical applications. In this
paper, we select the datasets from the electricity and weather scenarios as our benchmarks, including
ETT (Zhou et al., 2021), Electricity (UCI) and Weather (Wetterstation), where the data-missing
problem happens commonly. To compare the model capacity under different proportions of missing
data, we randomly mask the time points in the ratio of {12.5%, 25%, 37.5%, 50%}.

Results Due to the missing time points, the imputation task requires the model to discover underly-
ing temporal patterns from the irregular and partially observed time series. As shown in Table 4, our
proposed TimesNet still achieves the consistent state-of-the-art in this difficult task, verifying the
model capacity in capturing temporal variation from extremely complicated time series.

4.4      C LASSIFICATION

Setups Time series classification can be used in recognition and medical diagnosis (Moody et al.,
2011). We adopt the sequence-level classification to verify the model capacity in high-level represen-
tation learning. Concretely, we select 10 multivariate datasets from UEA Time Series Classification
Archive (Bagnall et al., 2018), covering the gesture, action and audio recognition, medical diagnosis
by heartbeat monitoring and other practical tasks. Then, we pre-process the datasets following the
descriptions in (Zerveas et al., 2021), where different subsets have different sequence lengths.


                                                                     7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Table 4: Imputation task. We randomly mask {12.5%, 25%, 37.5%, 50%} time points in length-96
time series. The results are averaged from 4 different mask ratios. See Table 16 for full results.
            TimesNet ETSformer LightTS               DLinear FEDformer Stationary Autoformer Pyraformer Informer                   LogTrans     Reformer
Models
             (Ours)   (2022)    (2022)               (2023)    (2022)   (2022a)     (2021)    (2021a)    (2021)                     (2019)       (2020)

  Metric    MSE MAE MSE MAE MSE MAE MSE MAE MSE MAE MSE MAE MSE MAE MSE MAE MSE MAE MSE MAE MSE MAE
 ETTm1 0.027 0.107 0.120 0.253 0.104 0.218 0.093 0.206 0.062 0.177 0.036 0.126 0.051 0.150 0.717 0.570 0.071 0.188 0.050 0.154 0.055 0.166

 ETTm2 0.022 0.088 0.208 0.327 0.046 0.151 0.096 0.208 0.101 0.215 0.026 0.099 0.029 0.105 0.465 0.508 0.156 0.292 0.119 0.246 0.157 0.280

  ETTh1 0.078 0.187 0.202 0.329 0.284 0.373 0.201 0.306 0.117 0.246 0.094 0.201 0.103 0.214 0.842 0.682 0.161 0.279 0.219 0.332 0.122 0.245

  ETTh2 0.049 0.146 0.367 0.436 0.119 0.250 0.142 0.259 0.163 0.279 0.053 0.152 0.055 0.156 1.079 0.792 0.337 0.452 0.186 0.318 0.234 0.352

Electricity 0.092 0.210 0.214 0.339 0.131 0.262 0.132 0.260 0.130 0.259 0.100 0.218 0.101 0.225 0.297 0.382 0.222 0.328 0.175 0.303 0.200 0.313

 Weather 0.030 0.054 0.076 0.171 0.055 0.117 0.052 0.110 0.099 0.203 0.032 0.059 0.031 0.057 0.152 0.235 0.045 0.104 0.039 0.076 0.038 0.087


Results As shown in Figure 5,                       Classical Methods                    TCN-Based                      MLP-Based

TimesNet achieves the best perfor-                  RNN-Based                            Transformer-Based              Ours

mance with an average accuracy                         72.5
                                                                      71.8            71.9 71.5 72.1
                                                                                                                 72.7            73.0
                                                                                                                                                    73.6


of 73.6%, surpassing the previous                                                                     70.8 71.1
                                                           Average Accuracy (%)



                                                                            70.9 70.3                                  70.7 71.0              70.4


state-of-the-art classical method          67.0
                                                66.0
                                                                                                                                       67.5


Rocket (72.5%) and deep model
Flowformer (73.0%). It is also no-
table that the MLP-based model
DLinear fails in this classification
task (67.5%), which performs well                              48.6
in some time series forecasting
datasets. This is because DLinear             W
                                           DT XGB
                                                  oo
                                                     st      t           et
                                                          cke LSTM STN LSSL         N    ns. Re.          .    .     n.    .   .    .      ar
                                                                                                  In. Pyra Auto tatio FED ETS Flow Line Light
                                                                                                                                                 TS
                                                                                                                                                      es
                                                                                                                                                        Ne
                                                                                                                                                           t
                                                       Ro           L             TC  Tra                                             D
only adopts a one-layer MLP model                                                                                S
                                                                                                                                                  Tim


on the temporal dimension, which Figure 5: Model comparison in classification. “∗.” in the Transform-
might be suitable for some autore- ers indicates the name of ∗former. The results are averaged from 10
                                      subsets of UEA. See Table 17 in Appendix for full results.
gressive tasks with fixed temporal
dependencies but will degenerate a lot in learning high-level representations. In contrast, TimesNet
unifies the temporal 2D-variation in 2D space, which is convenient to learn informative representation
by 2D kernels, thereby benefiting the classification task that requires hierarchical representations.

4.5        A NOMALY D ETECTION

Setups Detecting anomalies from monitoring data is vital to industrial maintenance. Since the
anomalies are usually hidden in the large-scale data, making the data labeling hard, we focus on
unsupervised time series anomaly detection, which is to detect the abnormal time points. We compare
models on five widely-used anomaly detection benchmarks: SMD (Su et al., 2019), MSL (Hundman
et al., 2018), SMAP (Hundman et al., 2018), SWaT (Mathur & Tippenhauer, 2016), PSM (Abdulaal
et al., 2021), covering service monitoring, space & earth exploration, and water treatment applications.
Following the pre-processing methods in Anomaly Transformer (2021), we split the dataset into
consecutive non-overlapping segments by sliding window. In previous works, the reconstruction is a
classical task for unsupervised point-wise representation learning, where the reconstruction error is a
natural anomaly criterion. For a fair comparison, we only change the base models for reconstruction
and use the classical reconstruction error as the shared anomaly criterion for all experiments.

Results Table 5 demonstrates that TimesNet still achieves the best performance in anomaly de-
tection, outperforming the advanced Transformer-based models FEDformer (2022) and Autoformer
(2021). The canonical Transformer performs worse in this task (averaged F1-score 76.88%). This
may come from that anomaly detection requires the model to find out the rare abnormal temporal
patterns (Lai et al., 2021), while the vanilla attention mechanism calculates the similarity between
each pair of time points, which can be distracted by the dominant normal time points. Besides, by
taking the periodicity into consideration, TimesNet, FEDformer and Autoformer all achieve great
performance. Thus, these results also demonstrate the importance of periodicity analysis, which can
highlight variations that violate the periodicity implicitly, further benefiting the anomaly detection.


                                                                                  8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         15
                                              0


                                         10
                                              5
                                                                                    Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023
                           1
                                                                               1


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         20
                                         15


                                         20


                                         25                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Frequency 1=15


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                14

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             12

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    10

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           8

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     6

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  4

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          2

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0
                                         30
                                                                                                                                                       2.0


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0
                                         35
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Va
                           °1                                                  °1
         15                                        0         5

                                                                                                           1.5
                                                                                    Table 5: Anomaly detection
                                                                                                            1.5
                                                                                                                 task. We calculate the F1-score (as %) for each dataset. *. means     the
                                                                                                                                                                                  -1.0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1.0


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              °1


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       5
                                                                           0.8
                                                                                    *former. A higher value1.0
                                                                                                            of
                                                                                                            1.0
                                                                                                                F1-score indicates a better performance. See Table 15 for full results.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Frequency 2=13
                                                                                                          TimesNet TimesNet 0.5  ETS. FED. LightTS DLinear Stationary Auto. Pyra. Anomaly* In.     Re. LogTrans Trans.


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       10


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         20

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                18

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          15

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               13

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     10
                                                                                     Models


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          7

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  5

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      3

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0
                                                                                                                                 0.5


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0
                                                                           °1.0
                                                                                                          (ResNeXt) (Inception) (2022) (2022) (2022) (2023) (2022a) (2021) (2021a) (2021) (2021) (2020) (2019) (2017)
                                                                                                                               0.0
              15           20                     25
                                                                                                                                 0.0


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       15
                                                                                           SMD                85.81                85.12   83.13                        85.08             82.53            77.10     84.72 85.11 83.04                                                    85.49                        81.65 75.32                                        76.21                     79.56                                                                       Frequency 3=


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              5


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    35


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           30


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      25


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            20


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       15
                                                                           0.8

                                                                                           MSL                85.15                84.18 -0.5
                                                                                                                                           85.03
                                                                                                                                          °0.5                          78.57             78.95            84.88     77.50 79.05 84.86                                                    83.31                        84.06 84.40                                        79.57                     78.68


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              10
                                                                           °1.0

                                                                                          SMAP                71.52                70.85   69.50                        70.76             69.21            69.26     71.09 71.12 71.09                                                    71.18                        69.92 70.40                                        69.97                     69.70


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       20


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                5
    20              25    30             35             40


                                                                                                                                   92.10 -1.0
                                                                                                                                          °1.0
                                                                                                                                                                                          93.33


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              15
                                                                                          SWaT                91.74                        84.91                        93.19                              87.52     79.88 92.74 91.78                                                    83.10                        81.43 82.80                                        80.52                     80.37
                                                                                           PSM                97.47                95.21       00
                                                                                                                                           91.76                         50
                                                                                                                                                                          50
                                                                                                                                                                        97.23             100
                                                                                                                                                                                           100
                                                                                                                                                                                          97.15            150
                                                                                                                                                                                                           93.55 200
                                                                                                                                                                                                            150   200
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     97.29250 93.29
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           250   300
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  300    350
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          350
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      82.08                                               79.40                        77.1024x15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              73.61                                       76.74                     76.07                      16x13                                                        10x36


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                °1


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              °1


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1
                                                                                                                                                                       (a) 1D  time series        Time                                                                                                                                                                       (b) Temporal 2D-variations


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       °1


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  1
                                                                      1
                                                                      °1              Avg F1                  86.34                85.49               82.87 84.97 84.23   82.46    82.08 84.26 82.57  80.50                                                                                                           78.83 77.31                                        76.60   76.88
0
                                                                      1                          ∗ We replace the joint criterion in Anomaly Transformer (2021) with reconstruction error for fair comparison.

                                                                                    4.6               M ODEL A NALYSIS
                                                                      °1


         10               15                      20
                                                                                    Representation analysis We attempt to explain model performance from the representation
                                                                                                                                                                         40
                                                                                                                                                                                     learning
                                                                                    aspect. From Figure 6, we can find that the better performance in forecasting and anomaly detection
                                                                                    corresponds to the higher CKA similarity (2019), which is opposite to the imputation and classification                                                                                                                                                           2

                                                                                                                                                                         0
                                                                               1
                                                                                    tasks. Note that the lower CKA similarity means that the representations are distinguishing
                                                                                                                                                                           0  20 40 among
                                                                                                                                                                                       60  80 100 120 140 160 180                                                                                                                                     1

                                                                               °1
              80                                                                    different layers, namely hierarchical representations. Thus, these results also indicate the property                                                                                                                                                             0


                                                                                    of representations that each task requires. As shown in Figure 6, TimesNet can learn appropriate
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     °1
                                                                           1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0                    50                     100                  150            200             250               300              350


               30              40                 50
                                                                           °1

                                                                                    representations for different tasks, such as low-level representations for forecasting and reconstruction                                                                                                                                                        40

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     30



                                                                           1
                                                                                    in anomaly detection, and hierarchical representations for imputation and classification. In contrast,                                                                                                                                                           20

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     10


                                                                                    FEDformer (2022) performs well in forecasting and anomaly detection tasks but fails in learning                                                                                                                                                                   0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              20              40                     60             80        100         120            140          160          180


    15               20             25             30            35
                                                                           °1
                                                                                    hierarchical representations, resulting in poor performance in imputation and classification. These
                                                                                    results also verify the task-generality of our proposed TimesNet as a foundation model.
                                                                                                              Time Series Forecast                                                    Time Series Imputation                                      Time Series Classification                                                                          Anomaly Detection
                                                                                          1.0
                                                                                           1.0                               Autoformer   Pyraformer         0.30
                                                                                                                                                              0.30       Autoformer      Pyraformer                                                      Autoformer        Flowformer          Reformer                             Autoformer            LogTrans
                                                                                                                             FEDformer    LogTrans                       FEDformer       LogTrans                                 87
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  87                     FEDformer         Pyraformer          Stationary                           FEDformer             Reformer
                                                                                                                             Informer     Reformer                       Informer        Reformer                                                        Informer          Transformer         Ours                     86
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        86          Informer              Anomaly
                                                                                          0.9
                                                                                           0.9                               Stationary   Ours                           Stationary      Ours                                                                                                                                       Stationary            Transformer
                                                                                                                                                             0.25
                                                                                                                                                              0.25                                                                86
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  86                                                                                                Pyraformer            Ours
                                                                                          0.8
                                                                                           0.8                                                                                                                                                                                                                          84
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        84
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  85
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                F1 / %(%)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  85
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Acc / %


                                                                                          0.7
                                                                                           0.7                                                               0.20
                                                                                                                                                              0.20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        82
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        82
                                                                                                                                                                                               r = 0.66
                                                                                      MSE


                                                                                                                                                         MSE


                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Accuracy


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                r = °0.82
                                                                                    MSE


                                                                                                                                                       MSE


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            F1-Score


                                                                                          0.6
                                                                                           0.6                                                                                                                                    84
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  84
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      r = 0.92
                                                                                          0.5
                                                                                           0.5                                                               0.15
                                                                                                                                                              0.15                                                                                                                                                      80
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        80
                                                                                                                 r = °0.83                                                                                                        83
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  83
                                                                                          0.4
                                                                                           0.4
                                                                                                                                                             0.10
                                                                                                                                                              0.10                                                                                                                                                      78
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        78
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  82
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  82
                                                                                          0.3
                                                                                           0.3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  81
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  81                                                                                    76
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        76
                                                                                          0.2
                                                                                           0.2                                                               0.05
                                                                                                                                                              0.05
                                                                                            0.84
                                                                                             0.84   0.86
                                                                                                    0.86 0.88
                                                                                                         0.88 0.90
                                                                                                              0.90 0.92
                                                                                                                     0.92 0.94
                                                                                                                             0.94 0.96
                                                                                                                                  0.96 0.98
                                                                                                                                       0.98 1.00
                                                                                                                                             1.00                0.6
                                                                                                                                                                 0.6          0.7
                                                                                                                                                                              0.7         0.8
                                                                                                                                                                                          0.8       0.9
                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.9        1.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                               1.0   1.1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1.1               0.76
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0.76 0.78
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0.78 0.80
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0.80 0.82
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0.82 0.84
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0.84 0.86
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.86 0.88
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0.88 0.90
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0.90 0.92
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.92                                    0.86
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0.86    0.88
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.88         0.90
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0.90          0.92
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0.92    0.94
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0.94   0.96
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0.96                     0.98
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0.98        1.00
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1.00
                                                                                                                CKA
                                                                                                              CKA    Similarity
                                                                                                                   Similarity                                                             CKA Similarity
                                                                                                                                                                                          CKA Similarity                                              CKA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        CKASimilarity
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Similarity                                                                                       CKA Similarity
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              CKA   Similarity

                                                                                     (a) Forecasting (Weather input-96-predict-336)                                  (b) Imputation (Electricity Mask 37.5%)                                 (c) Classification (PEMS-SF)                                                            (d) Anomaly Detection (SMD)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                14

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             12

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     10

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 8

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          6

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      4

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               2

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0


                                                                                    Figure 6: Representation analysis in four tasks. For each model, we calculate the centered kernel
                                                                                    alignment (CKA) similarity (2019) between representations from the first and the last layers. A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   5


                                                                                    higher CKA similarity indicates more similar representations. TimesNet is marked by red stars.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   10


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               2.0


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Electricity
                                                                                    Temporal 2D-variations We provide a case study
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   15


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               1.0


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0.5


                                                                                    of temporal 2D-variations in Figure 7. We can find
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0.0


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              -1.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              °0.5


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              °1.0


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0                50                 100                150                     200                       250                   300                       350
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0                50                 100                150                          200                  250                       300                   350
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   20


                                                                                    that TimesNet can capture the multi-periodicities pre-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Frequency=5 -1.0                                                                                      1.0                          Value
                                                                                    cisely. Besides, the transformed 2D tensor is highly                                                                                                         0

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Bar
                                                                                    structured and informative, where the columns and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       °1


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Frequency=9
                                                                                    rows can reflect the localities between time points                                                                                                         20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0


                                                                                    and periods respectively, supporting our motivation                                                                                                         30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Period
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               5



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Frequency=15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.8                   10



                                                                                    in adopting 2D kernels for representation learning.                                                                                                         40               =72                       15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Period0.8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0


                                                                                    See Appendix D for more visualizations.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                50
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              =40                         5                                        0.8


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Period
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           25
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         10


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    =24
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                60                                         30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         15


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           35
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         20


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                70
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           °1.0                                                    °1.0



                                                                                    5               C ONCLUSION AND F UTURE W ORK
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   °1.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0           5        10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0        5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0 3

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Figure 7: A case of temporal 2D-variations.

                                                                                    This paper presents the TimesNet as a task-general foundation model for time series analysis. Mo-
                                                                                    tivated by the multi-periodicity, TimesNet can ravel out intricate temporal variations by a modular
                                                                                    architecture and capture intraperiod- and interperiod-variations in 2D space by a parameter-efficient
                                                                                    inception block. Experimentally, TimesNet shows great generality and performance in five main-
                                                                                    stream analysis tasks. In the future, we will further explore large-scale pre-training methods in time
                                                                                    series, which utilize TimesNet as the backbone and can generally benefit extensive downstream tasks.


                                                                                                                                                                                                                      9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This work was supported by the National Key Research and Development Plan (2020AAA0109201),
National Natural Science Foundation of China (62022050 and 62021002), Civil Aircraft Research
Project (MZJ3-2N21), Beijing Nova Program (Z201100006820041), and CCF-Ant Group Green
Computing Fund.

R EFERENCES
Ahmed Abdulaal, Zhuanghua Liu, and Tomer Lancewicki. Practical approach to asynchronous
  multivariate time series anomaly detection and localization. KDD, 2021.
O. Anderson and M. Kendall. Time-series. 2nd edn. J. R. Stat. Soc. (Series D), 1976.
Anthony J. Bagnall, Hoang Anh Dau, Jason Lines, Michael Flynn, James Large, Aaron George
  Bostrom, Paul Southam, and Eamonn J. Keogh. The uea multivariate time series classification
  archive, 2018. arXiv preprint arXiv:1811.00075, 2018.
Donald J. Berndt and James Clifford. Using dynamic time warping to find patterns in time series. In
  KDD Workshop, 1994.
Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
  Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Sandhini Agarwal, Ariel
  Herbert-Voss, Gretchen Krueger, Tom Henighan, Rewon Child, Aditya Ramesh, Daniel Ziegler,
  Jeffrey Wu, Clemens Winter, Chris Hesse, Mark Chen, Eric Sigler, Mateusz Litwin, Scott Gray,
  Benjamin Chess, Jack Clark, Christopher Berner, Sam McCandlish, Alec Radford, Ilya Sutskever,
  and Dario Amodei. Language models are few-shot learners. In NeurIPS, 2020.
CDC.   Illness.      https://gis.cdc.gov/grasp/fluview/fluportaldashboard.
 html.
Cristian Challu, Kin G Olivares, Boris N Oreshkin, Federico Garza, Max Mergenthaler, and Artur
  Dubrawski. N-hits: Neural hierarchical interpolation for time series forecasting. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2201.12886, 2022.
Chris Chatfield. The analysis of time series: an introduction. 1981.
Tianqi Chen and Carlos Guestrin. Xgboost: A scalable tree boosting system. KDD, 2016.
Angus Dempster, Franccois Petitjean, and Geoffrey I. Webb. Rocket: exceptionally fast and accurate
  time series classification using random convolutional kernels. Data Min. Knowl. Discov., 2020.
Alexey Dosovitskiy, Lucas Beyer, Alexander Kolesnikov, Dirk Weissenborn, Xiaohua Zhai, Thomas
  Unterthiner, Mostafa Dehghani, Matthias Minderer, Georg Heigold, Sylvain Gelly, Jakob Uszkoreit,
  and Neil Houlsby. An image is worth 16x16 words: Transformers for image recognition at scale.
  In ICLR, 2021.
Jean-Yves Franceschi, Aymeric Dieuleveut, and Martin Jaggi. Unsupervised scalable representation
  learning for multivariate time series. In NeurIPS, 2019.
Milton Friedman. The interpolation of time series by related series. J. Amer. Statist. Assoc, 1962.
Albert Gu, Karan Goel, and Christopher Ré. Efficiently modeling long sequences with structured
  state spaces. In ICLR, 2022.
Kaiming He, X. Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image recognition.
  CVPR, 2016.
Yangdong He and Jiabao Zhao. Temporal convolutional networks for anomaly detection in time
  series. J. Phys. Conf. Ser, 2019.
S. Hochreiter and J. Schmidhuber. Long short-term memory. Neural Comput., 1997.


                                                 10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Kyle Hundman, Valentino Constantinou, Christopher Laporte, Ian Colwell, and Tom Söderström.
  Detecting spacecraft anomalies using lstms and nonparametric dynamic thresholding. KDD, 2018.
Rob J Hyndman and George Athanasopoulos. Forecasting: principles and practice. OTexts, 2018.
Diederik P. Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. In ICLR, 2015.
  URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1412.6980.
Nikita Kitaev, Lukasz Kaiser, and Anselm Levskaya. Reformer: The efficient transformer. In ICLR,
  2020.
Simon Kornblith, Mohammad Norouzi, Honglak Lee, and Geoffrey E. Hinton. Similarity of neural
  network representations revisited. In ICML, 2019.
Guokun Lai, Wei-Cheng Chang, Yiming Yang, and Hanxiao Liu. Modeling long-and short-term
  temporal patterns with deep neural networks. In SIGIR, 2018.
Kwei-Herng Lai, D. Zha, Junjie Xu, and Yue Zhao. Revisiting time series outlier detection: Definitions
 and benchmarks. In NeurIPS Dataset and Benchmark Track, 2021.
Shiyang Li, Xiaoyong Jin, Yao Xuan, Xiyou Zhou, Wenhu Chen, Yu-Xiang Wang, and Xifeng
  Yan. Enhancing the locality and breaking the memory bottleneck of transformer on time series
  forecasting. In NeurIPS, 2019.
Bryan Lim and Stefan Zohren. Time-series forecasting with deep learning: a survey. Philos. Trans.
  Royal Soc. A, 2021.
Shizhan Liu, Hang Yu, Cong Liao, Jianguo Li, Weiyao Lin, Alex X Liu, and Schahram Dust-
  dar. Pyraformer: Low-complexity pyramidal attention for long-range time series modeling and
  forecasting. In ICLR, 2021a.
Yong Liu, Haixu Wu, Jianmin Wang, and Mingsheng Long. Non-stationary transformers: Rethinking
  the stationarity in time series forecasting. In NeurIPS, 2022a.
Ze Liu, Yutong Lin, Yue Cao, Han Hu, Yixuan Wei, Zheng Zhang, Stephen Lin, and Baining Guo.
  Swin transformer: Hierarchical vision transformer using shifted windows. In ICCV, 2021b.
Zhuang Liu, Hanzi Mao, Chao-Yuan Wu, Christoph Feichtenhofer, Trevor Darrell, and Saining Xie.
  A convnet for the 2020s. CVPR, 2022b.
Aditya P. Mathur and Nils Ole Tippenhauer. Swat: a water treatment testbed for research and training
  on ICS security. In CySWATER, 2016.
George B. Moody, Roger G. Mark, and Ary L. Goldberger. Physionet: Physiologic signals, time
  series and related open source software for basic, clinical, and applied research. EMBC, 2011.
Boris N Oreshkin, Dmitri Carpov, Nicolas Chapados, and Yoshua Bengio. N-BEATS: Neural basis
  expansion analysis for interpretable time series forecasting. ICLR, 2019.
Adam Paszke, S. Gross, Francisco Massa, A. Lerer, James Bradbury, Gregory Chanan, Trevor Killeen,
  Z. Lin, N. Gimelshein, L. Antiga, Alban Desmaison, Andreas Köpf, Edward Yang, Zach DeVito,
  Martin Raison, Alykhan Tejani, Sasank Chilamkurthy, Benoit Steiner, Lu Fang, Junjie Bai, and
  Soumith Chintala. Pytorch: An imperative style, high-performance deep learning library. In
  NeurIPS, 2019.
PeMS. Traffic. http://pems.dot.ca.gov/.
Lifeng Shen, Zhuocong Li, and James T. Kwok. Timeseries anomaly detection using temporal
  hierarchical one-class network. In NeurIPS, 2020.
Spyros Makridakis. M4 dataset, 2018. URL https://github.com/M4Competition/
  M4-methods/tree/master/Dataset.
Ya Su, Y. Zhao, Chenhao Niu, Rong Liu, W. Sun, and Dan Pei. Robust anomaly detection for
  multivariate time series through stochastic recurrent neural network. KDD, 2019.


                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Christian Szegedy, Wei Liu, Yangqing Jia, Pierre Sermanet, Scott E. Reed, Dragomir Anguelov,
  D. Erhan, Vincent Vanhoucke, and Andrew Rabinovich. Going deeper with convolutions. CVPR,
  2015.
Sean J Taylor and Benjamin Letham. Forecasting at scale. Am. Stat., 2018.
UCI.       Electricity.   https://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/datasets/
 ElectricityLoadDiagrams20112014.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez, Lukasz
  Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. In NeurIPS, 2017.
Wetterstation. Weather. https://www.bgc-jena.mpg.de/wetter/.
Gerald Woo, Chenghao Liu, Doyen Sahoo, Akshat Kumar, and Steven C. H. Hoi. Etsformer:
  Exponential smoothing transformers for time-series forecasting. arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.01381,
  2022.
Haixu Wu, Jiehui Xu, Jianmin Wang, and Mingsheng Long. Autoformer: Decomposition transformers
  with Auto-Correlation for long-term series forecasting. In NeurIPS, 2021.
Haixu Wu, Jialong Wu, Jiehui Xu, Jianmin Wang, and Mingsheng Long. Flowformer: Linearizing
  transformers with conservation flows. In ICML, 2022.
Saining Xie, Ross B. Girshick, Piotr Dollár, Zhuowen Tu, and Kaiming He. Aggregated residual
  transformations for deep neural networks. CVPR, 2017.
Jiehui Xu, Haixu Wu, Jianmin Wang, and Mingsheng Long. Anomaly transformer: Time series
   anomaly detection with association discrepancy. In ICLR, 2021.
Ailing Zeng, Muxi Chen, Lei Zhang, and Qiang Xu. Are transformers effective for time series
  forecasting? 2023.
G. Zerveas, Srideepika Jayaraman, Dhaval Patel, Anuradha Bhamidipaty, and Carsten Eickhoff. A
  transformer-based framework for multivariate time series representation learning. KDD, 2021.
T. Zhang, Yizhuo Zhang, Wei Cao, J. Bian, Xiaohan Yi, Shun Zheng, and Jian Li. Less is more: Fast
   multivariate time series forecasting with light sampling-oriented mlp structures. arXiv preprint
   arXiv:2207.01186, 2022.
Haoyi Zhou, Shanghang Zhang, Jieqi Peng, Shuai Zhang, Jianxin Li, Hui Xiong, and Wancai Zhang.
  Informer: Beyond efficient transformer for long sequence time-series forecasting. In AAAI, 2021.
Tian Zhou, Ziqing Ma, Qingsong Wen, Xue Wang, Liang Sun, and Rong Jin. FEDformer: Frequency
  enhanced decomposed transformer for long-term series forecasting. In ICML, 2022.


A    I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS
We provide the dataset descriptions and experiment configurations in Table 6 and 7. All experi-
ments are repeated three times, implemented in PyTorch (Paszke et al., 2019) and conducted on
a single NVIDIA TITAN RTX 24GB GPU. To make the model handle various dimensions of in-
put series from different datasets, we select the dmodel based on the input series dimension C by
min{max{2⌈log C⌉ , dmin }, dmax } (see Table 7 for details of dmin and dmax ). This protocol can make
the model powerful enough for multiple variates and also keep the model size compact.
All the baselines that we reproduced are implemented based on configurations of the original paper
or official code. It is also notable that none of the previous methods are proposed for general time
series analysis. For a fair comparison, we keep the input embedding and the final projection layer the
same among different base models and only evaluate the capability of base models. Especially for
the forecasting task, we use a MLP on temporal dimension to get the initialization of predicted future.
Since we focus on the temporal variation modeling, we also adopt the Series Stationarization from
Non-stationary Transformer (Liu et al., 2022a) to eliminate the affect the distribution shift.


                                                 12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


For the metrics, we adopt the mean square error (MSE) and mean absolute error (MAE) for long-term
forecasting and imputations. For anomaly detection, we adopt the F1-score, which is the harmonic
mean of precision and recall. For the short-term forecasting, following the N-BEATS (Oreshkin et al.,
2019), we adopt the symmetric mean absolute percentage error (SMAPE), mean absolute scaled error
(MASE) and overall weighted average (OWA) as the metrics, where OWA is a special metric used in
M4 competition. These metrics can be calculated as follows:
                               H                                                                                         H
                           200 X |Xi − X   b i|                                                                      100 X |Xi − Xb i|
SMAPE =                                         ,                                                           MAPE =                     ,
                                           b i|
                            H i=1 |Xi | + |X                                                                          H i=1  |Xi |
                                 H
                           1 X                               b i|
                                                       |Xi − X                                                       1    SMAPE           MASE
     MASE =                                          PH                  ,                                     OWA =                +                  ,
                           H i=1         1
                                                      j=m+1 |Xj − Xj−m |
                                                                                                                     2 SMAPENaı̈ve2      MASENaı̈ve2
                                        H−m

                                           b ∈ RH×C are the ground truth and prediction results of
where m is the periodicity of the data. X, X
the future with H time pints and C dimensions. Xi means the i-th future time point.

B                 H YPER - PARAMETER S ENSITIVITY

We introduce a hyper-parameter in Equation 1 to select the most significant frequencies. We provide
the sensitivity analysis for these two hyper-parameters in Figure 8. We can find that our proposed
TimesNet can present a stable performance under different choices of k in all four tasks.
             -2
  (x10 )                                                                                                    (%)                                                                                            (%)

           10
           0.1

                                                                                                             95
                                                                                                             0.95                                                                                          95

              8
           0.08
                                                                                                  F1-Score


                                                                                                                                                                                                F1-Score
                         ETTh1       ETTm2
                         ETTh2       Electricity
  MSE


              6
           0.06                                                                                              85
                                                                                                             0.85                                                                                          85
                         ETTm1       Weather
    MSE


                                                                                                  MSE


                                                                                                                                                                        SMD       SWAT
                                                                                                                                                                                    SMD

              4
           0.04                                                                                                                                                                     MSL
                                                                                                                                                                        MSL       PSM
                                                                                                                                                                                    SMAP
                                                                                                                                                                                    SWAT
                                                                                                             75
                                                                                                             0.75                                                       SMAP        PSM                    75

              2
           0.02


             00                                                                                              65
                                                                                                             0.65                                                                                          65
                  1
                  1              2
                                 2                    3
                                                      3               4
                                                                      4                  5
                                                                                         5                          11            22                33                  44                 55                    2
                                            Nums of top frequency                                                                         Nums of top frequency
                             k in Equation (1) for Imputation Task                                                                       k infor
                                                                                                                          k in Equation (1)    Equation
                                                                                                                                                 Anomaly(1)Detection Task                                            m in E

     (%)                                                                                              13.0
                                                                                                         13


      1001
                                                                                                                                                                  M4 (Weighted Average)
           95
           0.95
                                                                                                      12.5
                                                                                                       12.5

           90
Accuracy


            0.9
                                                                                              SMAPE


           85
           0.85
                                                                    SpokenArabicDigits
MSE


                                                                                                      MSE


                                                                                                      12.0
                                                                                                         12
           80
            0.8                                                     FaceDetection

           75
           0.75

                                                                                                       11.5
                                                                                                        11.5
           70
            0.7


           65
           0.65


                                                                                                       11.0
                                                                                                          11
                  1
                  1              2
                                 2                   3
                                                     3                4
                                                                      4                  5
                                                                                         5                          1
                                                                                                                    1             2
                                                                                                                                  2                 3
                                                                                                                                                    3                  4
                                                                                                                                                                       4                   5
                                                                                                                                                                                           5
                                            Nums of top frequency                                                                         Nums of top frequency

                            k in Equation (1) for Classification Task                                                    k in Equation (1) for Short-term Forecasting Task


Figure 8: Sensitivity analysis of hyper-parameters k in imputation and anomaly detection task.
Especially, we select the 37.5% mask ratio for hyper-parameter experiments. For classification, we
choose the two largest subsets: SpokenArobicDigits and FaceDetection for evaluation. For short-term
forecasting, we adopt the weighted average for sensitivity analysis.

Besides, from Figure 8, we can also find out the following observations:

                      • For the low-level modeling tasks, such as forecasting and anomaly detection, the selection
                        of k will affect the final performance more. This may come from that k will directly affect
                        the amount of information in deep representations.


                                                                                             13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023



      Table 6: Dataset descriptions. The dataset size is organized in (Train, Validation, Test).
     Tasks      Dataset                  Dim         Series Length                      Dataset Size         Information (Frequency)
                ETTm1, ETTm2               7        {96, 192, 336, 720}          (34465, 11521, 11521)         Electricity (15 mins)

                ETTh1, ETTh2               7        {96, 192, 336, 720}            (8545, 2881, 2881)          Electricity (15 mins)

  Forecasting   Electricity               321 {96, 192, 336, 720}                 (18317, 2633, 5261)          Electricity (Hourly)

 (Long-term)    Traffic                   862 {96, 192, 336, 720}                 (12185, 1757, 3509)        Transportation (Hourly)

                Weather                   21        {96, 192, 336, 720}           (36792, 5271, 10540)          Weather (10 mins)

                Exchange                   8        {96, 192, 336, 720}            (5120, 665, 1422)          Exchange rate (Daily)

                ILI                        7         {24, 36, 48, 60}                   (617, 74, 170)           Illness (Weekly)

                M4-Yearly                  1                6                      (23000, 0, 23000)              Demographic

                M4-Quarterly               1                8                      (24000, 0, 24000)                   Finance

  Forecasting   M4-Monthly                 1                18                     (48000, 0, 48000)                   Industry

 (short-term)   M4-Weakly                  1                13                          (359, 0, 359)                  Macro

                M4-Daily                   1                14                      (4227, 0, 4227)                     Micro

                M4-Hourly                  1                48                          (414, 0, 414)                   Other

                ETTm1, ETTm2               7                96                   (34465, 11521, 11521)         Electricity (15 mins)

                ETTh1, ETTh2               7                96                     (8545, 2881, 2881)          Electricity (15 mins)
  Imputation
                Electricity               321               96                    (18317, 2633, 5261)          Electricity (15 mins)

                Weather                   21                96                    (36792, 5271, 10540)          Weather (10 mins)

                EthanolConcentration       3              1751                          (261, 0, 263)           Alcohol Industry

                FaceDetection             144               62                      (5890, 0, 3524)               Face (250Hz)

                Handwriting                3               152                          (150, 0, 850)              Handwriting

                Heartbeat                 61               405                          (204, 0, 205)               Heart Beat

 Classification JapaneseVowels            12                29                          (270, 0, 370)                   Voice

    (UEA)       PEMS-SF                   963              144                          (267, 0, 173)         Transportation (Daily)

                SelfRegulationSCP1         6               896                          (268, 0, 293)            Health (256Hz)

                SelfRegulationSCP2         7              1152                          (200, 0, 180)            Health (256Hz)

                SpokenArabicDigits        13                93                      (6599, 0, 2199)             Voice (11025Hz)

                UWaveGestureLibrary        3               315                          (120, 0, 320)                  Gesture

                SMD                       38               100               (566724, 141681, 708420)            Server Machine

   Anomaly      MSL                       55               100                   (44653, 11664, 73729)                Spacecraft

  Detection     SMAP                      25               100               (108146, 27037, 427617)                  Spacecraft

                SWaT                      51               100               (396000, 99000, 449919)              Infrastructure

                PSM                       25               100                   (105984, 26497, 87841)          Server Machine

Table 7: Experiment configuration of TimesNet. All the experiments use the ADAM (2015) optimizer
with the default hyperparameter configuration for (β1 , β2 ) as (0.9, 0.999).
                                      Model Hyper-parameter                                        Training Process
 Tasks / Configurations
                            k (Equ. 1) Layers dmin               †
                                                                      dmax   †
                                                                                   LR   ∗
                                                                                                 Loss       Batch Size Epochs
 Long-term Forecasting            5             2          32          512         10−4          MSE             32                10
 Short-term Forecasting           5             2          16           64         10−3
                                                                                               SMAPE             16                10
       Imputation                 3             2          64          128         10−3
                                                                                                 MSE             16                10
     Classification               3             2          32           64         10−3
                                                                                            Cross Entropy        16                30
  Anomaly Detection               3             3          32          128         10−4
                                                                                                 MSE            128                10
                              ⌈log C⌉
   † dmodel = min{max{2          , dmin }, dmax }, where C is input series dimension.
   ∗ LR means the initial learning rate.


                                                                 14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


       • For the high-level modeling tasks, such as classification and imputation, the model perfor-
         mance will be more robust to the selection of k, since the key to these tasks is to extract
         hierarchical representations.

Giving consideration to both efficiency and performance, we set k = 3 for imputation, classification
and anomaly detection and k = 5 for short-term forecasting.

C    A BLATION S TUDIES
To elaborate the property of our proposed TimesNet, we conduct detailed ablations on the representa-
tion leaning in 2D space, model architecture and adaptive aggregation.

2D space As shown in Table 8, replacing the inception block with more powerful blocks will bring
further performance promotion, such as ResNeXt (Xie et al., 2017), Swin Transformer (Liu et al.,
2021b) and ConvNeXt (Liu et al., 2022b). It is also notable that using the independent parameters
will also bring improvement, while this will cause the model size related to the selection of hyper-
parameter k. Considering the efficiency and model performance, we choose the parameter-efficient
inception block as our final solution. These results also verify that our design bridges the 1D time
series analysis with 2D computer vision backbones.

Table 8: Ablations on the representation leaning in 2D space, where we replace the parameter-efficient
inception with other well-acknowledged vision backbones. See Figure 4 for efficiency comparison.
    Datasets             SMD               MSL               SMAP              SWaT              PSM            Avg F1
     Metrics         P     R     F1    P     R     F1    P     R     F1    P     R     F1    P     R     F1      (%)
     ResNet         87.64 80.33 83.82 83.99 85.42 84.70 92.09 57.90 71.10 86.59 95.81 90.97 98.24 89.12 93.45   84.81
    ResNeXt         88.66 83.14 85.81 83.92 86.42 85.15 92.52 58.29 71.52 86.76 97.32 91.74 98.19 96.76 97.47   86.34
 Swin Transformer   88.51 82.22 85.25 87.36 86.93 87.14 92.12 57.60 70.88 89.02 95.81 92.29 98.45 91.80 95.01   86.11
    ConvNext        87.89 84.67 86.25 87.31 86.93 87.12 92.42 59.19 72.16 89.05 95.81 92.31 97.99 95.28 96.62   86.89
  Inception (Ind∗ ) 87.54 81.04 84.17 87.44 86.93 87.18 91.92 57.69 70.89 88.98 96.00 92.36 98.11 89.13 93.41 85.60
Inception (Shared∗ ) 87.76 82.63 85.12 82.97 85.42 84.18 91.50 57.80 70.85 88.31 96.24 92.10 98.22 92.21 95.21 85.49

    ∗ In this paper, we adopt a parameter-efficient design that uses the same parameters for k different transformed
    2D tensors, namely Shared. For comparison, we also compare with the independent design, that uses different
    parameters for different transformed 2D tensors, namely Ind.

Model architecture We also conduct experiments on different architectures. Surprisingly, as shown
in Table 9, we find that combining with the deep decomposition architecture in Autoformer (Wu et al.,
2021) cannot bring further promotion. These results may come from that in the case that the input
series already present clear periodicity, our design can capture the 2D-variations effectively. As for
the case that they are without clear periodicity, the model will learn the most significant frequency as
1, where the trend of time series be covered by the intraperiod-variation modeling. These results also
verify that our proposed TimesNet can handle the analysis for time series without clear periodicity.
Besides, in this paper, to take advantages of the deep representations, we place the transformation
from 1D-variations to 2D-variations in every TimesBlock. Here, we compare our design with the
case that only conducts the transformation on the raw input series. From Table 9, we can find that the
performance of Transform raw data degenerates a lot (Avg F1-score: 85.49% → 84.85%), indicating
the advantages of our design.

Table 9: Ablations on model architecture. + decomposition is to combine the deep decomposition
architecture proposed by Autoformer (Wu et al., 2021) with TimesNet. Transform raw data refers
conducting the transformation on the original time series, instead of deep features.
    Datasets             SMD               MSL               SMAP              SWaT              PSM            Avg F1
    Metrics          P     R    F1     P     R    F1     P     R    F1     P     R    F1     P     R    F1       (%)
    TimesNet       87.76 82.63 85.12 82.97 85.42 84.18 91.50 57.80 70.85 88.31 96.24 92.10 98.22 92.21 95.21 85.49
 + decomposition 87.44 78.49 82.72 83.48 86.47 84.95 91.64 57.34 70.54 89.68 95.60 92.54 98.42 93.12 95.69 85.29
Transform raw data 86.83 79.17 82.82 85.23 86.47 85.84 91.92 57.60 70.82 87.68 95.81 91.57 97.64 89.14 93.20 84.85



                                                        15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Adaptive aggregation As shown in Equation 6, following the design in Autoformer (2021),
we adopt the amplitudes after the Softmax function as aggregation weights of processed tensors
 b l,1 , · · · , X
{X               b l,k }. Here we include two variants for comparison. The first is directly-sum, namely
Pk1D b l,i 1D                                                            Pk         l−1    b l,i
  i=1 X1D . The second is to remove the Softmax function, that is           i=1 Afi × X1D . Table 10
demonstrates that our design in adaptive aggregation performs the best.

                                                                    Table 10: Ablations on adaptive aggregation.
               Datasets                                      SMD                              MSL                                                 SMAP                             SWaT                                             PSM                              Avg F1
                Metrics                             P         R      F1           P            R           F1                        P             R           F1             P            R                  F1              P         R                F1               (%)
   TimesNet      87.76 82.63 85.12 82.97 85.42 84.18 91.50 57.80 70.85 88.31 96.24 92.10 98.22 92.21 95.21 85.49
  Directly-sum   87.10 78.93 82.81 85.81 85.42 85.62 91.35 57.58 70.64 87.28 96.00 91.43 98.13 87.22 92.35 84.57
Removing-Softmax 87.27 79.31 83.10 83.91 86.47 85.17 91.93 58.57 71.55 87.13 95.81 91.27 98.00 92.48 95.16 85.25



D                   M ORE R EPRESENTATION A NALYSIS

To give an intuitive understanding of 2D-variations, we visualize the transformed 2D tensors in Figure
9. From the visualization, we can obtain the following observations:

                        • The interperiod-variation can present the long-term trends of time series. For example, in
                          the first case of Exchange, the values in each row decrease from left to right, indicating the
                          downtrend of the raw series. And for the ETTh1 dataset, the values in each row are similar
                          to each other, reflecting the global stable variation of the raw series.
                        • For the time series without clear periodicity, the temporal 2D-variations can still present
                          informative 2D structure. If the frequency is one, the intraperiod-variation is just the original
                          variation ID
                                     ofSeries
                                        raw series. Besides, the interperiod-variation2Dcan  also present the long-term
                                                                                          Variations
               2
                          trend, benefiting the temporal
                                                 Time domain
                                                             variation modeling.                               0                                                                               0                                                0


               1
                        • The transformed 2D-variations demonstrate two types of localities. Firstly, for each column
                                                                                                                                                                                               5                                            10

                                                                                                               5                                                    0.8

                          (intraperiod-variation), the adjacent values are close to each other, presenting the locality
               0                                                                                                                                                                           10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            20
Electricity


                          among adjacent time points. Secondly, for each row (interperiod-variation), the adjacent
                                                                                                                                                                                           15                           0.8
              °1                                                                                                                                                                                                                            30
                                                                                                               10
                    0         50         100        150       200     250         300         350                                                                                                                                                                   0.8

                          values are also close,       corresponding to the locality among adjacent periods. Note that the
                                                                                                                                                                                           20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            40
              40
                                                  Frequency domain
                           top_3 freq=5,9,15
                          non-adjacent       periods can be quite different from each other, which can be caused by global
                                                                                                               15                                                                          25
              30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            50


                          trend, such as the case from the Exchange dataset. These observations of localities also
              20                                                                                                                                                                           30

                                                                                                               20                                                                                                                           60
              10
                          motivate us to adopt the 2D kernel for representation learning.
                                                                                                                                                                                           35
               0                                                                                                                                                                                                                            70
                                                                                                                                                                    °1.0                                                °1.0                                        °1.0
                    0    20         40         60       80    100   120     140         160     180                                                                                                                                                 0 3
                                                                                                                        0                5         10                                               0     5
                                                                                                                                                               Weight

                                                                                                                    0                                                     0                                                                                                0.8
                                                                                                                                                                    0.8
                0
                                                                                                                                                                          2

                                                                                                                                                                          4
              °2                                                                                                    5
                                                                                                                                                                          6

              °4                                                            Time domain                                                                                   8
ETTh1


                                                                                                                10                                                    10
                                                                                                      Period


                    0          50        100        150       200     250         300         350                                                                                                                                                                          °1.0
              300                                                                                                                                                             0            5              10            15         20               25

                                                                    Frequency domain                            15
                                                                                                                                                                    °1.0

              200

                                    top_3 freq=15,30,45                                                                                                                0                                                                                                   0.8
              100                                                                                               20
                                                                                                                                                                       5
                0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          °1.0
                    0     20        40         60       80    100   120     140         160     180                         0             5        10                         0    5               10    15        20         25   30    35              40
                                                                                                                                         Frequency             Value
                                                                                                                                                                Bar
                                                                                                                                0                                                 0                                                         0
              3.0                                                           Time domain
                                                                                                                                5                       0.8                       10                    0.8                                                   0.8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         20
              2.5
                                                                                                                                10                                                20

              2.0                                                                                                               15                                                30                                                     40
Exchange


                                                                                                                                20                                                40
                    0         50         100        150       200     250         300         350
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         60
              40                                                                                                                25                                                50

              30
                                                                    Frequency domain
                                                                                                                                30                                                60                                                     80
                                                                                                                                                                                                        °1.0                                                  °1.0
              20
                        top_3 freq=3,4,8                                                                                        35                      °1.0
                                                                                                                                                                                  70
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        100
              10
                                                                                                                                40                                                80
               0
                    0    20         40         60       80    100   120     140         160     180                                  0        5                                        0                                                        0


                                                             Figure 9: More showcases for temporal 2D-variations.


                                                                                                                                     16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         E             M ULTI - PERIODICITY OF T IME S ERIES
As shown in Figure 10, we calculate the density of each period length for different datasets. We can
find that real-world time series present multi-periodicity to some extent. For example, the Electricity
dataset contains the periods with length-12 and length-24.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         17.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               30                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         15.0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               25                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         25
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         12.5                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          12
Density(⇥10 2 )


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Density(⇥10 2 )


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Density(⇥10 2 )


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Density(⇥10 2 )
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Density(⇥10 2 )
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       10                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      20                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         20



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Density
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         10.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        8                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      15                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             7.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               10                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             5.0
<latexit sha1_base64="tZ4RqWQOA/PRalBntjOFSuXhuFI=">AAAC43icjVHLSsNAFD3GV31XXQoSLIIuLImIuhR14bKCtYW2SpJO69C8yEzEUrpz507c+gNu9V/EP9C/8M4YQS2iE5KcOfeeM3PvdWOfC2lZL0PG8Mjo2HhuYnJqemZ2Lj+/cCqiNPFY2Yv8KKm6jmA+D1lZcumzapwwJ3B9VnE7BypeuWSJ4FF4IrsxawROO+Qt7jmSqPP8cl2yK9k7ZKHgsttfq0seMGHa1llvY7O/fp4vWEVLL3MQ2BkoIFulKP+MOpqI4CFFAIYQkrAPB4KeGmxYiIlroEdcQojrOEMfk6RNKYtRhkNsh75t2tUyNqS98hRa7dEpPr0JKU2skiaivISwOs3U8VQ7K/Y37572VHfr0t/NvAJiJS6I/Uv3mflfnapFooVdXQOnmmLNqOq8zCXVXVE3N79UJckhJk7hJsUTwp5WfvbZ1Bqha1e9dXT8VWcqVu29LDfFm7olDdj+Oc5BcLpZtLeL9vFWYW8/G3UOS1jBGs1zB3s4Qgll8r7GAx7xZDDjxrg17j5SjaFMs4hvy7h/B/gQm1w=</latexit>


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            <latexit sha1_base64="tZ4RqWQOA/PRalBntjOFSuXhuFI=">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</latexit>


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      <latexit sha1_base64="tZ4RqWQOA/PRalBntjOFSuXhuFI=">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</latexit>


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        <latexit sha1_base64="tZ4RqWQOA/PRalBntjOFSuXhuFI=">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</latexit>


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 <latexit sha1_base64="tZ4RqWQOA/PRalBntjOFSuXhuFI=">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</latexit>
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        4

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             2.5                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                5                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        2

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        5       10                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                15        20    25                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          5    10                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       15   20        25                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0        10   20        30                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    40   50    60        70                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0     20   40                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    60          80
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Peroids                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Peroids                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Peroids                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Peroids
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 <latexit sha1_base64="73AU5ugtUrsPeG70em8+pli0qtY=">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</latexit>                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            <latexit sha1_base64="73AU5ugtUrsPeG70em8+pli0qtY=">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</latexit>                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        <latexit sha1_base64="73AU5ugtUrsPeG70em8+pli0qtY=">AAAC0XicjVHLSsNAFD2Nr1pfVZdugkVwVRIRdVl047KifUBbJUmndWheTCZiKQVx6w+41Z8S/0D/wjtjCmoRnZDkzLn3nJl7rxv7PJGW9ZozZmbn5hfyi4Wl5ZXVteL6Rj2JUuGxmhf5kWi6TsJ8HrKa5NJnzVgwJ3B91nAHJyreuGEi4VF4IYcx6wROP+Q97jmSqMu2ZLdyVGUi4t1kfFUsWWVLL3Ma2BkoIVvVqPiCNrqI4CFFAIYQkrAPBwk9LdiwEBPXwYg4QYjrOMMYBdKmlMUowyF2QN8+7VoZG9JeeSZa7dEpPr2ClCZ2SBNRniCsTjN1PNXOiv3Ne6Q91d2G9Hczr4BYiWti/9JNMv+rU7VI9HCka+BUU6wZVZ2XuaS6K+rm5peqJDnExCncpbgg7GnlpM+m1iS6dtVbR8ffdKZi1d7LclO8q1vSgO2f45wG9b2yfVC2z/ZLleNs1HlsYRu7NM9DVHCKKmrkLfCIJzwb58bQuDPuP1ONXKbZxLdlPHwAefqVfA==</latexit>                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           <latexit sha1_base64="73AU5ugtUrsPeG70em8+pli0qtY=">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</latexit>


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            (a) Electricity                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         (b) ETTh1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      (c) Exchange                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       (d) Weather

Figure 10: Statistics of period length in experimental datasets. We conduct FFT to the raw data and
select the top-6 significant frequencies for each length-96 segment. Then, we record the corresponding
period lengths and plot the normalized density for each period length.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         F             S HOWCASES
To provide a clear comparison among different models, we provide showcases to the regression tasks,
including the imputation (Figure 11), long-term forecasting (Figure 12) and short-term forecasting
(Figure 13). Especially in the imputation task, the MLP-based models degenerate a lot. This is
because the input series has been randomly masked. However, the MLP-based models adopt the fixed
model parameter to model the temporal dependencies among time points, thereby failing in this task.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   TimesNet                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Stationary                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Autoformer
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Prediction                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Prediction                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Prediction
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         °0.4                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        GroundTruth        °0.4                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       GroundTruth                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              °0.4                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     GroundTruth


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         °0.5                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           °0.5                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                °0.5


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         °0.6                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           °0.6                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                °0.6


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        °0.7                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                °0.7
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         °0.7

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        °0.8                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                °0.8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         °0.8


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0           20                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      40        60                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   80                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0         20         40                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     60             80                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       20        40                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    60         80



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       DLinear                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   LightTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           FEDformer
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Prediction                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Prediction                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Prediction
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         °0.4                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        GroundTruth        °0.4                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       GroundTruth                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       GroundTruth

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            °0.4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        °0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         °0.6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        °0.6                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                °0.6

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         °0.8                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           °0.7
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            °0.8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        °0.8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         °1.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        °0.9                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                °1.0


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0           20                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      40        60                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   80                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0         20         40                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     60             80                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       20        40                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    60         80



Figure 11: Visualization of ETTm1 imputation results given by models under the 50% mask ratio
setting. The black lines stand for the ground truth and the orange lines stand for predicted values.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         G             M ODEL E FFICIENCY A NALYSIS
To summarize the model performance and efficiency, we calculate the relative performance rankings
for comparing baselines. The rankings are compared from the common models used in all five
tasks: LSTM (1997) and LSSL (2022); TCN (2019); LightTS (2022) and DLinear (2023); Reformer
(2020), Informer (2021), Pyraformer (2021a), Autoformer (2021), FEDformer (2022), Non-stationary
Transformer (2022a), ETSformer (2022) and our proposed TimesNet, namely 13 models in total.


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                              TimesNet                                                              Stationary                                                             Autoformer
  0.75                                                                  0.75                                                                   0.75

  0.50                                                                  0.50                                                                   0.50

  0.25                                                                  0.25                                                                   0.25

  0.00                                                                  0.00                                                                   0.00

 °0.25                                                                 °0.25                                                                  °0.25

 °0.50                                                                 °0.50                                                                  °0.50

 °0.75                                                   Prediction    °0.75                                                    Prediction    °0.75                                                   Prediction
                                                         GroundTruth                                                            GroundTruth                                                           GroundTruth


            0           100        200        300              400                0           100         200        300              400                0           100        200        300              400



                               DLinear                                                                   LightTS                                                           FEDformer
  0.75                                                                  0.75                                                                   0.75

  0.50                                                                  0.50                                                                   0.50

  0.25                                                                  0.25                                                                   0.25

  0.00                                                                  0.00                                                                   0.00

 °0.25                                                                 °0.25                                                                  °0.25

 °0.50                                                                 °0.50                                                                  °0.50

 °0.75                                                   Prediction    °0.75                                                    Prediction    °0.75                                                   Prediction
                                                         GroundTruth                                                            GroundTruth                                                           GroundTruth


            0           100        200        300              400                0           100         200        300              400                0           100        200        300              400



Figure 12: Visualization of ETTm2 predictions by different models under the input-96-predict-336
setting. The black lines stand for the ground truth and the orange lines stand for predicted values.


                              TimesNet                                                                   N-HiTS                                                            N-BEATS
 9000                                                                  9000                                                                   9000
                Prediction                                                            Prediction                                                             Prediction
                GroundTruth                                                           GroundTruth                                                            GroundTruth

 8500                                                                  8500                                                                   8500


 8000                                                                  8000                                                                   8000


 7500                                                                  7500                                                                   7500


 7000                                                                  7000                                                                   7000



        0          10         20         30         40           50           0          10         20          30         40           50           0          10         20         30         40           50



                               DLinear                                                              Autoformer                                                             FEDformer
 9000                                                                  9000                                                                   9000
                Prediction                                                            Prediction                                                             Prediction
                GroundTruth                                                           GroundTruth                                                            GroundTruth

 8500                                                                  8500                                                                   8500


 8000                                                                  8000                                                                   8000


 7500                                                                  7500                                                                   7500


 7000                                                                  7000                                                                   7000



        0          10         20         30         40           50           0          10         20          30         40           50           0          10         20         30         40           50



Figure 13: Visualization of M4 predictions by different models. The black lines stand for the ground
truth and the orange lines stand for predicted values.


As shown in Table 11, our proposed TimesNet achieves the best performance in all five tasks. Among
the top three models, TimesNet also achieves the greatest efficiency. Compared to MLP-based models,
our proposed TimesNet shows a significant advantage in performance. And benefiting from the
utilization of 2D kernels and parameter-efficient design, the parameter size is invariant when the input
series changes. Compared to Transformer-based models, TimesNet is with great efficiency in GPU
memory, which is essential in long sequence modeling.


                                                                                                     18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023



Table 11: Model efficiency comparison and their rankings in five tasks. The efficiency measurements
are recorded on the imputation task of ETTh1 dataset. The rankings are organized in the order of
long- and short-term forecasting, imputation, classification and anomaly detection. “/” indicates the
out-of-memory situation. A smaller ranking means better performance.
        Models           Parameter   GPU Memory       Running Time                  Ranking
     Series Length         (MB)          (MiB)          (s / iter)       Five tasks           Avg Ranking
                   384     0.067         1245            0.024
   TimesNet        768     0.067         1585            0.040
                                                                        (1, 1, 1, 1, 1)           1.0
    (ours)        1536     0.067         2491            0.045
                  3072     0.067         2353            0.073
                   384     1.884         2321            0.046
 Non-stationary    768     1.910         4927            0.118
                                                                        (3, 2, 2, 2, 8)           3.4
  Transformer     1536     1.961           /               /
                  3072       /             /               /
                   384     1.848          2101           0.070
                   768     1.848          3209           0.071
  Autoformer                                                            (7, 4, 3, 5, 3)           4.4
                  1536     1.848          5395           0.129
                  3072     1.848         10043           0.255
                   384     2.901         5977            0.807
                   768     2.901         7111            1.055
   FEDformer                                                            (4, 3, 6, 9, 2)           4.8
                  1536     2.901         9173            1.482
                  3072     2.901           /               /
                   384     0.163         1055            0.009
                   768     0.614         1077            0.013
    LightTS                                                            (6, 5, 4, 10, 4)           5.8
                  1536     2.403         1127            0.015
                  3072     9.534         1311            0.030
                   384     0.296         1057            0.006
                   768     1.181         1093            0.006
    DLinear                                                            (2, 6, 5, 12, 7)           6.4
                  1536     4.722         1159            0.007
                  3072    18.881         1433            0.026
                   384     1.123         1831            0.042
                   768     1.123         2565            0.047
   ETSformer                                                            (5, 9, 9, 6, 5)           6.8
                  1536     1.123         4081            0.072
                  3072     1.123         7065            0.143
                   384     1.903         1577            0.044
                   768     1.903         2125            0.047
    Informer                                                           (10, 8, 8, 3, 9)           7.6
                  1536     1.903         3153            0.088
                  3072     1.903         5194            0.165
                   384     1.157         1681            0.030
                   768     1.157         2301            0.046
   Reformer                                                           (11, 11, 7, 4, 11)          8.8
                  1536     1.157         5793            0.102
                  3072     1.157           /               /
                   384     1.308         2047            0.046
                   768     1.996         6077            0.119
   Pyraformer                                                         (9, 10, 12, 8, 6)           9.0
                  1536     3.372           /               /
                  3072       /             /               /
                   384     0.121         1135            0.010
                   768     0.220         1139            0.011
     LSSL                                                             (8, 12, 10, 7, 13)         10.0
                  1536     0.417         1147            0.013
                  3072     0.812         1197            0.032
                   384     0.372         1195            0.020
                   768     0.372         1333            0.020
      TCN                                                            (12, 7, 11, 11, 12)         10.6
                  1536     0.372         1533            0.025
                  3072     0.372         1983            0.061
                   384     0.268         1201            0.064
                   768     0.268         1323            0.122
     LSTM                                                            (13, 13, 13, 13, 10)        12.4
                  1536     0.268         1539            0.229
                  3072     0.268         2017            0.452


                                                 19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


H              M ODEL PERFORMANCE IN M IXED DATASET
To verify the model capacity in large-scale pre-training, we evaluate the model performance when
it is trained from a mixed dataset. Concretely, we mixed the hourly-collected ETTh1, ETTh2 and
the 15-minute collected ETTm1, ETTm2 as the mixed dataset. Note that this mixed dataset contains
diverse temporal patterns and periodicities in different data instances, making the unified training
challenging. From Table 12, we can find that TimesNet can handle this mixed dataset well and
generally promote the model performance in four independent subsets.
Besides, we can also find that except TimesNet, for other baselines, the mixed training may decrease
the model performance in some subsets, indicating that other baselines cannot handle the complex
periodicities in the mixed dataset. These results also verify the potential of TimesNet in performing
as the general-purpose backbone for large-scale pre-training in time series.


             Table 12: Comparison between unified training and independent training for imputation task.
                Datasets                ETTm1                  ETTm2                   ETTh1                   ETTh2

               Mask Ratio       12.5% 25% 37.5% 50% 12.5% 25% 37.5% 50% 12.5% 25% 37.5% 50% 12.5% 25% 37.5% 50%
                           MSE 0.034 0.048 0.060 0.078 0.023 0.027 0.030 0.034 0.066 0.086 0.114 0.133 0.042 0.049 0.055 0.065
Autoformer


               Unified
                           MAE 0.122 0.146 0.163 0.185 0.091 0.102 0.109 0.117 0.174 0.200 0.229 0.247 0.135 0.147 0.157 0.171

                           MSE 0.034 0.046 0.057 0.067 0.023 0.026 0.030 0.035 0.074 0.090 0.109 0.137 0.044 0.050 0.060 0.068
             Independent
                           MAE 0.124 0.144 0.161 0.174 0.092 0.101 0.108 0.119 0.182 0.203 0.222 0.248 0.138 0.149 0.163 0.173

                           MSE 0.041 0.057 0.073 0.099 0.060 0.089 0.125 0.172 0.077 0.101 0.130 0.164 0.087 0.125 0.161 0.214
FEDformer


               Unified
                           MAE 0.143 0.169 0.192 0.224 0.166 0.205 0.244 0.287 0.196 0.228 0.258 0.289 0.204 0.246 0.283 0.326

                           MSE 0.035 0.052 0.069 0.089 0.056 0.080 0.110 0.156 0.070 0.106 0.124 0.165 0.095 0.137 0.187 0.232
             Independent
                           MAE 0.135 0.166 0.191 0.218 0.159 0.195 0.231 0.276 0.190 0.236 0.258 0.299 0.212 0.258 0.304 0.341

                           MSE 0.019 0.023 0.028 0.037 0.018 0.020 0.022 0.025 0.035 0.046 0.057 0.075 0.032 0.036 0.040 0.047
               Unified
TimesNet


                           MAE 0.091 0.099 0.109 0.123 0.075 0.081 0.086 0.095 0.126 0.144 0.159 0.181 0.112 0.119 0.129 0.140

                           MSE 0.019 0.023 0.029 0.037 0.018 0.020 0.023 0.026 0.057 0.069 0.084 0.102 0.040 0.046 0.052 0.060
             Independent
                           MAE 0.092 0.101 0.111 0.124 0.080 0.085 0.091 0.098 0.159 0.178 0.196 0.215 0.130 0.141 0.151 0.162


I             F ULL R ESULTS
Due to the space limitation of the main text, we place the full results of all experiments in the
following: long-term forecasting in Table 13, short-term forecasting in Table 14, imputation in Table
16, classification in Table 17 and anomaly detection in Table 15.


                                                                   20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Table 13: Full results for the long-term forecasting task. We compare extensive competitive models
under different prediction lengths. The input sequence length is set to 36 for the ILI dataset and 96
for the others. Avg is averaged from all four prediction lengths.
                    TimesNet ETSformer LightTS∗         DLinear∗ FEDformer Stationary Autoformer Pyraformer Informer            LogTrans    Reformer      LSSL        LSTM
  Models
                     (Ours)   (2022)    (2022)           (2023)    (2022)   (2022a)     (2021)    (2021a)    (2021)              (2019)      (2020)       (2022)      (1997)

   Metric MSE MAE MSE MAE MSE MAE MSE MAE MSE MAE MSE MAE MSE MAE MSE MAE MSE MAE MSE MAE MSE MAE MSE MAE MSE MAE
              96    0.338 0.375 0.375 0.398 0.374 0.400 0.345 0.372 0.379 0.419 0.386 0.398 0.505 0.475 0.543 0.510 0.672 0.571 0.600 0.546 0.538 0.528 0.450 0.477 0.863 0.664
ETTm1


              192   0.374 0.387 0.408 0.410 0.400 0.407 0.380 0.389 0.426 0.441 0.459 0.444 0.553 0.496 0.557 0.537 0.795 0.669 0.837 0.700 0.658 0.592 0.469 0.481 1.113 0.776
              336   0.410 0.411 0.435 0.428 0.438 0.438 0.413 0.413 0.445 0.459 0.495 0.464 0.621 0.537 0.754 0.655 1.212 0.871 1.124 0.832 0.898 0.721 0.583 0.574 1.267 0.832
              720   0.478 0.450 0.499 0.462 0.527 0.502 0.474 0.453 0.543 0.490 0.585 0.516 0.671 0.561 0.908 0.724 1.166 0.823 1.153 0.820 1.102 0.841 0.632 0.596 1.324 0.858

              Avg 0.400 0.406 0.429 0.425 0.435 0.437 0.403 0.407 0.448 0.452 0.481 0.456 0.588 0.517 0.691 0.607 0.961 0.734 0.929 0.725 0.799 0.671 0.533 0.532 1.142 0.782

              96    0.187 0.267 0.189 0.280 0.209 0.308 0.193 0.292 0.203 0.287 0.192 0.274 0.255 0.339 0.435 0.507 0.365 0.453 0.768 0.642 0.658 0.619 0.243 0.342 2.041 1.073
ETTm2


              192   0.249 0.309 0.253 0.319 0.311 0.382 0.284 0.362 0.269 0.328 0.280 0.339 0.281 0.340 0.730 0.673 0.533 0.563 0.989 0.757 1.078 0.827 0.392 0.448 2.249 1.112
              336   0.321 0.351 0.314 0.357 0.442 0.466 0.369 0.427 0.325 0.366 0.334 0.361 0.339 0.372 1.201 0.845 1.363 0.887 1.334 0.872 1.549 0.972 0.932 0.724 2.568 1.238
              720   0.408 0.403 0.414 0.413 0.675 0.587 0.554 0.522 0.421 0.415 0.417 0.413 0.433 0.432 3.625 1.451 3.379 1.338 3.048 1.328 2.631 1.242 1.372 0.879 2.720 1.287

              Avg 0.291 0.333 0.293 0.342 0.409 0.436 0.350 0.401 0.305 0.349 0.306 0.347 0.327 0.371 1.498 0.869 1.410 0.810 1.535 0.900 1.479 0.915 0.735 0.598 2.395 1.177

              96    0.384 0.402 0.494 0.479 0.424 0.432 0.386 0.400 0.376 0.419 0.513 0.491 0.449 0.459 0.664 0.612 0.865 0.713 0.878 0.740 0.837 0.728 0.548 0.528 1.044 0.773
              192   0.436 0.429 0.538 0.504 0.475 0.462 0.437 0.432 0.420 0.448 0.534 0.504 0.500 0.482 0.790 0.681 1.008 0.792 1.037 0.824 0.923 0.766 0.542 0.526 1.217 0.832
ETTh1


              336   0.491 0.469 0.574 0.521 0.518 0.488 0.481 0.459 0.459 0.465 0.588 0.535 0.521 0.496 0.891 0.738 1.107 0.809 1.238 0.932 1.097 0.835 1.298 0.942 1.259 0.841
              720   0.521 0.500 0.562 0.535 0.547 0.533 0.519 0.516 0.506 0.507 0.643 0.616 0.514 0.512 0.963 0.782 1.181 0.865 1.135 0.852 1.257 0.889 0.721 0.659 1.271 0.838

              Avg 0.458 0.450 0.542 0.510 0.491 0.479 0.456 0.452 0.440 0.460 0.570 0.537 0.496 0.487 0.827 0.703 1.040 0.795 1.072 0.837 1.029 0.805 0.777 0.664 1.198 0.821

              96    0.340 0.374 0.340 0.391 0.397 0.437 0.333 0.387 0.358 0.397 0.476 0.458 0.346 0.388 0.645 0.597 3.755 1.525 2.116 1.197 2.626 1.317 1.616 1.036 2.522 1.278
              192   0.402 0.414 0.430 0.439 0.520 0.504 0.477 0.476 0.429 0.439 0.512 0.493 0.456 0.452 0.788 0.683 5.602 1.931 4.315 1.635 11.12 2.979 2.083 1.197 3.312 1.384
ETTh2


              336   0.452 0.452 0.485 0.479 0.626 0.559 0.594 0.541 0.496 0.487 0.552 0.551 0.482 0.486 0.907 0.747 4.721 1.835 1.124 1.604 9.323 2.769 2.970 1.439 3.291 1.388
              720   0.462 0.468 0.500 0.497 0.863 0.672 0.831 0.657 0.463 0.474 0.562 0.560 0.515 0.511 0.963 0.783 3.647 1.625 3.188 1.540 3.874 1.697 2.576 1.363 3.257 1.357

              Avg 0.414 0.427 0.439 0.452 0.602 0.543 0.559 0.515 0.437 0.449 0.526 0.516 0.450 0.459 0.826 0.703 4.431 1.729 2.686 1.494 6.736 2.191 2.311 1.259 3.095 1.352

              96    0.168 0.272 0.187 0.304 0.207 0.307 0.197 0.282 0.193 0.308 0.169 0.273 0.201 0.317 0.386 0.449 0.274 0.368 0.258 0.357 0.312 0.402 0.300 0.392 0.375 0.437
Electricity


              192   0.184 0.289 0.199 0.315 0.213 0.316 0.196 0.285 0.201 0.315 0.182 0.286 0.222 0.334 0.378 0.443 0.296 0.386 0.266 0.368 0.348 0.433 0.297 0.390 0.442 0.473
              336   0.198 0.300 0.212 0.329 0.230 0.333 0.209 0.301 0.214 0.329 0.200 0.304 0.231 0.338 0.376 0.443 0.300 0.394 0.280 0.380 0.350 0.433 0.317 0.403 0.439 0.473
              720   0.220 0.320 0.233 0.345 0.265 0.360 0.245 0.333 0.246 0.355 0.222 0.321 0.254 0.361 0.376 0.445 0.373 0.439 0.283 0.376 0.340 0.420 0.338 0.417 0.980 0.814

              Avg 0.192 0.295 0.208 0.323 0.229 0.329 0.212 0.300 0.214 0.327 0.193 0.296 0.227 0.338 0.379 0.445 0.311 0.397 0.272 0.370 0.338 0.422 0.313 0.401 0.559 0.549

              96    0.593 0.321 0.607 0.392 0.615 0.391 0.650 0.396 0.587 0.366 0.612 0.338 0.613 0.388 0.867 0.468 0.719 0.391 0.684 0.384 0.732 0.423 0.798 0.436 0.843 0.453
              192   0.617 0.336 0.621 0.399 0.601 0.382 0.598 0.370 0.604 0.373 0.613 0.340 0.616 0.382 0.869 0.467 0.696 0.379 0.685 0.390 0.733 0.420 0.849 0.481 0.847 0.453
Traffic


              336   0.629 0.336 0.622 0.396 0.613 0.386 0.605 0.373 0.621 0.383 0.618 0.328 0.622 0.337 0.881 0.469 0.777 0.420 0.734 0.408 0.742 0.420 0.828 0.476 0.853 0.455
              720   0.640 0.350 0.632 0.396 0.658 0.407 0.645 0.394 0.626 0.382 0.653 0.355 0.660 0.408 0.896 0.473 0.864 0.472 0.717 0.396 0.755 0.423 0.854 0.489 1.500 0.805

              Avg 0.620 0.336 0.621 0.396 0.622 0.392 0.625 0.383 0.610 0.376 0.624 0.340 0.628 0.379 0.878 0.469 0.764 0.416 0.705 0.395 0.741 0.422 0.832 0.471 1.011 0.541

              96    0.172 0.220 0.197 0.281 0.182 0.242 0.196 0.255 0.217 0.296 0.173 0.223 0.266 0.336 0.622 0.556 0.300 0.384 0.458 0.490 0.689 0.596 0.174 0.252 0.369 0.406
Weather


              192   0.219 0.261 0.237 0.312 0.227 0.287 0.237 0.296 0.276 0.336 0.245 0.285 0.307 0.367 0.739 0.624 0.598 0.544 0.658 0.589 0.752 0.638 0.238 0.313 0.416 0.435
              336   0.280 0.306 0.298 0.353 0.282 0.334 0.283 0.335 0.339 0.380 0.321 0.338 0.359 0.395 1.004 0.753 0.578 0.523 0.797 0.652 0.639 0.596 0.287 0.355 0.455 0.454
              720   0.365 0.359 0.352 0.288 0.352 0.386 0.345 0.381 0.403 0.428 0.414 0.410 0.419 0.428 1.420 0.934 1.059 0.741 0.869 0.675 1.130 0.792 0.384 0.415 0.535 0.520

              Avg 0.259 0.287 0.271 0.334 0.261 0.312 0.265 0.317 0.309 0.360 0.288 0.314 0.338 0.382 0.946 0.717 0.634 0.548 0.696 0.602 0.803 0.656 0.271 0.334 0.444 0.454

              96    0.107 0.234 0.085 0.204 0.116 0.262 0.088 0.218 0.148 0.278 0.111 0.237 0.197 0.323 1.748 1.105 0.847 0.752 0.968 0.812 1.065 0.829 0.395 0.474 1.453 1.049
Exchange


              192   0.226 0.344 0.182 0.303 0.215 0.359 0.176 0.315 0.271 0.380 0.219 0.335 0.300 0.369 1.874 1.151 1.204 0.895 1.040 0.851 1.188 0.906 0.776 0.698 1.846 1.179
              336   0.367 0.448 0.348 0.428 0.377 0.466 0.313 0.427 0.460 0.500 0.421 0.476 0.509 0.524 1.943 1.172 1.672 1.036 1.659 1.081 1.357 0.976 1.029 0.797 2.136 1.231
              720   0.964 0.746 1.025 0.774 0.831 0.699 0.839 0.695 1.195 0.841 1.092 0.769 1.447 0.941 2.085 1.206 2.478 1.310 1.941 1.127 1.510 1.016 2.283 1.222 2.984 1.427

              Avg 0.416 0.443 0.410 0.427 0.385 0.447 0.354 0.414 0.519 0.500 0.461 0.454 0.613 0.539 1.913 1.159 1.550 0.998 1.402 0.968 1.280 0.932 1.121 0.798 2.105 1.221

              24    2.317 0.934 2.527 1.020 8.313 2.144 2.398 1.040 3.228 1.260 2.294 0.945 3.483 1.287 7.394 2.012 5.764 1.677 4.480 1.444 4.400 1.382 4.381 1.425 5.914 1.734
              36    1.972 0.920 2.615 1.007 6.631 1.902 2.646 1.088 2.679 1.080 1.825 0.848 3.103 1.148 7.551 2.031 4.755 1.467 4.799 1.467 4.783 1.448 4.442 1.416 6.631 1.845
ILI


              48    2.238 0.940 2.359 0.972 7.299 1.982 2.614 1.086 2.622 1.078 2.010 0.900 2.669 1.085 7.662 2.057 4.763 1.469 4.800 1.468 4.832 1.465 4.559 1.443 6.736 1.857
              60    2.027 0.928 2.487 1.016 7.283 1.985 2.804 1.146 2.857 1.157 2.178 0.963 2.770 1.125 7.931 2.100 5.264 1.564 5.278 1.560 4.882 1.483 4.651 1.474 6.870 1.879

              Avg 2.139 0.931 2.497 1.004 7.382 2.003 2.616 1.090 2.847 1.144 2.077 0.914 3.006 1.161 7.635 2.050 5.137 1.544 4.839 1.485 4.724 1.445 4.508 1.440 6.538 1.829

  1st Count             40           4          1           14          6           7           0           0           0           0           0           0           0

              ∗ means that there are some mismatches between our input-output setting and their papers. We adopt their official codes and only
              change the length of input and output sequences for a fair comparison.


                                                                                   21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Table 14: Full results for the short-term forecasting task in the M4 dataset. ∗. in the Transformers
indicates the name of ∗former. Stationary means the Non-stationary Transformer.
                                    TimesNet N-HiTS N-BEATS∗ ETS. LightTS DLinear FED. Stationary Auto. Pyra.  In. LogTrans Re. LSTM TCN LSSL
           Models
                                     (Ours) (2022) (2019) (2022) (2022) (2023) (2022) (2022a) (2021) (2021a) (2021) (2019) (2020) (1997) (2019) (2022)
                            SMAPE 13.387     13.418 13.436 18.009 14.247 16.965 13.728 13.717 13.974 15.530 14.727 17.107 16.169 176.040 14.920 61.675
 Yearly


                            MASE 2.996       3.045 3.043 4.487 3.109 4.283 3.048 3.078 3.134 3.711 3.418 4.177 3.800 31.033 3.364 19.953
                             OWA  0.786      0.793 0.794 1.115 0.827 1.058 0.803 0.807 0.822 0.942 0.881 1.049 0.973 9.290 0.880 4.397
 Others Monthly Quarterly


                            SMAPE 10.100     10.202 10.124 13.376 11.364 12.145 10.792 10.958 11.338 15.449 11.360 13.207 13.313 172.808 11.122 65.999
                            MASE 1.182       1.194 1.169 1.906 1.328 1.520 1.283 1.325 1.365 2.350 1.401 1.827 1.775 19.753 1.360 17.662
                             OWA  0.890      0.899 0.886 1.302 1.000 1.106 0.958 0.981 1.012 1.558 1.027 1.266 1.252 15.049 1.001 9.436

                            SMAPE 12.670     12.791 12.677 14.588 14.014 13.514 14.260 13.917 13.958 17.642 14.062 16.149 20.128 143.237 15.626 64.664
                            MASE 0.933       0.969 0.937 1.368 1.053 1.037 1.102 1.097 1.103 1.913 1.141 1.660 2.614 16.551 1.274 16.245
                             OWA  0.878      0.899 0.880 1.149 0.981 0.956 1.012 0.998 1.002 1.511 1.024 1.340 1.927 12.747 1.141 9.879

                            SMAPE    4.891    5.061   4.925   7.267 15.880   6.709 4.954      6.302    5.485 24.786 24.460 23.236 32.491 186.282 7.186 121.844
                            MASE     3.302    3.216   3.391   5.240 11.434   4.953 3.264      4.064    3.865 18.581 20.960 16.288 33.355 119.294 4.677 91.650
                             OWA     1.035    1.040   1.053   1.591 3.474    1.487 1.036      1.304    1.187 5.538 5.879 5.013 8.679 38.411 1.494 27.273
Weighted
 Average


                            SMAPE 11.829     11.927 11.851 14.718 13.525 13.639 12.840 12.780 12.909 16.987 14.086 16.018 18.200 160.031 13.961 67.156
                            MASE 1.585       1.613 1.599 2.408 2.111 2.095 1.701 1.756 1.771 3.265 2.718 3.010 4.223 25.788 1.945 21.208
                             OWA  0.851      0.861 0.855 1.172 1.051 1.051 0.918 0.930 0.939 1.480 1.230 1.378 1.775 12.642 1.023 8.021

                       ∗ The original paper of N-BEATS (Oreshkin et al., 2019) adopts a special ensemble method to promote the performance.
                       For fair comparisons, we remove the ensemble and only compare the pure forecasting models.


Table 15: Full results for the anomaly detection task. The P, R and F1 represent the precision, recall
and F1-score (%) respectively. F1-score is the harmonic mean of precision and recall. A higher value
of P, R and F1 indicates a better performance.
                              Datasets                SMD              MSL                   SMAP               SWaT               PSM         Avg F1

                              Metrics           P      R      F1   P    R      F1        P    R       F1    P     R     F1    P     R     F1    (%)
 LSTM         (1997) 78.52 65.47 71.41 78.04 86.22 81.93 91.06 57.49 70.48 78.06 91.72 84.34 69.24 99.53 81.67 77.97
 Transformer (2017) 83.58 76.13 79.56 71.57 87.37 78.68 89.37 57.12 69.70 68.84 96.53 80.37 62.75 96.56 76.07 76.88
 LogTrans     (2019) 83.46 70.13 76.21 73.05 87.37 79.57 89.15 57.59 69.97 68.67 97.32 80.52 63.06 98.00 76.74 76.60
 TCN          (2019) 84.06 79.07 81.49 75.11 82.44 78.60 86.90 59.23 70.45 76.59 95.71 85.09 54.59 99.77 70.57 77.24
 Reformer     (2020) 82.58 69.24 75.32 85.51 83.31 84.40 90.91 57.44 70.40 72.50 96.53 82.80 59.93 95.38 73.61 77.31
 Informer     (2021) 86.60 77.23 81.65 81.77 86.48 84.06 90.11 57.13 69.92 70.29 96.75 81.43 64.27 96.33 77.10 78.83
 Anomaly∗     (2021) 88.91 82.23 85.49 79.61 87.37 83.31 91.85 58.11 71.18 72.51 97.32 83.10 68.35 94.72 79.40 80.50
 Pyraformer  (2021a) 85.61 80.61 83.04 83.81 85.93 84.86 92.54 57.71 71.09 87.92 96.00 91.78 71.67 96.02 82.08 82.57
 Autoformer   (2021) 88.06 82.35 85.11 77.27 80.92 79.05 90.40 58.62 71.12 89.85 95.81 92.74 99.08 88.15 93.29 84.26
 LSSL         (2022) 78.51 65.32 71.31 77.55 88.18 82.53 89.43 53.43 66.90 79.05 93.72 85.76 66.02 92.93 77.20 76.74
 Stationary  (2022a) 88.33 81.21 84.62 68.55 89.14 77.50 89.37 59.02 71.09 68.03 96.75 79.88 97.82 96.76 97.29 82.08
 DLinear      (2023) 83.62 71.52 77.10 84.34 85.42 84.88 92.32 55.41 69.26 80.91 95.30 87.52 98.28 89.26 93.55 82.46
 ETSformer    (2022) 87.44 79.23 83.13 85.13 84.93 85.03 92.25 55.75 69.50 90.02 80.36 84.91 99.31 85.28 91.76 82.87
 LightTS      (2022) 87.10 78.42 82.53 82.40 75.78 78.95 92.58 55.27 69.21 91.98 94.72 93.33 98.37 95.97 97.15 84.23
 FEDformer    (2022) 87.95 82.39 85.08 77.14 80.07 78.57 90.47 58.10 70.76 90.17 96.42 93.19 97.31 97.16 97.23 84.97
 TimesNet (Inception) 87.76 82.63 85.12 82.97 85.42 84.18 91.50 57.80 70.85 88.31 96.24 92.10 98.22 92.21 95.21 85.49
 TimesNet   (ResNeXt) 88.66 83.14 85.81 83.92 86.42 85.15 92.52 58.29 71.52 86.76 97.32 91.74 98.19 96.76 97.47 86.34

                       ∗ The original paper of Anomaly Transformer (Xu et al., 2021) adopts the temporal association and recon-
                       struction error as a joint anomaly criterion. For fair comparisons, we only use reconstruction error here.


                                                                                    22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Table 16: Full results for the imputation task. We randomly mask 12.5%, 25%, 37.5% and 50% time
points to compare the model performance under different missing degrees. ∗. in the Transformers
indicates the name of ∗former.
                      TimesNet       ETS.        LightTS∗   DLinear∗    FED.      Stationary    Auto.      Pyra.         In.     LogTrans        Re.        LSTM        TCN        LSSL
    Models
                       (Ours)       (2022)        (2022)     (2023)    (2022)      (2022a)     (2021)     (2021a)      (2021)     (2019)       (2020)       (1997)     (2019)      (2022)

  Mask Ratio MSE MAE MSE MAE MSE MAE MSE MAE MSE MAE MSE MAE MSE MAE MSE MAE MSE MAE MSE MAE MSE MAE MSE MAE MSE MAE MSE MAE
              12.5% 0.019 0.092 0.067 0.188 0.075 0.180 0.058 0.162 0.035 0.135 0.026 0.107 0.034 0.124 0.670 0.541 0.047 0.155 0.041 0.141 0.032 0.126 0.974 0.780 0.510 0.493 0.101 0.231
ETTm1


               25% 0.023 0.101 0.096 0.229 0.093 0.206 0.080 0.193 0.052 0.166 0.032 0.119 0.046 0.144 0.689 0.553 0.063 0.180 0.044 0.144 0.042 0.146 1.032 0.807 0.518 0.500 0.106 0.235
              37.5% 0.029 0.111 0.133 0.271 0.113 0.231 0.103 0.219 0.069 0.191 0.039 0.131 0.057 0.161 0.737 0.581 0.079 0.200 0.052 0.158 0.063 0.182 0.999 0.792 0.516 0.499 0.116 0.246
               50% 0.036 0.124 0.186 0.323 0.134 0.255 0.132 0.248 0.089 0.218 0.047 0.145 0.067 0.174 0.770 0.605 0.093 0.218 0.063 0.173 0.082 0.208 0.952 0.763 0.519 0.496 0.129 0.260

               Avg   0.027 0.107 0.120 0.253 0.104 0.218 0.093 0.206 0.062 0.177 0.036 0.126 0.051 0.150 0.717 0.570 0.071 0.188 0.050 0.154 0.055 0.166 0.989 0.786 0.516 0.497 0.113 0.254

              12.5% 0.018 0.080 0.108 0.239 0.034 0.127 0.062 0.166 0.056 0.159 0.021 0.088 0.023 0.092 0.394 0.470 0.133 0.270 0.103 0.229 0.108 0.228 1.013 0.805 0.307 0.441 0.150 0.298
ETTm2


               25% 0.020 0.085 0.164 0.294 0.042 0.143 0.085 0.196 0.080 0.195 0.024 0.096 0.026 0.101 0.421 0.482 0.135 0.272 0.120 0.248 0.136 0.262 1.039 0.814 0.263 0.402 0.159 0.306
              37.5% 0.023 0.091 0.237 0.356 0.051 0.159 0.106 0.222 0.110 0.231 0.027 0.103 0.030 0.108 0.478 0.521 0.155 0.293 0.138 0.260 0.175 0.300 0.917 0.744 0.250 0.396 0.180 0.321
               50% 0.026 0.098 0.323 0.421 0.059 0.174 0.131 0.247 0.156 0.276 0.030 0.108 0.035 0.119 0.568 0.560 0.200 0.333 0.117 0.247 0.211 0.329 1.140 0.835 0.246 0.389 0.210 0.353

               Avg   0.022 0.088 0.208 0.327 0.046 0.151 0.096 0.208 0.101 0.215 0.026 0.099 0.029 0.105 0.465 0.508 0.156 0.292 0.119 0.246 0.157 0.280 1.027 0.800 0.266 0.407 0.175 0.324

              12.5% 0.057 0.159 0.126 0.263 0.240 0.345 0.151 0.267 0.070 0.190 0.060 0.165 0.074 0.182 0.857 0.609 0.114 0.234 0.229 0.330 0.074 0.194 1.265 0.896 0.599 0.554 0.422 0.461
ETTh1


               25% 0.069 0.178 0.169 0.304 0.265 0.364 0.180 0.292 0.106 0.236 0.080 0.189 0.090 0.203 0.829 0.672 0.140 0.262 0.207 0.323 0.102 0.227 1.262 0.883 0.610 0.567 0.412 0.456
              37.5% 0.084 0.196 0.220 0.347 0.296 0.382 0.215 0.318 0.124 0.258 0.102 0.212 0.109 0.222 0.830 0.675 0.174 0.293 0.210 0.328 0.135 0.261 1.200 0.867 0.628 0.577 0.421 0.461
               50% 0.102 0.215 0.293 0.402 0.334 0.404 0.257 0.347 0.165 0.299 0.133 0.240 0.137 0.248 0.854 0.691 0.215 0.325 0.230 0.348 0.179 0.298 1.174 0.849 0.648 0.587 0.443 0.473

               Avg   0.078 0.187 0.202 0.329 0.284 0.373 0.201 0.306 0.117 0.246 0.094 0.201 0.103 0.214 0.842 0.682 0.161 0.279 0.219 0.332 0.122 0.245 1.225 0.873 0.621 0.571 0.424 0.481

              12.5% 0.040 0.130 0.187 0.319 0.101 0.231 0.100 0.216 0.095 0.212 0.042 0.133 0.044 0.138 0.976 0.754 0.305 0.431 0.173 0.308 0.163 0.289 2.060 1.120 0.410 0.494 0.521 0.555
ETTh2


               25% 0.046 0.141 0.279 0.390 0.115 0.246 0.127 0.247 0.137 0.258 0.049 0.147 0.050 0.149 1.037 0.774 0.322 0.444 0.175 0.310 0.206 0.331 2.007 1.105 0.419 0.490 0.487 0.535
              37.5% 0.052 0.151 0.400 0.465 0.126 0.257 0.158 0.276 0.187 0.304 0.056 0.158 0.060 0.163 1.107 0.800 0.353 0.462 0.185 0.315 0.252 0.370 2.033 1.111 0.429 0.498 0.487 0.529
               50% 0.060 0.162 0.602 0.572 0.136 0.268 0.183 0.299 0.232 0.341 0.065 0.170 0.068 0.173 1.193 0.838 0.369 0.472 0.212 0.339 0.316 0.419 2.054 1.119 0.467 0.529 0.484 0.523

               Avg   0.049 0.146 0.367 0.436 0.119 0.250 0.142 0.259 0.163 0.279 0.053 0.152 0.055 0.156 1.079 0.792 0.337 0.452 0.186 0.318 0.234 0.352 2.039 1.114 0.431 0.503 0.495 0.475

              12.5% 0.085 0.202 0.196 0.321 0.102 0.229 0.092 0.214 0.107 0.237 0.093 0.210 0.089 0.210 0.297 0.383 0.218 0.326 0.164 0.296 0.190 0.308 0.277 0.366 0.621 0.620 0.217 0.341
Electricity


               25% 0.089 0.206 0.207 0.332 0.121 0.252 0.118 0.247 0.120 0.251 0.097 0.214 0.096 0.220 0.294 0.380 0.219 0.326 0.169 0.299 0.197 0.312 0.281 0.369 0.559 0.585 0.219 0.341
              37.5% 0.094 0.213 0.219 0.344 0.141 0.273 0.144 0.276 0.136 0.266 0.102 0.220 0.104 0.229 0.296 0.381 0.222 0.328 0.178 0.305 0.203 0.315 0.275 0.364 0.567 0.588 0.223 0.343
               50% 0.100 0.221 0.235 0.357 0.160 0.293 0.175 0.305 0.158 0.284 0.108 0.228 0.113 0.239 0.299 0.383 0.228 0.331 0.187 0.312 0.210 0.319 0.273 0.361 0.581 0.597 0.229 0.347

               Avg   0.092 0.210 0.214 0.339 0.131 0.262 0.132 0.260 0.130 0.259 0.100 0.218 0.101 0.225 0.297 0.382 0.222 0.328 0.175 0.303 0.200 0.313 0.277 0.365 0.582 0.597 0.222 0.293

              12.5% 0.025 0.045 0.057 0.141 0.047 0.101 0.039 0.084 0.041 0.107 0.027 0.051 0.026 0.047 0.140 0.220 0.037 0.093 0.037 0.072 0.031 0.076 0.296 0.379 0.176 0.287 0.036 0.095
Weather


               25% 0.029 0.052 0.065 0.155 0.052 0.111 0.048 0.103 0.064 0.163 0.029 0.056 0.030 0.054 0.147 0.229 0.042 0.100 0.038 0.074 0.035 0.082 0.327 0.409 0.187 0.293 0.042 0.104
              37.5% 0.031 0.057 0.081 0.180 0.058 0.121 0.057 0.117 0.107 0.229 0.033 0.062 0.032 0.060 0.156 0.240 0.049 0.111 0.039 0.078 0.040 0.091 0.406 0.463 0.172 0.281 0.047 0.112
               50% 0.034 0.062 0.102 0.207 0.065 0.133 0.066 0.134 0.183 0.312 0.037 0.068 0.037 0.067 0.164 0.249 0.053 0.114 0.042 0.082 0.046 0.099 0.431 0.483 0.195 0.303 0.054 0.123

               Avg   0.030 0.054 0.076 0.171 0.055 0.117 0.052 0.110 0.099 0.203 0.032 0.059 0.031 0.057 0.152 0.235 0.045 0.104 0.039 0.076 0.038 0.087 0.365 0.434 0.183 0.291 0.045 0.108

     1st Count            48          0             0          0          0           0          0           0           0           0           0            0          0           0


Table 17: Full results for the classification task. ∗. in the Transformers indicates the name of ∗former.
We report the classification accuracy (%) as the result. The standard deviation is within 0.1%.
                                 Classical methods            RNN         TCN                            Transformers                                   MLP
  Datasets / Models
                               DTW XGBoost Rocket LSTM LSTNet LSSL            TCN Trans. Re.    In. Pyra. Auto.Station. FED. ETS. Flow. DLinearLightTS.TimesNet
                               (1994) (2016) (2020)(1997)(2018)(2022)(2019) (2017) (2020)(2021)(2021a)(2021) (2022a) (2022)(2022)(2022) (2023) (2022)                 (Ours)

EthanolConcentration 32.3 43.7 45.2 32.3 39.9 31.1 28.9 32.7 31.9 31.6 30.8 31.6                        32.7 31.2 28.1 33.8                          32.6   29.7       35.7
                    52.9
              FaceDetection               63.3    64.7 57.7 65.7 66.7 52.8 67.3 68.6 67.0 65.7 68.4 68.0 66.0 66.3 67.6                              68.0   67.5       68.6
     Handwriting    28.6                  15.8    58.8 15.2 25.8 24.6 53.3 32.0 27.4 32.8 29.4 36.7 31.6 28.0 32.5 33.8                              27.0   26.1       32.1
      Heartbeat     71.7                  73.2    75.6 72.2 77.1 72.7 75.6 76.1 77.1 80.5 75.6 74.6 73.7 73.7 71.2 77.6                              75.1   75.1       78.0
   JapaneseVowels   94.9                  86.5    96.2 79.7 98.1 98.4 98.9 98.7 97.8 98.9 98.4 96.2 99.2 98.4 95.9 98.9                              96.2   96.2       98.4
      PEMS-SF       71.1                  98.3    75.1 39.9 86.7 86.1 68.8 82.1 82.7 81.5 83.2 82.7 87.3 80.9 86.0 83.8                              75.1   88.4       89.6
 SelfRegulationSCP1 77.7                  84.6    90.8 68.9 84.0 90.8 84.6 92.2 90.4 90.1 88.1 84.0 89.4 88.7 89.6 92.5                              87.3   89.8       91.8
 SelfRegulationSCP2 53.9                  48.9    53.3 46.6 52.8 52.2 55.6 53.9 56.7 53.3 53.3 50.6 57.2 54.4 55.0 56.1                              50.5   51.1       57.2
 SpokenArabicDigits 96.3                  69.6    71.2 31.9 100.0 100.0 95.6 98.4 97.0 100.0 99.6 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 98.8                       81.4   100.0      99.0
UWaveGestureLibrary 90.3                  75.9    94.4 41.2 87.8 85.9 88.4 85.6 85.6 85.6 83.4 85.9 87.5 85.3 85.0 86.6                              82.1   80.3       85.3

 Average Accuracy 67.0 66.0 72.5 48.6 71.8 70.9 70.3 71.9 71.5 72.1 70.8 71.1 72.7 70.7 71.0 73.0 67.5                                                       70.4      73.6


                                                                                      23
