Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


H OLISTICALLY E XPLAINABLE V ISION T RANSFORMERS
  Anonymous authors
  Paper under double-blind review



                                               A BSTRACT
          Transformers increasingly dominate the machine learning landscape across many
          tasks and domains, which increases the importance for understanding their out-
          puts. While their attention modules provide partial insight into their inner work-
          ings, the attention scores have been shown to be insufficient for explaining the
          models as a whole. To address this, we propose B-cos transformers, which inher-
          ently provide holistic explanations for their decisions. Specifically, we formulate
          each model component—such as the multi-layer perceptrons, attention layers, and
          the tokenisation module—to be dynamic linear, which allows us to faithfully sum-
          marise the entire transformer via a single linear transform. We apply our proposed
          design to Vision Transformers (ViTs) and show that the resulting models, dubbed
          Bcos-ViTs, are highly interpretable and perform competitively to baseline ViTs on
          ImageNet. Code will be available: github.com/anonymous/authors.

 1    I NTRODUCTION
                                                                             Ours      Ours
                                                                    Input   [W(x)]k             Rollout   FinAtt
 Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have                                            Eq. (7)
                                                    Ibizan hound


 dominated the last decade of computer vision.
 However, recently they are often surpassed by
 transformers (Vaswani et al., 2017), which—
 if the current development is any indication—
 will replace CNNs for ever more tasks and
                                                    cock


 domains. Transformers are thus bound to im-
 pact many aspects of our lives: from health-
 care, over judicial decisions, to autonomous
                                                    magpie


 driving. Given the sensitive nature of such ar-
 eas, it is of utmost importance to ensure that
 we can explain the underlying models, which
                                                    goldfish


 still remains a challenge for transformers.
 To explain transformers, prior work often fo-
 cused on the models’ attention layers (Jain &
                                                    blue bird


 Wallace, 2019; Serrano & Smith, 2019; Ab-
 nar & Zuidema, 2020; Barkan et al., 2021), as
 they inherently compute their output in an in-
                                                    rocking chair


 terpretable manner. However, as transformers
 consist of many additional components, ex-
 planations derived from attention alone have
 been found insufficient to explain the full
 models (Bastings & Filippova, 2020; Chefer Fig. 1: Inherent explanations (cols. 2+3) of B-cos ViTs
 et al., 2021). To address this, our goal is vs. attention explanations (cols. 4+5) for the same model.
                                                  Note that W(x) faithfully reflects the whole model and
 to develop transformers that inherently pro- yields more detailed and class-specific explanations than
 vide holistic explanations for their decisions, attention alone. For a detailed discussion, see supplement.
 i.e. explanations that reflect all model com-
 ponents. These model components are given by: a tokenisation module, a mechanism for providing
 positional information to the model, multi-layer perceptrons (MLPs), as well as normalisation and
 attention layers, see Fig. 2a. By addressing the interpretability of each component individually, we
 obtain transformers that inherently explain their decisions, see, for example Fig. 1 and Fig. 2b.
 In detail, our approach is based on the idea of designing each component to be dynamic linear, such
 that it computes an input-dependent linear transform. This renders the entire model dynamic linear,
 cf. Böhle et al. (2021; 2022), s.t. it can be summarised by a single linear transform for each input.


                                                         1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023



B-cos ViT                                              ×L
 Tokeniser:          B-cos
                                    +
                                               B-cos
                                                             +
                                                                  B-cos               Input    ×       [W(x)]k      =        ck (x)    Prediction
 B-cos CNN          Attention                  MLP               Classifier

                                                                                                                                       σ (Sum(ck (x))):

          (x)                      (x)                 (x)                 (x)
                                                                                              ×                     =                      100.0%
 W                      Wl                     Wl                W
     Tokens                  Att                  MLP               Class

                                                                                                                                        Lesser Panda
    Dynamic Linear Transformation

                                                                                  Probability(Lesser Panda) = σ (Sum(ck (x))) = 100%
W(x) = W            (x) ∏l=1( Wl           (x) Wl            (x) ) W        (x)
                Class        L           MLP           Att             Tokens


                                     (a)                                                                 (b)

Fig. 2: (a) B-cos ViTs. We design each ViT component to be dynamic linear, allowing us to summarise the
entire model by a single linear transform W(x), as shown in the bottom. (b) Computation is Explanation.
The model output is exactly computed by the linear transform W(x). As a result, we can visualise this effective
linear transform either by the corresponding matrix row (center) or the contributions ck (x) (right), cf. Eq. (7).

In short, we make the following contributions. (I) We present a novel approach for designing in-
herently interpretable transformers. For this, (II) we carefully design each model component to be
dynamic linear and ensure that their combination remains dynamic linear and interpretable. Specifi-
cally, we address (IIa) the tokenisation module, (IIb) the attention layers, (IIc) the MLPs, and (IId)
the classification head. (III) Additionally, we introduce a novel mechanism for allowing the model
to learn attention priors, which breaks the permutation invariance of transformers and thus allows the
model to easily leverage positional information. In our experiments, we find that B-cos ViTs with
such a learnt ‘attention prior’ achieve significantly higher classification accuracies. (IV) Finally, we
evaluate a wide range of model configurations and show that the proposed B-cos ViTs are not only
highly interpretable, but also constitute powerful image classifiers.

2     R ELATED W ORK
Attention as Explanation. As the name exemplifies, attention is often thought to give insight into
what a model ‘pays attention to’ for its prediction. As such, various methods for using attention to
understand the model output have been proposed, such as visualising the attention of single attention
heads, cf. Vaswani et al. (2017). However, especially in deeper layers the information becomes in-
creasingly distributed and it is thus unclear whether a given token still represents its original position
in the input (Serrano & Smith, 2019; Abnar & Zuidema, 2020), thus complicating the interpretation
of high attention values deep in the network (Serrano & Smith, 2019; Bastings & Filippova, 2020).
Therefore, Abnar & Zuidema (2020) proposed ‘attention rollout’, which summarises the various
attention maps throughout the layers. However, this summary still only includes the attention layers
and neglects all other network components (Bastings & Filippova, 2020). In response, various
improvements over attention rollout have been proposed, such as GradSAM (Barkan et al., 2021) or
an LRP-based explanation method (Chefer et al., 2021), that were designed to more accurately reflect
the computations of all model components. The significant gains in quantitative interpretability
metrics reported by Chefer et al. (2021) highlight the importance of such holistic explanations.
Similarly, we also aim to derive holistic explanations for transformers. However, instead of deriving
an explanation ‘post-hoc’ as in Chefer et al. (2021), we explicitly design our models to be holistically
explainable. For this, we formulate each component—and thus the full model—to be dynamic linear.
Dynamic Linearity. Plain linear models, i.e. y(x)=Wx, are usually considered interpretable,     P as
y(x) can be decomposed into individual contributions ci =wi xi from any dimension i: y = i ci
(Alvarez-Melis & Jaakkola, 2018). However, linear models have a limited capacity, which has lead
to various works aimed at extending their capacity without losing their interpretability, see Alvarez-
Melis & Jaakkola (2018); Brendel & Bethge (2019); Böhle et al. (2021; 2022). An appealing strategy
for this is formulating dynamic linear models (Alvarez-Melis & Jaakkola, 2018; Böhle et al., 2021;
2022), i.e. models that transform the input with a data-dependent matrix W(x): y(x)=W(x)x.
In this work, we rely on the B-cos framework (Böhle et al., 2022), but instead of focusing on CNNs
as in Böhle et al. (2022), we investigate the applicability of this framework to transformers.
Interpretability in DNNs. The question of interpretability extends, of course, beyond transformers
and many methods for explaining DNNs have been proposed. While other approaches exist, cf. Kim


                                                                                  2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


et al. (2018), these methods typically estimate the importance of individual input features, which can
be visualised as a heatmap, cf. Lundberg & Lee (2017); Petsiuk et al. (2018); Ribeiro et al. (2016);
Simonyan et al. (2014); Springenberg et al. (2015); Zhou et al. (2016); Bach et al. (2015); Selvaraju
et al. (2017); Shrikumar et al. (2017); Srinivas & Fleuret (2019); Sundararajan et al. (2017).
Similarly, our models yield explanations in form of contribution heatmaps. However, in contrast to
the above-referenced post-hoc explanation methods, the contribution maps of our B-cos ViTs are
model-inherent. Further, as the interpretability of the B-cos ViTs relies on aligning the weights with
the inputs, the weights can be visualised in colour as in Böhle et al. (2022), see Figs. 1 and 7.

3       D ESIGNING H OLISTICALLY E XPLAINABLE T RANSFORMERS
In the following, we present the overarching goal that we pursue and how we structure this section
around it. First, however, we introduce the necessary background and the notation used in our work.
Preliminaries. Vision Transformers (ViT) (Dosovitskiy et al., 2021) with L blocks are given by:
                                  QL
               y(x) = Classifier ◦ l=1 (MLPBlockl ◦ AttBlockl ) ◦ Tokens(x) .                  (1)
Here, the input x ∈ R(CHW ) denotes a vectorised image of H =W height and width and with C
color channels; the functions, concatenated by ◦, are defined in Eqs. (2) - (5) (left), with P, E ∈
RD×N , N the number of tokens and D their dimensionality. Further, in Eqs. (2) - (5), CNN is a
convolutional neural network1 , T ‘tokenises’ the CNN output (see Sec. 3.2), Linear is a learnable
linear transform p′ (p)=Wp+b with parameters W and b that is applied to each token p (columns
of P) independently, MSA denotes Multi-head Self-Attention, and E is a learnable embedding.
Following Graham et al. (2021), Pool performs average pooling over the tokens, and the model
output is given by y(x) ∈ RM with M classes. Last, we omit indices for blocks and layers whenever
unambiguous and it may be assumed that each layer has its own set of learnable parameters.
Our goal in this work is to reformulate the ViTs such that they compute their output in a more
interpretable manner. Specifically, we aim to make them dynamic linear such that they compute
y(x) = W(x) x. Instead of using the ViTs to predict W(x), cf. Alvarez-Melis & Jaakkola (2018),
we achieve this by rendering each of the ViT components dynamic linear on their own as follows:

             Tokens (x) = T (CNN(x)) + E −−→ B-cos Tokens                        (x) = WTokens (x) x            (2)
                                                                                             Att
           AttBlock (P) = MSA(P) + P                 −−→ B-cos AttBlock (P) = W                      (P) P      (3)
                                                                                             MLP
         MLPBlock (P) = MLP(P) + P                   −−→ B-cos MLPBlock (P) = W                      (P) P      (4)
                                                                                             Class
           Classifier (P) = Linear ◦ Pool(P) −−→ B-cos Classifier (P) = W                            (P) P .    (5)

Crucially, we define each component such that it can be expressed as a dynamic linear function, see
the right-hand side of Eqs. (2) - (5). As a result, the entire model will become dynamic linear:
                                  QL
             y(x) = WClass (x) l=1 WlMLP (x) WlAtt (x) WTokens (x) x = W(x) x .

                                                                                                    (6)
Specifically, we develop the B-cos ViTs in accordance with the B-cos framework (Böhle et al., 2022)
to render W(x) interpretable by aligning it with relevant input patterns.
Outline. In the following, we shortly summarise the most relevant aspects of B-cos networks and
how to explain them (Sec. 3.1). Then, we discuss Eqs. (2) - (5) in detail and how we ensure that
the resulting linear transform W(x) will be interpretable. In particular, we discuss the tokenisation
(Sec. 3.2), attention (Sec. 3.3), and the multi-layer perceptrons (Sec. 3.4). Finally, in Sec. 3.5, we
discuss how we encode positional information in B-cos ViTs, introducing ‘position-aware’ attention.
3.1 B- COS N ETWORKS : I NTERPRETABLE M ODEL -I NHERENT E XPLANATIONS
As shown in Eq. (6), a dynamic linear transformer is summarised exactly by a single matrix W(x)
for every x. These linear explanations lend themselves well for understanding the model decisions:
as in plain linear models, one can calculate linear contributions from individual features (e.g., pixels)
to each output unit. In detail, the effective linear contributions ck to the k-th class logit are given by
                                                                                     T
                 Dynamic Linear Contribution Maps: ck (x) = [W(x)]k ⊙ x ,                                        (7)
1
    To simplify later equations, we take advantage of the fact that conv. layers are equivalent to linear layers with
    weight constraints (weight sharing and local connectivity) and assume the CNN to process vectorised images.


                                                           3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


with ⊙ denoting element-wise multiplication. Crucially, these contribution maps faithfully sum-
marise the entire model, as this linear summary is inherent to the model formulation, see also Fig. 2.
Thus, we use these contribution maps to explain the B-cos ViTs, see, e.g., Figs. 1, 2 and 7.
Note, however, that while the contribution maps in Eq. (7) accurately summarise any given dynamic
linear model, this summary need not be interpretable. E.g., for piece-wise linear models, which
are also dynamic linear, this amounts to ‘Input×Grad’, cf. Adebayo et al. (2018). For such models,
however, the contributions c are very noisy and not easily interpretable for humans. Hence, we de-
sign the transformers in accordance with the ‘B-cos’ framework (Böhle et al., 2022), which ensures
that W(x) aligns with relevant input features and thus becomes easily interpretable. In detail, the
B-cos transform induces weight alignment by suppressing outputs for badly aligned weights:

                      B-cos(a; W) = cosB−1 (a, W) ⊙ W     c a = W(a)T a .                       (8)
                               c denotes that the matrix rows are of unit norm, and ⊙ represents
here, cos is applied row-wise, W
row-wise scaling. As can be seen on the RHS of Eq. (8), the B-cos transform is dynamic linear.
As a result, the matrix rows [W(x)]k align with relevant patterns of class k. By encoding the image
such that the color is uniquely determined by the angle of the pixel encodings, it is possible to
directly visualise those matrix rows in color, see Figs. 1 and 7. For details, see Böhle et al. (2022).
Requirements. To ensure that a B-cos network aligns W(x) with its inputs, each of its layers needs
to (a) be bounded, (b) yield its maximum output if and only if its weight vectors align with its input,
and (c) directly scale the overall model output by its own output norm, see Böhle et al. (2022). In the
following, we ensure that each of the model components (Eqs. (2)-(5)), fulfills these requirements.
3.2 I NTERPRETABLE T OKENISATION M ODULES : B- COS CNN S
While the original Vision Transformer only applied a single-layered CNN, it has been shown that
deeper CNN backbones yield better results and exhibit more stable training behaviour (Xiao et al.,
2021). Hence, to address the general case, and to take advantage of the increased training stability
and performance, we take the tokenisation module to be given by a general CNN backbone. Being
able to explain the full ViT models consequently requires using an explainable CNN for this.
Tokenisation. We use B-cos CNNs (Böhle et al., 2022) as feature extractors; thus, the requirements
(a-c), see Sec. 3.1, of B-cos networks are, of course, fulfilled. The input tokens are computed as

         B-cos Token pi (x) = Ti ◦ B-cos CNN(x) = WTi WCNN (x) x = WiTokens (x) x .                (9)

Here, pi ∈RD corresponds to the ith column in the token matrix P, Ti extracts the respective features
from the CNNs’ output with WTi denoting the corresponding linear matrix. WCNN is the dynamic
linear mapping computed by the B-cos CNN, and as color-indicated, WiTokens (x)=WTi WCNN (x).
Finally, note that we did not include the additive positional embedding E, cf. Eq. (2) (left). For a
detailed discussion on how to provide positional information to the B-cos ViTs, please see Sec. 3.5.
3.3 B- COS ATTENTION
Interestingly, the attention operation itself is already dynamic linear and, as such, attention lends
itself well to be integrated into the linear model summary according to Eq. (6). To ensure that
the resulting linear transformation maintains the desired interpretability, we discuss the necessary
changes to make the attention layers compatible with the B-cos formulation as discussed in Sec. 3.1.
B-cos Attention. Note that conventional attention indeed computes a dynamic linear transform:
   Attention(P; Q, K, V) = softmax PT QT KP VP = A(P) V P = W(P)P. (10)

                              |         {z          } |{z}     | {z }
                                   Attention matrix A(P)   Value(P)   W(P)

Here, Q, K and V denote the respective query, key, and value transformation matrices and P denotes
the input tokens to the attention layer; further, softmax is computed column-wise.
In multi-head self-attention (MSA), see Eq. (3) (left), H distinct attention heads are used in parallel
after normalising the input. Their concatenated outputs are then linearly projected by a matrix U:
                    h                                       i
     MSA(P)e = U W1 (P)    e P,
                              e W2 (P)e P,
                                         e ... , WH (P) e P
                                                          e      with P  e = LayerNorm(P)         (11)


                                                     4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


While this can still2 be expressed as a dynamic linear transform of P, we observe the following
issues with respect to the requirements (a-c), see Sec. 3.1. First, (a) while the attention matrix A(P)
is bounded, the value computation VP and the projection by U are not. Therefore, as the output
can arbitrarily increased by scaling V and U, (b) a high weight alignment is not necessary to obtain
large outputs. Finally, by normalising the outputs of the previous layer, the scale of those outputs
does not affect the scale of the overall model output anymore, which violates requirement (c).
To address (a+b), we propose to formulate a B-cos Attention Block as follows. First, we replace the
value computation and the linear projection by U by corresponding B-cos transforms. As in Böhle
et al. (2022), we employ MaxOut and for a given input P the resulting projections are computed as
        B-cos Linear(P; S) = MaxOut ◦ B-cos(P; S) = WS (P)P with S ∈ {U, V}.                               (12)
To fulfill (c), whilst not foregoing the benefits of LayerNorm3 , we propose to exclusively apply
LayerNorm before the computation of the attention matrix. i.e. we compute A(P), see Eq. (10) as

                A(P; Q, K) = softmax P    e T QT KPe    with P e = LayerNorm(P) .            (13)
In total, a ‘B-cos AttBlock’ thus computes the following linear transformation:
                                                     H
          B-cos AttBlock(P) = WU (P′ ) Ah (P)WhV (P) h=1 + I P = WAtt (P) P ,

                                                                                                         (14)

                                  H
Here, P′ = Ah (P)WhV (P) h=1 , WU and WV as in Eq. (12), and Ah (P) as in Eq. (13); the

identity matrix I reflects the skip connection around the MSA computation, see Fig. 2 and Eq. (3).
For an ablation study regarding the proposed changes, we kindly refer the reader to the supplement.
3.4 I NTERPRETABLE MLP S AND C LASSIFIERS
To obtain dynamic linear and interpretable MLPs, we convert them to ‘B-cos’ MLPs, such that they
are compatible with the B-cos formulation (Sec. 3.1) and align their weights with relevant inputs.
B-cos MLPs. Typically, an MLP block in a ViT computes the following:
                    MLPBlock(P) = Linear2 ◦ GELU ◦ Linear1 ◦ LayerNorm(P) + P                              (15)
Here, Linear is as in Eq. (5), the GELU activation function is as in Hendrycks & Gimpel (2016), and
LayerNorm as in Ba et al. (2016).
To obtain our ‘B-cos MLPBlock’, we follow Böhle et al. (2022) and replace the linear layers by B-
cos transforms, remove the non-linearities and the normalisation (cf. Sec. 3.3); further, each ‘neuron’
is modelled by two units, to which we apply MaxOut (Goodfellow et al., 2013). As a result, each
MLP block becomes dynamic linear:

          B-cos MLPBlock(P) = (M2 (P) L2 (P) M1 (P) L1 (P) + I)P = WMLP (P) P .                          (16)

Here, Mi (P) and Li (P) correspond to the effective linear transforms performed by the MaxOut and
B-cos operation respectively, and I denotes the identity matrix stemming from the skip connection.
Classifier. Similar to the B-cos MLPs, we also replace the linear layer in the classifier, cf. Eq. (5)
(left), by a corresponding B-cos transform and the B-cos Classifier is thus defined as

              B-cos Classifier(P) = B-cos ◦ Pool(P) = L(P′ )WAvgPool P = WClass (P) P ,                  (17)

with L(P′ ) the dynamic linear matrix corresponding to the B-cos transform and P′ =Pool(P).
3.5 P OSITIONAL INFORMATION IN B- COS T RANSFORMERS
In contrast to CNNs, which possess a strong inductive bias w.r.t. spatial relations (local connectivity),
transformers (Vaswani et al., 2017) are invariant w.r.t. the token order and thus lack such a ‘locality
2
    To be exact, it can be represented as a dynamic affine transform, since LayerNorm adds a bias term.
3
    We noticed normalised inputs to be crucial for the computation of the attention matrix A(P) in Eq. (10): for
    unconstrained inputs, softmax easily saturates and suffers from the vanishing gradient problem.


                                                        5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


bias’. To nevertheless leverage spatial information, it is common practice to break the symmetry
between tokens by adding a (learnt) embedding E to the input tokens P, see Eq. (2) (left).
However, within the B-cos framework, this strategy is not optimal: in particular, note that each B-cos
transformation needs to align its weights with its inputs to forward a large output to the next layer,
see Eq. (8) and Böhle et al. (2022). As a result, a B-cos ViT would need to associate contents (inputs)
with specific positions, which could negatively impact the model’s generalisation capabilities.
Therefore, we investigate two alternative strategies for providing positional information to the B-
cos ViTs: additive and multiplicative attention priors, see Eqs. (18) and (19) respectively. Specifi-
cally, we propose to add a learnable bias matrix Blh to each attention head h in every layer l in the
model. This pair-wise (between tokens) bias is then either added4 before the softmax operation or
multiplied to the output of the softmax operation in the following way (omitting sub/superscripts):

       Aadd (P) = SM (R(P) + B)             (18)          and     Amul (P) = SM (R(P)) × SM (B) . (19)
Here, R(P)=QP      e T KT and SM denotes softmax. The bias B thus allows the model to learn an
                  eP
attention prior, and the attention operation is no longer invariant to the token order. As such, the
model can learn spatial relations between tokens and encode them explicitly in the bias matrix B.
In our experiments, this significantly improved the performance of the B-cos ViTs, see Sec. 5.1.

4       E XPERIMENTAL S ETTING
Dataset. In this work, we focus on Vision Transformers (ViTs, Dosovitskiy et al. (2021)) for image
classification. For this, we evaluate the B-cos and conventional ViTs and their explanations on the
ImageNet dataset (Deng et al., 2009). We use images of size 224×224. For B-cos models, we
encode the images as in Böhle et al. (2022).
Models. We follow prior work and evaluate ViTs of different sizes in common configurations: Tiny
(Ti), Small (S), and Base (B), cf. Steiner et al. (2021). We train these models on the frozen features
of publicly available (Böhle et al., 2022; Marcel & Rodriguez) (B-cos) DenseNet-121 models and
extract those features at different depths of the models: after 13, 38, or 87 layers. Model names are
thus as follows: (B-cos) ViT-{size}-{L} with size∈{Ti, S, B} and L∈{13, 38, 87}. We opted for
(B-cos) DenseNet-121 backbones, as the conventional and the B-cos version achieve the same top-1
accuracy on the ImageNet validation set. In particular, we compare B-cos ViTs on B-cos backbones
to normal ViTs on normal backbones.
Training. We employ a simple training paradigm that is common across models for comparability.
All models are trained with RandAugment (Cubuk et al., 2020) for 100 epochs with a learning rate
of 2.5e−4 , which is decreased by a factor of 10 after 60 epochs; for details, see supplement.
Evaluation Metrics. We evaluate all models with respect to their accuracy on the ImageNet valida-
tion set. Further, we employ two common metrics to assess the quality of the model explanations.
First, we evaluate the grid pointing game (Böhle et al., 2021). For this, we evaluate the explanations
(see below) on 250 synthetic image grids of size 448×448, containing 4 images of distinct classes,
see Fig. 4; the individual images are ordered by confidence and we measure the fraction of positive
attribution an explanation method assigns to the correct sub-image when explaining a given class.
Note that, in contrast to fully convolutional networks, transformers with positional embeddings ex-
pect a fixed-size input. To nevertheless evaluate the models on such synthetic image grids, we scale
down the image grid to the required input size of 224x224 to allow for applying the ViTs seamlessly.
Second, we evaluate two pixel perturbation metrics, cf. Chefer et al. (2021). For this, the pixels are
ranked according to the importance assigned by a given explanation method. Then, we increasingly
zero out up to 25% of the pixels in increasing (decreasing) order, whilst measuring the model confi-
dence in the ground truth class; a good explanation should obtain a high area under (over) the curve,
i.e. the model should be insensitive to unimportant pixels and sensitive to important ones.
We evaluate the perturbation metrics on the 250 most confidently and correctly classified images
to enable a fair comparison between models, as the confidence affects the metrics; more details in
supplement. Last, to succinctly summarise the two metrics, we evaluate the area between the curves.
4
    Note that an additive positional bias in attention layers has been proposed before (Graham et al., 2021).


                                                          6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                            Encoding of positional information                                                                             Evidence for Fire Truck          Evidence for Tiger

                            Position Embedding            Add. Att. Bias Eq. (18)            Mul. Att. Bias Eq. (19)
                                                                                                                                      Localisation
                                                                                                                                       Example
                     80                                                                                                                   Input
                                                                             76.6                          76.7
                                             75.6
Top-1 accuracy (%)


                                                         74.3       74.3                        73.9
                                                                                      73.1
                           71.0    71.5

                     70


                     60
                                   Tiny                             Small                       Base
                                                    Size of the B-cos ViT-size-87                                                                           Evidence for Lorikeet       Evidence for Taxi / Cab


Fig. 3: ImageNet accuracy of differently sized B-cos ViTs (Tiny, Fig. 4: In the localisation metric, we mea-
Small, Base) depending on the positional encoding. We find B- sure the fraction of pos. evidence assigned to
cos ViTs with Amul , see Eq. (19), to perform significantly better. the correct grid cell for each occurring class.


                                                             13 backbone layers                             38 backbone layers                           87 backbone layers

                             Conventional                            B-cos               Conventional                         B-cos               Conventional                              B-cos
Top-1 accuracy (%)


                      80
                                                                                                                                       76.6                                                   76.6      76.7
                                                                               75.6                                            75.7                                                  74.9
                                               74.6                   74.3                         74.5      74.9      74.2                                74.3     74.5
                                                                                        73.0                                                      73.1
                            71.4     72.1
                                                             71.1
                      70


                      60
                                                      Tiny                                                        Small                                                    Base
                                                                                                          Transformer size

Fig. 5: ImageNet accuracies of B-cos ViTs with a multiplicative attention bias (Eq. (19)) compared to standard
ViTs and backbones, both for differently sized ViTs (Tiny, Small, Base) and backbones (13, 38, or 87 layers).
We find that the B-cos ViTs perform at least as well as the baseline ViTs over almost all tested configurations.



Explanation Methods. Apart from the model-inherent explanations (Eq. (7)), we evaluate two sets
of explanation methods. First, we follow Chefer et al. (2021) and evaluate common transformer-
specific explanations such as the attention in the final layer (FinAtt), attention rollout (Rollout) (Ab-
nar & Zuidema, 2020), a transformer-specific LRP implementation (CheferLRP) proposed by Chefer
et al. (2021), ‘partial LRP’(pLRP) (Voita et al., 2019), and ‘GradSAM’ (Barkan et al., 2021).
Further, we evaluate architecture-agnostic methods such as Integrated Gradients (IntGrad) (Sun-
dararajan et al., 2017), adapted GradCAM (Selvaraju et al., 2017) as in Chefer et al. (2021), and
‘Input×Gradient’ (IxG), cf. Adebayo et al. (2018). As no LRP rules are defined for B-cos ViTs we
only apply it to baseline models. For method details, we kindly refer the reader to the supplement.
We evaluate all of those methods (if applicable) to the proposed B-cos ViTs, as well as the baselines
consisting of conventional ViTs and backbones and compare them on the metrics described above.


 5                    R ESULTS

In the following, we present our experimental results. Specifically, in Sec. 5.1 we analyse the classi-
fication performance of the B-cos ViTs: we investigate how the encoding of positional information
affects model accuracy (see Sec. 3.5) and compare the classification performance of B-cos and con-
ventional ViTs. Further, in Sec. 5.2, we evaluate the model-inherent explanations of the B-cos ViTs
against common post-hoc explanation methods evaluated on the same models. To highlight the gain
in interpretability over conventional ViT models, we also compare the inherent explanations of the
B-cos ViTs to the best post-hoc explanations evaluated on conventional ViTs, see supplement.


                                                                                                              7
 Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                 Explanation Method
                                      Localisation Metric                                 Perturbation Metric
                     1.00        Ours    Rollout      GradSAM            IntGrad       IxG      FinAtt     GradCAM
Localisation score                                                                                                        1.25


                                                                                                                                 Normalised ABC
                     0.75                                                                                                 1.00
                                      ×2.47                                                ×1.99                          0.75
                     0.50
                                                                                                                          0.50
                     0.25                                                                                                 0.25
                     0.00                                                                                                 0.00
                            71   72      73    74      75   76      77        71      72      73    74     75   76   77
                                          Model accuracy                                       Model accuracy

 Fig. 6: Quantitative comparison of explanation methods according to two metrics: localisation (left) and per-
 turbation (right); for a description of metrics and methods, see Sec. 4. We evaluated the methods for all B-cos
 ViTs shown in Fig. 5 and plot the corresponding scores (markers). We also plot the mean score over all models
 (dashed lines) per method and the average improvement of the model-inherent over the best post-hoc explana-
 tion (localisation: ×2.47, perturbation: ×1.99). Note that for the perturbation metric, we normalised the area
 between curves (ABC) by the scores of the model-inherent explanations for better cross-model comparison.

 5.1 C LASSIFICATION P ERFORMANCE OF B- COS V I T S
 In Fig. 3, we compare the top-1 ImageNet accuracy of various B-cos ViTs trained on the feature
 embeddings of the 87th layer of a frozen5 B-cos DenseNet-121 (Böhle et al., 2022). Specifically, we
 compare ViTs of different sizes (Tiny, Small, Base) and with different ways of allowing the models
 to use positional information, see Eqs. (2), (18) and (19). We find that the multiplicative attention
 bias, see Eq. (19), consistently yields significant gains in performance. As discussed in Sec. 3.5, we
 believe this could be due to the higher disentanglement between content and positional information.
 However, in preliminary experiments with conventional ViTs, we did not observe significant benefits
 from such a multiplicative prior and this seems to be particularly advantageous for B-cos ViTs.
 Interestingly, once trained with such a multiplicative attention prior, we find the B-cos ViTs to
 perform at least as good as their conventional counterparts over a wide range of configurations, see
 Fig. 5; we find consistent results even without MaxOut in the Transformer layers (cf. Sec. 3), as we
 show in Appendix B.3. However, these results have to be interpreted with caution: ViTs are known
 to be highly sensitive to, e.g., the amount of data augmentation, the number of training iterations,
 and model regularisation, see Steiner et al. (2021). Moreover, our goal in this work is to develop
 interpretable ViTs and our focus thus lies on evaluating the quality of the explanations (Sec. 5.2).
 5.2 I NTERPRETABILITY OF B- COS V I T S
 Here, we assess how well the inherent explanations (Eq. (7)) of B-cos ViTs explain their output and
 compare to common post-hoc explanations; for comparisons to baseline ViTs, see supplement.
 Localisation Metric. In Fig. 6 (left), we plot the mean localisation score per model configuration
 (B-cos ViT-{size}-{L}) and explanation method, see Sec. 4. We find that across all configurations,
 the model-inherent explanations according to Eq. (7) yield by far the best results under this metric
 and outperform the best post-hoc explanation for the B-cos ViTs (Rollout) by a factor of 2.47.
 Pixel Perturbation. As for the localisation, in Fig. 6 (right), we plot the normalised mean area
 between the curves (ABC) per model configuration and explanation method of the B-cos ViTs.
 Specifically, the mean ABC is computed as the mean area between the curves when first removing
 the most / least important pixels from the images; we normalise the mean ABC for each explanation
 by the mean ABC of the model-inherent explanation (Ours) per model configuration to facilitate
 cross-model comparisons. Again, the model-inherent explanations perform best and, on average,
 they outperform the second best post-hoc method (Rollout) on B-cos ViTs by a factor of 1.99.
 Qualitative Examples. In Figs. 1 and 7, we qualitatively compare the inherent explanations (size: B,
 38 backbone layers, see Fig. 5) to post-hoc explanations evaluated on the same model. As becomes
 apparent, the model-inherent summaries not only perform well quantitatively (cf. Fig. 6), but are also
 qualitatively convincing. Colour visualisations as in Böhle et al. (2022); more results in supplement.
 In contrast to attention explanations, which are not class-specific (Chefer et al., 2021), we find the
 5
      We chose to freeze the backbones to reduce the computational cost and compare the architectures across a wide
      range of settings. We observed comparable results when training the full models for individual architectures.


                                                                          8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                Input image   Ours [W(x)]k   Ours Eq. (7)   GradSAM       GradCAM   Rollout   FinAtt      IntGrad


black swan
forklift
digital clock
lion


Fig. 7: Comparison of the model-inherent explanations (Ours) of a B-cos ViT-B-38, and several post-hoc expla-
nations (GradSAM, GradCAM, Rollout, FinAtt, IntGrad) for class k (left). In particular, we show explanations
for the classes ‘black swan’, ‘forklift’, ‘digital clock’, and ‘lion’ on a synthetic image containing these classes,
as used in the localisation metric, see Fig. 4. As B-cos ViTs follow the B-cos formulation, we can visualise the
rows of W(x) in colour (Böhle et al., 2022). Additionally, we show contribution maps according to Eq. (7).

model-inherent explanations of B-cos ViTs to be highly detailed and class-specific. E.g., in Fig. 1,
we compare model-inherent explanations to attention-based explanations for single images from the
ImageNet dataset which are inherently ambiguous. In Fig. 7, we evaluate the model on images as
used in the localisation metric, see Sec. 4, i.e. synthetic images with multiple classes. In both cases
we find the model-inherent explanations to accurately highlight the respective features for the class
logit that we aim to explain, whereas other methods are much less sensitive to the class logit; in fact,
attention-based explanations are inherently agnostic to the choice of logit and thus the same for all
classes. For comparisons to explanations for conventional ViTs, see the supplement.

6                C ONCLUSION
We present a novel approach for designing ViTs that are holistically explainable. For this, we design
every component of the ViTs with the explicit goal of being able to summarise the entire model by
a single linear transform. By integrating recent advances in designing interpretable dynamic linear
models (Böhle et al., 2022), these summaries become interpretable, as they are implicitly optimised
to align with relevant input patterns. The resulting B-cos ViTs constitute competitive classifiers and
their inherent linear summaries outperform any post-hoc explanation method on common metrics.
Compared to attention-based explanations, our method can be understood to ‘fill the blanks’ in at-
tention rollout (Abnar & Zuidema, 2020). Specifically, attention rollout computes a linear summary
of the attention layers only. By integrating explanations for the remaining components (tokenisation,
attention, MLPs), we are able to obtain holistic explanations of high detail, see Figs. 1 and 7.
As transformers are highly modality-agnostic, we believe that our work has the potential to positively
impact model interpretability across a wide range of domains. Evaluating B-cos transformers on
different tasks and modalities is thus an exciting direction that we aim to explore in future work.
Limitations. While the B-cos ViTs allow us to extract model-faithful explanations for single images,
note that these explanations are always local in nature, i.e. for single data points. The explanations
thus help understanding an individual classification, but do not directly give insights into which
features the models most focus on over the entire dataset. It would thus be interesting to combine
B-cos ViTs with global explanation methods, such as in Bau et al. (2017); Kim et al. (2018).
Further, we focused primarily on the designing of interpretable transformers, and, to test across a
wide range of models, limited experiments to the ImageNet-1k dataset. As transformers are known
to significantly benefit from additional data and training (Dosovitskiy et al., 2021), it would be
interesting to test the limits of capacity of the B-cos ViTs and scale to more complex tasks.



                                                                      9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


E THICS S TATEMENT
The growing adoption of deep neural network models in many different settings is accompanied by
an increasingly louder call for more transparency in the model predictions; especially in high-stake
situations, relying on an opaque decision process can have severe consequences (Rudin, 2019). With
this work, we make a step towards developing inherently more transparent neural network models
that explain their decisions without incurring losses in model performance.
However, we would like to emphasise that our contribution can only be seen as a step in this di-
rection; while the explanations might seem meaningful on a per sample basis, they could lead
to a false sense of security in terms of ‘understanding’ model behaviour. Currently, we can
give no formal guarantees for model behaviour under unseen input data and more research on
explainable machine learning is necessary. Lastly, any research that holds the potential for ac-
celerating the adoption of machine learning systems could have unpredictable societal impacts.


R EFERENCES
Samira Abnar and Willem Zuidema. Quantifying Attention Flow in Transformers. In Proceedings
  of the Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL), 2020. 1, 2, 7, 9,
  14, 15, 23

Julius Adebayo, Justin Gilmer, Michael Muelly, Ian J. Goodfellow, Moritz Hardt, and Been Kim.
  Sanity Checks for Saliency Maps. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems
  (NeurIPS), 2018. 4, 7, 23

David Alvarez-Melis and Tommi S. Jaakkola. Towards Robust Interpretability with Self-Explaining
  Neural Networks. In Advances in Neural Information Processing (NeurIPS), 2018. 2, 3

Lei Jimmy Ba, Jamie Ryan Kiros, and Geoffrey E. Hinton. Layer Normalization.                 CoRR,
  abs/1607.06450, 2016. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1607.06450. 5

Sebastian Bach, Alexander Binder, Grégoire Montavon, Frederick Klauschen, Klaus-Robert Müller,
  and Wojciech Samek. On Pixel-Wise Explanations for Non-Linear Classifier Decisions by Layer-
  Wise Relevance Propagation. PLoS ONE, 2015. 3

Oren Barkan, Edan Hauon, Avi Caciularu, Ori Katz, Itzik Malkiel, Omri Armstrong, and Noam
  Koenigstein. Grad-SAM: Explaining Transformers via Gradient Self-Attention Maps. In Pro-
  ceedings of the International Conference on Information and Knowledge Management (CIKM),
  pp. 2882–2887, 2021. 1, 2, 7, 23

Jasmijn Bastings and Katja Filippova. The elephant in the interpretability room: Why use attention
  as explanation when we have saliency methods? In Proceedings of the Third BlackboxNLP
  Workshop on Analyzing and Interpreting Neural Networks for NLP, 2020. 1, 2

David Bau, Bolei Zhou, Aditya Khosla, Aude Oliva, and Antonio Torralba. Network dissection:
  Quantifying interpretability of deep visual representations. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference
  on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 6541–6549, 2017. 9

Wieland Brendel and Matthias Bethge. Approximating CNNs with Bag-of-local-Features models
 works surprisingly well on ImageNet. In International Conference on Learning Representations
 (ICLR), 2019. 2

Moritz Böhle, Mario Fritz, and Bernt Schiele. Convolutional Dynamic Alignment Networks for
 Interpretable Classifications. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and
 Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2021. 1, 2, 6, 23, 24

Moritz Böhle, Mario Fritz, and Bernt Schiele. B-cos Networks: Attention is All We Need for Inter-
 pretability. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
 (CVPR), 2022. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 8, 9, 14, 21, 22, 23


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Hila Chefer, Shir Gur, and Lior Wolf. Transformer interpretability beyond attention visualization. In
  Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2021.
  1, 2, 6, 7, 8, 22, 23

Ekin D Cubuk, Barret Zoph, Jonathon Shlens, and Quoc V Le. Randaugment: Practical automated
  data augmentation with a reduced search space. In Proceedings of the Conference on Computer
  Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), Workshops, 2020. 6, 23

Jia Deng, Wei Dong, Richard Socher, Li-Jia Li, Kai Li, and Li Fei-Fei. ImageNet: A large-scale
   hierarchical image database. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and
   Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2009. 6

Alexey Dosovitskiy, Lucas Beyer, Alexander Kolesnikov, Dirk Weissenborn, Xiaohua Zhai, Thomas
  Unterthiner, Mostafa Dehghani, Matthias Minderer, Georg Heigold, Sylvain Gelly, Jakob Uszko-
  reit, and Neil Houlsby. An Image is Worth 16x16 Words: Transformers for Image Recogni-
  tion at Scale. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2021. URL https:
  //openreview.net/forum?id=YicbFdNTTy. 3, 6, 9

Ian Goodfellow, David Warde-Farley, Mehdi Mirza, Aaron Courville, and Yoshua Bengio. Maxout
  networks. In International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2013. 5, 22

Benjamin Graham, Alaaeldin El-Nouby, Hugo Touvron, Pierre Stock, Armand Joulin, Hervé Jégou,
  and Matthijs Douze. LeViT: a Vision Transformer in ConvNet’s Clothing for Faster Inference. In
  Proceedings of the International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), 2021. 3, 6

Dan Hendrycks and Kevin Gimpel.            Gaussian error linear units (gelus).      arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1606.08415, 2016. 5, 22

Sarthak Jain and Byron C Wallace. Attention is not Explanation. In Proceedings of the Conference of
  the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language
  Technologies (NAACL-HLT), pp. 3543–3556, 2019. 1

Been Kim, Martin Wattenberg, Justin Gilmer, Carrie J. Cai, James Wexler, Fernanda B. Viégas,
  and Rory Sayres. Interpretability Beyond Feature Attribution: Quantitative Testing with Concept
  Activation Vectors (TCAV). In International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2018. 2,
  9

Scott M. Lundberg and Su-In Lee. A Unified Approach to Interpreting Model Predictions. In
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2017. 3

Sébastien Marcel and Yann Rodriguez. Torchvision library, pretrained models. pytorch.org/
   vision/stable/models.html. Accessed: 2021-11-11. 6

Adam Paszke, Sam Gross, Francisco Massa, Adam Lerer, James Bradbury, Gregory Chanan, Trevor
  Killeen, Zeming Lin, Natalia Gimelshein, Luca Antiga, Alban Desmaison, Andreas Kopf, Edward
  Yang, Zachary DeVito, Martin Raison, Alykhan Tejani, Sasank Chilamkurthy, Benoit Steiner,
  Lu Fang, Junjie Bai, and Soumith Chintala. PyTorch: An Imperative Style, High-Performance
  Deep Learning Library. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2019.
  22, 23

Vitali Petsiuk, Abir Das, and Kate Saenko. RISE: Randomized Input Sampling for Explanation
  of Black-box Models. In British Machine Vision Conference (BMVC), 2018. URL http://
  bmvc2018.org/contents/papers/1064.pdf. 3

Marco Tulio Ribeiro, Sameer Singh, and Carlos Guestrin. ”Why Should I Trust You?”: Explaining
 the Predictions of Any Classifier. In International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data
 Mining (SIGKDD), 2016. 3

Cynthia Rudin. Stop explaining black box machine learning models for high stakes decisions and
  use interpretable models instead. Nature Machine Intelligence, 1(5):206–215, 2019. 10


                                                 11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Ramprasaath R. Selvaraju, Michael Cogswell, Abhishek Das, Ramakrishna Vedantam, Devi Parikh,
  and Dhruv Batra. Grad-CAM: Visual Explanations from Deep Networks via Gradient-Based
  Localization. In International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), 2017. doi: 10.1109/
  ICCV.2017.74. URL https://doi.org/10.1109/ICCV.2017.74. 3, 7, 23
Sofia Serrano and Noah A Smith. Is Attention Interpretable? In Proceedings of the Annual Meeting
  of the Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL), 2019. 1, 2
Avanti Shrikumar, Peyton Greenside, and Anshul Kundaje. Learning Important Features Through
  Propagating Activation Differences. In International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML),
  2017. 3
Karen Simonyan, Andrea Vedaldi, and Andrew Zisserman. Deep Inside Convolutional Networks:
  Visualising Image Classification Models and Saliency Maps. In International Conference on
  Learning Representations (ICLR), Workshop, 2014. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1312.
  6034. 3
Jost Tobias Springenberg, Alexey Dosovitskiy, Thomas Brox, and Martin A. Riedmiller. Striving for
  Simplicity: The All Convolutional Net. In International Conference on Learning Representations
  (ICLR), Workshop, 2015. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1412.6806. 3
Suraj Srinivas and François Fleuret. Full-Gradient Representation for Neural Network Visualization.
  In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2019. 3
Andreas Steiner, Alexander Kolesnikov, Xiaohua Zhai, Ross Wightman, Jakob Uszkoreit, and Lucas
  Beyer. How to train your ViT? Data, Augmentation, and Regularization in Vision Transformers.
  arXiv e-prints, art. arXiv:2106.10270, June 2021. 6, 8
Mukund Sundararajan, Ankur Taly, and Qiqi Yan. Axiomatic Attribution for Deep Networks. In
 Doina Precup and Yee Whye Teh (eds.), International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML),
 2017. 3, 7, 23
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez,
  Łukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. Advances in Neural Informa-
  tion Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2017. 1, 2, 5
Elena Voita, David Talbot, Fedor Moiseev, Rico Sennrich, and Ivan Titov. Analyzing Multi-Head
  Self-Attention: Specialized Heads Do the Heavy Lifting, the Rest Can Be Pruned. In Proceedings
  of the Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL), 2019. 7, 23
Tete Xiao, Mannat Singh, Eric Mintun, Trevor Darrell, Piotr Dollár, and Ross Girshick. Early
  convolutions help transformers see better. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems
  (NeurIPS), volume 34, pp. 30392–30400, 2021. 4

Bolei Zhou, Aditya Khosla, Àgata Lapedriza, Aude Oliva, and Antonio Torralba. Learning Deep
  Features for Discriminative Localization. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer
  Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2016. 3


                                                12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                              Supplementary Material


Table of Contents


In this supplement to our work on designing holistically explainable transformers, we provide:

    (A) Additional Qualitative Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
              In this section, we show additional qualitative results and discuss the quali-
              tative differences between the various explanations methods in more detail.
              For this, we include explanations for B-cos as well as for conventional ViTs.

    (B) Additional Quantitative Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
              In this section, we show additional quantitative results. In particular, we
              compare the model-inherent explanations of the B-cos ViTs to explanations
              for conventional ViTs, both for the localisation and the perturbation metrics.
              Further, we present the results of an ablation study in which we investigate
              the impact of the design choices within the attention layer in more detail.

    (C) Implementation Details . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
             In this section, we describe the model architectures, the training procedure,
             the explanation methods, as well as the evaluation metrics in more detail.


                                                                    13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A    A DDITIONAL Q UALITATIVE R ESULTS
A.1 C OMPARISON TO ATTENTION EXPLANATIONS
                                                                   Ours      Ours
                                                 Input            [W(x)]k             Rollout   FinAtt
For the reader’s convenience, in Fig. A1                                    Eq. (7)


                                                  Ibizan hound
we repeat the qualitative results presented in
Fig. 1, such as to facilitate the following dis-
cussion of the qualitative differences between
the holistic and the purely attention-based ex-
planations of B-cos ViTs.


                                                  cock
In particular, we would like to point out sev-
eral key differences between our holistic ex-
planations as per Eq. (7) and the attention-


                                                  magpie
based explanations according to Attention
Rollout (Abnar & Zuidema, 2020) and the
last layer’s attention.


                                                  goldfish
First, only the linear mapping W(x) used
for the contribution maps in Eq. (7) is able
to capture ‘negative evidence’ for the respec-
                                                  blue bird
tive classes, see col. 2 in Fig. A1. Note that
this does not depend on the particular choice
of images shown here. Instead, as the at-
                                                  rocking chair



tention matrices consist only of non-negative
values, the attention-based explanations can-
not distinguish between positively and neg-
atively contributing features. Therefore, to Fig. A1: Inherent explanations (cols. 2+3) of B-cos ViTs
improve the attention visualisation and more vs. attention explanations (cols. 4+5) for the same model.
clearly highlight details in the attention maps, Note that W(x) faithfully reflects the whole model and
we plot the attention-based explanations on yields more detailed and class-specific explanations than
a colour scale from 0 to the maximal atten- attention alone. For a detailed discussion, see Sec. A.1.
tion value. The model-inherent explanation,
in contrast, use a colour scale from [−p, p] with p the maximum absolute pixel contribution.
Importantly, as attention-based explanations do not distinguish between positively and negatively
contributing neurons / pixels, they are inherently not class-specific. For example, especially in
images in which various classes are present (rows 1, 2, 3, 5), attention focuses on all occurring
class instances: all birds in rows 2, 3, and 4, as well as both dogs in row 1. The model-inherent
explanations, on the other hand, clearly distinguish between positive and negative contributions and
are thus able to resolve class-specific details.
Secondly, the attention-based explanation are of much lower resolution than the model-inherent
ones. Again, this cannot be attributed to the choice of images, but reflects an intrinsic difference
between the explanations: whereas the linear mapping W(x) reflects the entire model including the
tokenisation module and thus attributes on the level of pixels, the attention explanations can only
yield attributions at the level of tokens, which highlights a key difference between the methods:
while the attention explanations only include a few layers in their attributions, the model-inherent
linear map W(x) constitutes an exact summary of the entire model.
Third, as shown in the first column, the rows of the linear mapping W(x) can directly be visualised
in colour space, as the B-cos ViTs are designed according to the B-cos framework proposed by
Böhle et al. (2022). Note that this is not a masked version of the original image, but instead a
direct reflection of the dynamically computed weight matrix W(x), for details see Sec. C.3. Such
visualisations are not possible with attention-based explanations.
Finally, we would like to highlight the relation between attention rollout and the model-inherent
linear mapping. Specifically, as shown in Eq. (6), note that the entire model can be summarised by
                                       QL
                 W(x) = WClass (x) l=1 WlMLP (x) WlAtt (x) WTokens (x) .

                                                                                              (A.1)
Interestingly, attention rollout in fact computes the overall attention attributions in a similar manner:
                                                QL
                           Arollout (x) = IClass l=1 IMLP

                                                        l    Āl (x) ITokens ,                      (A.2)


                                                    14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


with Ilayer replacing the actual linear transformation of a specific layer by an identity matrix and
Āl denoting the average attention distribution of layer l, see Abnar & Zuidema (2020). Comparing
Eqs. (A.1) and (A.2) succinctly shows how solely attention-based explanations leave out a large part
of the model computations, which are seamlessly integrated in the complete linear mapping given
by W(x).
A.2 N ORMALISING THE VISUALISATIONS ACROSS MULTIPLE EXPLANATIONS
As we discuss in Appendix C.3, the individual explanations are normalised independently of each
other; i.e., all explanations shown on the blue-white-red colour map (Ours (Eq. (7)), GradSAM,
GradCAM, IxG, IntGrad, and pLRP) are plotted on a scale from −v to v with v the 99.9th percentile
of the absolute value of the given attribution map. As such, the resulting attribution maps are not
directly comparable across different explanations. To show the effect of normalising across multiple
explanations, in Fig. A2 we repeat Fig. 7 from the main paper, once normalised across contribution
maps, and once normalised independently. To normalise across contribution maps, v is computed
as the 99.9th percentile of the absolute value in all of the four class explanations per method in the
figure.
A.3 A DDITIONAL EXPLANATIONS AND COMPARISONS
In Fig. A3, we compare the model-inherent explanations of a B-cos ViT-B-38 model to additional
explanation methods apart from purely attention-based ones. Moreover, we show explanations ex-
tracted for a conventional ViT-B-38 model in Fig. A4 for comparison.
We would like to highlight the following. First, we find that the model-inherent explanations of the
B-cos ViTs provide more detailed and convincing explanations than any of the post-hoc explanations
when evaluated on the same model. Crucially, these explanations do not only look convincing, but
in fact accurately reflect the model computations of the B-cos ViTs—i.e., they are model-faithful.
Further, the model-inherent explanations do not only compare favourably to other explanations eval-
uated on our newly proposed B-cos ViTs. Instead, they also provide much more detail and highlight
more class-specific features than any of the post-hoc explanation methods yield on conventional
ViTs, see Fig. A4. As such, we find that there is a clear gain in interpretability when using B-cos
ViTs instead of conventional ones.

B     A DDITIONAL Q UANTITATIVE R ESULTS
In this section, we quantitatively compare the interpretability of the B-cos ViTs to that of conven-
tional ViTs (Appendix B.1). Specifically, as in Sec. 5.2, we discuss the localisation and the pertur-
bation metrics. Additionally, in Appendix B.2, we present results of an ablation study in which we
investigate the design choices of the B-cos Attention module in more detail.
B.1   I NTERPRETABILITY COMPARISON : B- COS VS . CONVENTIONAL V I T MODELS
Localisation. In Fig. B1 (right) we present the localisation results of post-hoc explanation methods
evaluated on conventional ViTs; for comparison, we repeat the results of the B-cos ViTs (see Fig. 6)
on the left. As becomes apparent, no post-hoc explanation method evaluated on conventional ViTs
allows for localising the correct grid images (cf. Fig. 4) in the localisation metric to the same degree
as is possible with the model-inherent explanations. Specifically, we find that the model-inherent
explanations yield on average 2.32 times higher localisation scores across the various model config-
urations than the best post-hoc explanation method on conventional ViTs (IntGrad).
Perturbation. In Fig. B2 (right) we present the perturbation metric results of post-hoc explana-
tion methods evaluated on conventional ViTs; for comparison, we repeat the results of the B-cos
ViTs (see Fig. 6) on the left. Specifically, as discussed in the main paper, on the left we show the
normalised mean area between the curces (ABC) for each model configuration (differently sized
backbones and transformers), in which the ABC of each configuration is normalised by the ABC of
the model-inherent explanations (Ours). To enable a comparison between the conventional and the
B-cos ViTs, on the right we normalise by the best post-hoc method (FinAtt) and further multiply
the resulting score by the ratio between the mean scores across configurations of FinAtt on conven-
tional ViTs and the mean scores of Ours on B-cos ViTs (corresponding to the respective dashed lines
before normalisation).
As discussed in the main paper, we find that the model inherent explanations of B-cos ViTs con-
sistently yield the best pixel ranking for each of the configurations of the B-cos ViTs. Further, the

                                                  15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                Input image   Ours [W(x)]k   Ours Eq. (7)   GradSAM    GradCAM      Rollout    FinAtt   IntGrad


black swan
forklift
digital clock
lion


                                              (a) Independently normalised attribution maps.
                Input image   Ours [W(x)]k   Ours Eq. (7)   GradSAM    GradCAM      Rollout    FinAtt   IntGrad
black swan
forklift
digital clock
lion


                                                    (b) Jointly normalised attribution maps.

Fig. A2: (a) Repetition of Fig. 7 from the main paper, i.e., with each attribution map normalised independently.
(b) The same figure is shown again, but this time the normalisation is done column-wise, i.e., all explanations of
a given method are shown on the same scale (except for the coloured explanations in the second column, which
are unchanged). Note that the attention-based explanations are the same across all classes to begin with and
are thus not affected. The IntGrad explanations as well as the forklift explanation according to Ours (7) change
most notably—in the case of the model-inherent explanations, this directly reflects the fact that the model
has found the least evidence for forklift: the sum of positive contributions according to the model-inherent
contribution maps are 13.6 (black swan), 3.3 (forklift), 7.0 (digital clock), and 5.2 (lion).


ABC is on average much higher for the model-inherent explanations for B-cos ViTs than the ABC
resulting from the rankings of post-hoc explanations on conventional ViTs. Note, however, that this
could also reflect a difference in model stability and the comparisons across models have thus to be
interpreted with care.
B.2                 A BLATION STUDY: A NALYSING THE DESIGN CHOICES IN THE B- COS ATTENTION
                    MODULE
In this subsection, we analyse the impact of the proposed changes for the attention module in more
detail. Specifically, we investigate the effect of changing the position of the LayerNorm module
within the attention layer. Further, we discuss the effect of changing the model’s value computation
and projection layers to B-cos layers.
Position of the LayerNorm module. In Fig. B3, we present the classification performance results
of various B-cos ViT-S models trained on embeddings extracted at different depths of the back-


                                                                      16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


         ibex        Ours [W(x)]k   Ours Eq. (7)   GradSAM   GradCAM   Rollout   FinAtt   IxG    IntGrad


       limpkin       Ours [W(x)]k   Ours Eq. (7)   GradSAM   GradCAM   Rollout   FinAtt   IxG    IntGrad


      redshank       Ours [W(x)]k   Ours Eq. (7)   GradSAM   GradCAM   Rollout   FinAtt   IxG    IntGrad


      ambulance      Ours [W(x)]k   Ours Eq. (7)   GradSAM   GradCAM   Rollout   FinAtt   IxG    IntGrad


        harp         Ours [W(x)]k   Ours Eq. (7)   GradSAM   GradCAM   Rollout   FinAtt   IxG    IntGrad


       axolotl       Ours [W(x)]k   Ours Eq. (7)   GradSAM   GradCAM   Rollout   FinAtt   IxG    IntGrad


     traffic light   Ours [W(x)]k   Ours Eq. (7)   GradSAM   GradCAM   Rollout   FinAtt   IxG    IntGrad


    indigo bunting   Ours [W(x)]k   Ours Eq. (7)   GradSAM   GradCAM   Rollout   FinAtt   IxG    IntGrad


Fig. A3: Comparison of inherent explanations (Ours) of a B-cos ViT-B-38, and several post-hoc explanations
for class k (left). For Ours, we show a colour visualisation (see Sec. C.3) of the corresponding row of the
weight matrix W(x) as well as the corresponding contribution maps as defined in Eq. (7). Note that of the
compared methods, the model-inherent explanations yield by far the most detail and class-specificity, as also
discussed in Sec. A.1 above. For a comparison to explanations generated for a conventional ViT-B-38 model
on the same set of images, see the following Fig. A4.


bone B-cos DenseNet-121 model. Specifically, we evaluate three different model configurations for
each backbone depth: ‘Standard Attention’, ‘Shifted LayerNorm (B=1)’, and ‘Shifted LayerNorm
(B=2)’. Here, ‘Standard Attention’ refers to the unchanged attention module as it is used in con-
ventional ViT models. On the other hand, the ‘Shifted LayerNorm’ models implement the change
described in eq. (13); i.e., for these models, the normalisation layer is moved inside the softmax
computation instead of being applied before the attention module as a whole. We observe that the
models with the shifted LayerNorm perform significantly better than those using standard attention,
especially for shallower backbone models.
We attribute this to the fact that using LayerNorm only within the softmax computation leaves the
norm of the value vectors unchanged, such that they are inherently on a similar scale as the token
embeddings they are added to in the skip connection—this allows the model to compute significant
and well-scaled updates of the token embeddings via the attention module. Moreover, the model can
learn bias and scale parameters that are specifically tailored to the softmax layer, instead of affecting
both the softmax computation as well as the value vectors at the same time.
In the standard attention module, on the other hand, the norm of the value vectors can differ signif-
icantly from the norm of the token embeddings in the residual connection, which can make it more


                                                               17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


         ibex        CheferLRP   pLRP   GradSAM     GradCAM     Rollout     FinAtt      IxG       IntGrad


       limpkin       CheferLRP   pLRP   GradSAM     GradCAM     Rollout     FinAtt      IxG       IntGrad


      redshank       CheferLRP   pLRP   GradSAM     GradCAM     Rollout     FinAtt      IxG       IntGrad


      ambulance      CheferLRP   pLRP   GradSAM     GradCAM     Rollout     FinAtt      IxG       IntGrad


        harp         CheferLRP   pLRP   GradSAM     GradCAM     Rollout     FinAtt      IxG       IntGrad


       axolotl       CheferLRP   pLRP   GradSAM     GradCAM     Rollout     FinAtt      IxG       IntGrad


     traffic light   CheferLRP   pLRP   GradSAM     GradCAM     Rollout     FinAtt      IxG       IntGrad


    indigo bunting   CheferLRP   pLRP   GradSAM     GradCAM     Rollout     FinAtt      IxG       IntGrad


Fig. A4: Importance attributions given by common post-hoc explanation methods applied to a conventional
ViT-B-38 model (see Sec. 4 for the model specifications) on the same set of images as in Fig. A3. We find that
none of the common post-hoc explanations for conventional ViTs give similarly detailed results as the model-
inherent explanations do for B-cos ViTs, see Fig. A3. As such, we observe a clear gain in interpretability when
using B-cos ViTs instead of conventional ones.


difficult for the model to take advantage of the attention module. This hypothesis is corroborated
by an analysis of the norms of the embeddings. In particular, we find the embeddings coming from
the skip connections to be on average several orders of magnitude larger than those returned by the
attention layer in the models trained with standard attention: e.g., by a factor of 105 in the model
trained on a 13-layer backbone model. In contrast, in the Shifted LayerNorm model with B=2, this
factor is on the order of 100 , i.e., both embeddings are in fact on a similar scale. While models with
standard attention could in principle learn large scale values in the LayerNorm modules, this would
effectively result in one-hot encodings in the softmax computation, which could hamper learning.
As the attention modules thus have very limited impact on the model output, we further observe that
the model does not seem to learn useful attention maps in the first place. E.g., in Fig. B4 we compare
the attention maps of the models with Standard Attention and the Shifted LayerNorm models on
various images and find those of the Standard Attention model to be much less structured; note that
for the Standard Attention model, the model output is no longer a dynamic linear transformation of
the input, due to the LayerNorm module.
B-cos transforms for value and projection layers. In the following, we discuss the impact of
replacing the linear layers typically used in the value computation and the projection layers by B-
cos layers (cf. eq. (14). In particular, we would first like to highlight that a B-cos transform with


                                                      18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                               Localisation Metric
                                Ours        Rollout         FinAtt         IntGrad        IxG      GradSAM          GradCAM         pLRP        CheferLRP
                        1.00
                                                                                                                     Conventional ViTs
  Localisation score
                        0.75
                                                                                                  ×2.32
                                            ×2.47           B-Cos ViTs
                        0.50

                        0.25

                        0.00
                               71      72       73         74      75          76        77        71          72           73             74          75
                                                      Model accuracy                                                 Model accuracy

Fig. B1: Left: Localisation metric results for the B-cos ViTs of various sizes, same as shown in the main paper
in Fig. 6 (left). Right: For comparison, we show the results of common post-hoc explanations evaluated on the
corresponding conventional ViTs. As can be seen, the model-inherent explanations of the B-cos ViTs not only
constitute the best localising explanation for any given B-cos ViT, but also achieve much higher localisation
scores than the best post-hoc explanations evaluated on conventional ViTs.



                                                                               Perturbation Metric
                                Ours        Rollout         FinAtt         IntGrad       IxG       GradSAM          GradCAM        pLRP         CheferLRP

                         1.0
       Normalised ABC


                                                                                                  ×1.85              Conventional ViTs
                                       B-Cos ViTs           ×1.99

                         0.5



                         0.0
                               71      72       73         74      75          76        77        71          72           73             74          75
                                                      Model accuracy                                                 Model accuracy

Fig. B2: Left: Perturbation metric results for the B-cos ViTs of various sizes, same as in the main paper in
Fig. 6 (left). Right: For comparison, we show the results of common post-hoc explanations evaluated on
the corresponding conventional ViTs. Note that, to allow for a comparison between the B-cos ViTs and the
conventional ViTs, we normalised the mean ABCs of the conventional ViTs by the mean ABC of the best post-
hoc method (FinAtt) and multiplied the results by the ratio between the mean ABCs FinAtt on conventional
ViTs and the mean ABCs of Ours on B-cos ViTs. For a detailed discussion, see Sec. B.



                                                      Standard Attention             Shifted LayerNorm (B=1)          Shifted LayerNorm (B=2)
                        0.80

                        0.75
   Top-1 accuracy (%)


                        0.70

                        0.65

                        0.60

                        0.55

                        0.50
                                       13 backbone layers                              38 backbone layers                       87 backbone layers


Fig. B3: Ablation results for different version of the attention module. Specifically, we show the top-1 accuracy
on the ImageNet validation set for B-cos ViTs with the conventional attention module (‘Standard Attention’)
and the proposed B-cos Attention (‘Shifted LayerNorm’, see eq. (13)). Specifically, for the latter we show the
results of models trained with different values for B (B=1 and B=2) in the value computation and the projection
head, see eq. (14). Note that for B=1, the B-cos transform is equivalent to a linear transformation. As such,
‘Standard Attention’ and ‘Shifted LayerNorm (B=1)’ differ only in the positioning of the LayerNorm module.



                                                                                          19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                                       Standard Attention
                                                                               Input          Rollout                      FinAtt


                                                              indigo bunting
                                                              redshank
                                                              limpkin
                                                              axolotl


                                                                                               (a)
                              Shifted LayerNorm (B=1)                                                                                  Shifted LayerNorm (B=2)
                   Input   Ours [W(x)]k   Ours Eq. (7)   Rollout                   FinAtt                          Input            Ours [W(x)]k   Ours Eq. (7)   Rollout   FinAtt
  indigo bunting


                                                                                                  indigo bunting
  redshank


                                                                                                  redshank
  limpkin


                                                                                                  limpkin
  axolotl


                                                                                                  axolotl


                                              (b)                                                                                                      (c)

Fig. B4: Visualisation of attention-based explanations as well as the model-inherent explanations for models
trained with (a) the standard attention module, (b) Shifted LayerNorm (B=1), and (c) Shifted LayerNorm
(B=2); for details, see Sec. B.2. As we describe in that section, the models with standard attention seem unable
to take advantage of the attention module and thus do not learn structured attention maps (a). In contrast, once
the LayerNorm is shifted inside the softmax computation, the models are not only inherently explainable by a
single linear transformation, but also learn to use the attention layers in a much more structured manner (b+c).


                                                                                               20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                        B-cos ViT-{Ti/S/B}-13                   B-cos ViT-{Ti/S/B}-38                   B-cos ViT-{Ti/S/B}-87
                                        + No MaxOut                             + No MaxOut                             + No MaxOut
Top-1 accuracy (%)

                     80                                                                                                                     76.8   76.7
                                                               75.6                        75.7   76.1   76.6                 76.4   76.6
                                                 74.3                               74.6                        75.3   74.9
                                                        73.7                 74.2
                                                                      72.7
                                 71.1     70.4
                     70   66.9



                     60
                                             Tiny                                     Small                                     Base
                                                                                Transformer size
             (a) Comparison between B-cos ViTs with (solid) and without (striped) MaxOut in the Transformer layers.
                                   ViT-{Ti/S/B}-13                             ViT-{Ti/S/B}-38                           ViT-{Ti/S/B}-87
                                   + B-cosify (No MaxOut)                      + B-cosify (No MaxOut)                    + B-cosify (No MaxOut)
Top-1 accuracy (%)


                     80                                                                                                                     76.8
                                                                                                  76.1                        76.4
                                                               74.6                 74.6   74.5          74.9   75.3                 74.3          74.5
                                                 72.8   73.7          72.7   73.0                                      73.1
                                 71.4     70.4
                     70   66.9



                     60
                                             Tiny                                     Small                                     Base
                                                                                Transformer size
    (b) Comparison between B-cos ViTs (no MaxOut) (striped) in the Transformer layers and conventional ViTs.

Fig. B5: Understanding the impact of MaxOut on model performance. (a) For the Tiny transformers, we
find that MaxOut indeed significantly improves model performance. However, this performance gap between
models with and without MaxOut closes with increasing model size (Small and Base). (b) As such, when
comparing to conventional ViTs (same numbers as in Fig. 5), we find that B-cos ViTs without MaxOut can
achieve similar performance without adding additional parameters in the Transformer layers, as long as the
initial model size is sufficiently large.


B=1 is in fact equivalent to a linear layer and the Shifted LayerNorm (B=1) model thus only differs
from the conventional attention by the placement of the LayerNorm module.
When comparing the classification performance of the Shited LayerNorm models with different val-
ues for B, we find the models to perform very similarly, see Fig. B3. Given that the main difference
between those models is a slightly higher value of B in one of them, this is not surprising. Moreover,
given that both models still adhere to the B-cos formulation, both models are accurately summarised
by a global linear transformation and allow for a model-faithful decomposition into individual in-
put contributions, see Fig. B4; note that all other modules still use B=2 in both models and thus
already induce significant alignment, irrespective of the value and projection layers6 . In contrast to
the model with Standard Attention, we find both models with Shifted LayerNorm to learn highly
structured attention maps, see Fig. B4.
B.3 A BLATION STUDY: A NALYSING THE IMPACT OF M AX O UT ON PERFORMANCE
As discussed in Sec. 3, when converting the baseline ViTs to B-cos ViTs, we follow Böhle et al.
(2022) and add a MaxOut unit to every B-cos transformation. This, of course, doubles the number
of parameters, which can skew the comparison to the baseline models. In the following, we assess
how MaxOut impacts the model performance.
In particular, in Fig. B5 (a), we compare the performance of B-cos ViTs as presented in the main
paper to a version that does not use MaxOut when converting the baseline Transformer layers. We
6
     As was shown in Böhle et al. (2022), higher values of B can lead to a higher degree of alignment, but this
     transition is smooth and a value of B=1 in the attention layers seems to be sufficient.


                                                                                    21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


observe that for smaller models (see, e.g., Tiny), MaxOut indeed significantly improves the perfor-
mance of the B-cos ViTs. However, with increasing model size (Small and Base), this performance
gap closes and the B-cos ViTs without MaxOut perform on par with those that have twice the number
of parameters in the Transformer layers.
As a result, we find that for sufficiently large Transformers (Small and Base), the B-cos ViTs without
MaxOut are able to achieve similar performance as the baseline models, without increasing the
parameter count, as we show in Fig. B5 (b).

C       I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS
In the following, we provide further implementation details regarding the models (C.1), the training
and evaluation procedure (C.2), the explanation methods (C.3), and the evaluation metrics (C.4).
C.1 M ODELS
For all models, we rely on the implementation by Chefer et al. (2021), which we use unchanged for
the conventional ViTs and modify as we describe below for the B-cos ViTs (C.1.1). The configu-
rations of the ViTs follow the conventional specifications for ViTs of size Ti, S, and B, cf. Chefer
et al. (2021). As described in Sec. 3, we use average pooling over the tokens and pass the result to
the classifier head for all models. The conventional ViTs use a DenseNet-121 backbone as available
in the torchvision library (Paszke et al., 2019).
C.1.1 B- COS V I T S
Tokenisation. For all B-cos ViTs, we use a pretrained7 B-cos DenseNet-121 as provided by Böhle
et al. (2022) as a tokenisation module, cf. Fig. 2a; specifically, we use the DenseNet-121 with the
training+ schedule, as this one achieves the same accuracy on the ImageNet validation set as the
conventional DenseNet-121 contained in the pytorch library (Paszke et al., 2019). As described in
the main paper, we freeze this backbone and extract features after either 13, 38, or 87 convolutional
layers.
We then apply a single B-cos convolutional layer with a kernel size k =1, 2, 4 and stride s=1, 2, 4
with no padding on the feature maps after 87, 38, or 13 convolutional layers respectively, such that
the number of tokens is the same for all B-cos ViTs. We found it advantageous to scale the features
of the backbones by 103 , as this improved signal propagation and lead to better results8 . Depending
on the size of the transformer (Ti, S, B, see main paper), this B-cos convolution produced activations
with c=192, 384, 768 channels after MaxOut (Goodfellow et al., 2013) over every two output units.
The resulting activation map of size c×h×w is then reshaped to n×c with n the number of input
tokens.
Attention. As described in the main paper, we replace the value computation as well as the linear
projection of the attention heads by linear B-cos transformations. Further, we apply layer normalisa-
tion to the inputs before the query and key computations; the value computations use the raw input,
cf. Fig. 2a. Finally, when additionally learning ‘attention priors’, see Sec. 3.5, we add a learnable pa-
rameter B∈Rm×n×n to each attention layer, with m the number of attention heads. The parameter
B thus contains separate pair-wise priors between any two tokens for every attention head.
MLPs. As discussed in Sec. 3.4, we convert the MLPs to B-cos MLPs by replacing the linear
transformations by B-cos transformations with two units and MaxOut (Goodfellow et al., 2013).
Further, we remove the normalisation layer before the MLP block, and the GELU (Hendrycks &
Gimpel, 2016) non-linearities within the MLPs.
Classifier. We use a single B-cos transformation as a classification head, without MaxOut and
C =1000 output features, i.e., one output for each class.
General remarks. Similar to Böhle√ et al. (2022), we scale the output of every B-cos layer in the
network by a scaling factor γ =f / c to improve signal propagation. In particular, as more channels
lead to a stronger decay, we used f =15, 20, 25 for ViTs of size Ti, S, B respectively; further, since
the multiplicative prior computes the product of two attention values ≤ 1, the activations in these
networks decay even more quickly and we scale each f by an additional factor of 10. Moreover, as
7
    The pretrained models were downloaded from github.com/moboehle/B-cos.
8
    Note that in contrast to standard ViTs, in which normalisation layers ensure that the input to each layer is
    well-behaved, in B-cos Networks the activations can decay very quickly since no normalisation is used.


                                                        22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


in Böhle et al. (2022), we scale down the model output by 103 after which we add a logit bias b∈RC
to the model output which is set to log(0.01/0.99) for each of the C output logits. Lastly, for the
B-cos ViTs, we encode the input images as in Böhle et al. (2021), i.e., such that each pixel uses 6
color channels [r, g, b, 1−r, 1−g, 1−b] with r, g, b∈[0, 1]. As we discuss in Sec. C, this allows for
visualising the matrices W(x) in color.

C.2   T RAINING AND E VALUATION P ROCEDURE
Training. We trained the B-cos ViTs with a batch size of 256. For the conventional ViTs, we found
larger batch sizes to yield better results and thus trained those with a batch size of 1024. Further, we
trained all our models with RandAugment (Cubuk et al., 2020) (n=2 and m=9) and used images
of size 224×224. While the conventional models were, as is common, trained with SoftMax and
a cross entropy loss, for the B-cos ViTs we followed Böhle et al. (2022) and trained with binary
cross entropy and sigmoid applied to the output logits. Note that, as discussed in Böhle et al. (2022),
binary cross entropy induces the necessary logit maximisation for every input, which in turn leads
to weight alignment with class-relevant patterns.
Evaluation. We evaluated all networks on the ImageNet validation set after resizing the images such
that the smaller dimension measured 256 pixels and then center-cropped images of size 224×224.

C.3   ATTRIBUTION METHODS
In the following, we describe the explanation methods that we evaluate on the B-cos as well as the
conventional ViTs in more detail.
Model-inherent explanations. The model-inherent explanations that we quantitatively evaluated
are given by the contribution maps defined in Eq. (7). Specifically, for a given class logit, we extract
the effective linear contribution as performed by the model and multiply it with the input in an
element-wise manner and sum all values per pixel location, i.e., across the colour channels; note
that this is conceptually equivalent to ‘Input×Grad’ for piece-wise linear models. For a visualisation
of contribution maps, see Figs. 1 and 7; here, we use a blue-white-red colormap with blue colors
denoting negative, and red colors denoting positive contributions. This visualisation method is the
same for all methods except for those that use the jet colormap (CheferLRP, Rollout, and FinAtt).
Additionally, for better visibility, we clamp the contribution values to the interval [−v, v], with v
the 99.9th percentile of the absolute values of the given spatial attribution map (i.e., after summing
over the colour channels). Note that as a result, the explanations are normalised independently; for
a discussion of the effect of normalising across multiple explanations, see Appendix A.2.
Further, as also shown in those figures, the B-cos formulation allows to directly visualise the trans-
formation matrix W(x) in color. Specifically, note that the input to B-cos networks is encoded as
p = [r, g, b, 1−r, 1−g, 1−b] with r, g, b∈[0, 1] the color channels, cf. Sec. C.1.1 and Böhle et al.
(2022). As such, the color of each pixel is unambiguously encoded by the angle of the pixel vector p
and it is thus possible to reconstruct the image colors from the angles alone. Crucially, as discussed
in Sec. 3.1 W(x) is implicitly optimised to align with relevant patterns in the input, i.e., to have a
similar angle as the input, such that the weights for any given pixel can be mapped to a specific color
in RGB. We further follow Böhle et al. (2022) and use the norm of the pixel vectors to compute
the opacity α in an RGB-α encoding, for details see Böhle et al. (2022), and only show pixels that
positively contribute to the respective logit.
Transformer-specific explanations. As described in the main paper, we evaluate against common
transformer-specific explanations such as the average attention distribution in the final layer (FinAtt),
Attention Rollout as proposed by Abnar & Zuidema (2020), and GradSAM (Barkan et al., 2021).
On the conventional ViTs, we further evaluate LRP-based explanations: partial LRP (pLRP) Voita
et al. (2019) and the transformer-specific LRP adaptation by Chefer et al. (2021) (CheferLRP). For
all these transformer-specific explanations, we rely on the implementation provided by Chefer et al.
(2021).
Architecture-agnostic explanations. Further, as shown in Figs. 6 and 7, we also evaluate other
commonly used explanation methods. Specifically, we use IntGrad (Sundararajan et al., 2017)
with n=32 steps, ‘Input×Gradient’ (IxG), cf. Adebayo et al. (2018), as well as an adapted Grad-
CAM (Selvaraju et al., 2017) as in Chefer et al. (2021). For the last, we rely on the implementation
provided by Chefer et al. (2021). For the remaining methods, we use the implementations contained
in the captum library of pytorch (Paszke et al., 2019).


                                                   23
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


C.4 E VALUATION METRICS
C.4.1 L OCALISATION METRIC
For the localisation metric, we evaluated all attribution methods on the grid pointing game (Böhle
et al., 2021). For this, we constructed 250 2×2 grid images, see, e.g., Fig. 4. As was done in Böhle
et al. (2021), we sorted the images according to the models’ classification confidence for each class
and then sampled a random set of classes for each multi-image. For each of the sampled classes, we
then included the most confidently classified image in the grid that had not already been used in a
previous grid image.
Further, transformers with positional information expect a fixed size input, see Sec. 4. To neverthe-
less evaluate the attribution methods on the localisation metric, which uses images of size 448×448,
we scale the synthetic images down by a factor of two such that they are of size 224×224 and thus
of a size that is compatible with the transformers.
C.4.2 P ERTURBATION METRIC
As for the pixel perturbation metrics, we proceed as follows.
First, we sort the images in the validation set by their classification confidence and evaluate on the
first 250 images for each model. We do this to reduce the computational cost of evaluating this metric
whilst nevertheless allowing for a fair comparison between models. Specifically, we observed the
model stability to correlate with the model confidence and by choosing the most confidently predict
images, each model is evaluated in a favourable setting, which ensures comparability.
Second, we remove up to 25% of the pixels from the images in increasing / decreasing order as
ranked by a given attribution method. Specifically, we sample the resulting confidence curves at 9
equidistant points r in the interval [0, 25%] and ‘remove’ the pixels by zeroing out the respective
pixel encoding.
Finally, we record the mean model confidence at the sampled points, which we normalise by the
initial mean confidence; as such, each curve starts at (r, o)=(0, 1) with r the percentage of pixels
removed and o the normalised model confidence. To assess the quality of the ranking, we then
measure the area between the two confidence curves corresponding to the order in which we remove
the pixels, i.e., least / most important first, see, e.g., Fig. 6 (right).


                                                 24
