Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


L ESS IS M ORE : R ETHINKING F EW-S HOT L EARNING
AND R ECURRENT N EURAL N ETS

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                           A BSTRACT

         The statistical supervised learning framework assumes an input-output set with a
         joint probability distribution that is reliably represented by the training dataset.
         The learner is then required to output a prediction rule learned from the train-
         ing dataset’s input-output pairs. In this work, we provide meaningful insights
         into the asymptotic equipartition property (AEP) (Shannon, 1948) in the context
         of machine learning, and illuminate some of its potential ramifications for few-
         shot learning. We provide theoretical guarantees for reliable learning under the
         information-theoretic AEP, and for the generalization error with respect to the
         sample size. We then focus on a highly efficient recurrent neural net (RNN) frame-
         work and propose a reduced-entropy algorithm for few-shot learning. We also pro-
         pose a mathematical intuition for the RNN as an approximation of a sparse coding
         solver. We verify the applicability, robustness, and computational efficiency of
         the proposed approach with image deblurring and optical coherence tomography
         (OCT) speckle suppression. Our experimental results demonstrate significant po-
         tential for improving learning models’ sample efficiency, generalization, and time
         complexity, that can therefore be leveraged for practical real-time applications.


1   I NTRODUCTION
In recent years, machine learning (ML) methods have led to many state-of-the-art results, spanning
through various fields of knowledge. Nevertheless, a clear theoretical understanding of important
aspects of artificial intelligence (AI) is still missing. Furthermore, there are many challenges con-
cerning the deployment and implementation of AI algorithms in practical applications, primarily
due to highly extensive computational complexity and insufficient generalization. Concerns have
also been raised regarding the effects of energy consumption of training large scale deep learning
systems (Strubell et al., 2020). Improving sample efficiency and generalization, and the integration
of physical models into ML have been the center of attention and efforts of many in the industrial
and academic research community. Over the years significant progress has been made in training
large models. Nevertheless, it has not yet been clear what makes a representation good for complex
learning systems (Bottou et al., 2007; Vincent et al., 2008; Bengio, 2009; Zhang et al., 2021).

Main Contributions. In this work we investigate the theoretical and empirical possibilities
of few shot learning and the use of RNNs as a powerful platform given limited ground truth
training data. (1) Based on the information-theoretical asymptotic equipartition property (AEP)
(Cover & Thomas, 2006), we show that there exists a relatively small set that can empirically rep-
resent the input-output data distribution for learning. (2) In light of the theoretical analysis, we
promote the use of a compact RNN-based framework, to demonstrate the applicability and effi-
ciency for few-shot learning for natural image deblurring and optical coherence tomography (OCT)
speckle suppression. We demonstrate the use of a single image training dataset, that generalizes
well, as an analogue to universal source coding with a known dictionary. The method may be appli-
cable to other learning architectures as well as other applications where the signal can be processed
locally, such as speech and audio, video, seismic imaging, MRI, ultrasound, natural language pro-
cessing and more. Training of the proposed framework is extremely time efficient. Training takes
about 1-30 seconds on a GPU workstation and a few minutes on a CPU workstation (2-4 minutes),
and thus does not require expensive computational resources. (3) We propose an upgraded RNN
framework incorporating receptive field normalization (RFN) (see (Pereg et al., 2021), Appendix C)


                                                  1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


that decreases the input data distribution entropy, and improves visual quality in noisy environments.
(4) We illuminate a possible optimization mechanism behind RNNs. We observe that an RNN can
be viewed as a sparse solver starting from an initial condition based on the previous time step. The
proposed interpretation can be viewed as an intuitive explanation for the mathematical functionality
behind the popularity and success of RNNs in solving practical problems.

2   DATA -G ENERATION M ODEL - A D IFFERENT P ERSPECTIVE
Typically, in statistical learning (Shalev-Shwartz & Ben-David, 2014; Vapnik, 1999), it is assumed
that the instances of the training data are generated by some probability distribution. For example,
we can assume a training input set ΨY = {{yi }m      i=1 : yi ∼ PY }, such that there is some correct
target output x, unknown to the learner, and each pair (yi , xi ) in the training data Ψ is generated
by first sampling a point yi according to PY (·) and then labeling it. The examples in the training
set are randomly chosen and, hence, independently and identically distributed (i.i.d.) according to
the distribution PY (·). We have access to the training error (also referred to as empirical risk),
which we normally try to minimize. The known phenomenon of overfitting is when the learning
system fits perfectly to the training set and fails to generalize. In classification problems, probably
approximately correct (PAC) learning defines the minimal size of a training set required to guarantee
a PAC solution. The sample complexity is a function of the accuracy of the labels and a confidence
parameter. It also depends on properties of the hypothesis class. To describe generalization we
normally differentiate between the empirical risk (training error) and the true risk. It is known that
the curse of dimensionality renders learning in high dimension to always amount to extrapolation
(out-of-sample extension) (Balestriero et al., 2021).

I NFORMATION T HEORETIC P ERSPECTIVE : C ONNECTION TO AEP

Hereafter, we use the notation xn to denote a sequence x1 , x2 , ..., xn . In information theory, a
stationary stochastic process un taking values in some finite alphabet U is called a source. In
communication theory we often refer to discrete memoryless sources (DMS) (Kramer et al., 2008;
Cover & Thomas, 2006). However, many signals, such as image patches, are usually modeled as
entities belonging to some probability distribution forming statistical dependencies (e.g., a Markov-
Random-Field (MRF) (Roth & Black, 2009; Weiss & Freeman, 2007)) describing the relations be-
tween data points in close spatial or temporal proximity. Here, we will briefly summarize the AEP
for ergodic sources with memory (Austin, 2017). Although the formal definition of ergodic pro-
cess is somewhat involved, the general idea is simple. In an ergodic process, every sequence that
is produced by the process is the same in statistical properties (Shannon, 1948). The symbol fre-
quencies obtained from particular sequences will approach a definite statistical limit, as the length
of the sequence is increased. More formally, we assume an ergodic source with memory that emits
n symbols from a discrete and finite alphabet U , with probability PU (u1 , u2 , ..., un ). We recall a
theorem (Breiman, 1957), here without proof.
Theorem 1 (Entropy and Ergodic Theory). Let u1 , u2 , ..., un be a stationary ergodic process ranging
over a finite alphabet U , then there is a constant H such that
                                                 1
                                  H = lim − log2 PU (u1 , ..., un ).
                                         n→∞     n
H is the entropy rate of the source.
Intuitively, when we observe a source with memory over several time units, the uncertainty grows
more slowly as n grows, because once we know the previous sources entries, the dependencies
reduce the overall conditional uncertainty. The entropy rate H, which represents the average un-
certainty per time unit, converges over time. This, of course, makes sense, as it is known that
H(X, Y ) ≤ H(X) + H(Y ). In other words, the uncertainty of a joint event is less than or equal to
the sum of the individual uncertainties. The generalization of the AEP to arbitrary ergodic sources
is as following (McMillan, 1953).
Theorem 2 (Shannon McMillan (AEP)). For ǫ > 0, the typical set Anǫ with respect to the ergodic
process PU (u) is the set of sequences u = (u1 , u2 , ..., un ) ∈ U n obeying
      1. Pr[u ∈ Anǫ ] > 1 − ǫ, for n sufficiently large.

      2. 2−n(H+ǫ) ≤ PU (u) ≤ 2−n(H−ǫ) .


                                                  2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


      3. |Anǫ | ≈ 2nH .
|A| denotes the number of elements in the set A, and Pr[A] denotes the probability of the event A .
In other words, if we draw a random sequence (u1 , u2 , ..., un ), the typical set has probability nearly
1, all elements of the typical set are nearly equally probable, and the number of elements of the
typical set is nearly 2nH . This property is called the asymptotic equipartition property (AEP). In
information theory the AEP is the analog of the law of large numbers (Cover & Thomas, 2006). The
notion of a typical sequence was first introduced in 1948 by Shannon in his paper “A Mathematical
Theory of Communication” (Shannon, 1948). Intuitively, the typical sequences un are the sequences
whose empirical probability distribution is close to PU (·).
As mentioned, the entropy rate is more often used for discrete memoryless sources (DMS), yet
“every ergodic source has the AEP” (McMillan, 1953). Note that entropy typicality applies also to
continuous random variables with a density pU replacing the discrete probability PU (un ) with the
density value pU (un ). The AEP leads to Shannon’s source coding theorem stating that the average
number of bits required to specify a symbol in a sequence of length n, when we consider only the
most probable sequences, is H. And it is the foundation for the known rate-distortion theory and
channel capacity.
The AEP property divides the space of all possible sequences into two sets: the typical set, where
the sample entropy is close to the true entropy, and the non-typical set that consists of the other
sequences. We would like to show that most of our attention should be on the typical sequences,
because any property that is true for the typical sequences will then be true with high probability
and will determine the average behavior of a large sample.
Let us assume a training set Ψ = {yi , xi }m   i=1 ,
where xi ∈ Rn×1 are sampled from Anǫ (PX )
and paired with yi ∈ Rd×1 by some function
as ground truth. The learning system is trained
to output a prediction rule F : Y d → X n . As-
sume an algorithm that trains the predictor by
minimizing the training error (empirical error
or empirical risk). Assuming a discrete source                Figure 1: The learning system problem.
PX (·) that emits i.i.d sequences xn of symbols
(for example: patches in an image, segments of
an audio signal, etc.), the estimator has access only to the observed signal y d . In an inverse problem
y d would be a degraded signal originating in xn , where the relationship between xn and y d could be
linear or non-linear, with or without additive noise, such that generally y d = g(xn ) + e(xn ), where
g(·) and e(·) are functions of xn . Given y d , we produce an estimate x̂n . However, the following
proofs are not restricted to this framework. Our problem setting is illustrated in Fig. 1. For the sake
of the following theoretical analysis we restrict the mapping F : Y d → X n to be a surjective func-
tion. Namely, for every xn , there is a y d such that f (y d ) = xn . In other words, every element xn is
the image of at least one element of y d . It is not required that y d be unique. In the presence of noise
this condition can only be met if the noise’s power is under a certain threshold. The goal is to prove
that learning with Anǫ is sufficient for generalization of the entire distribution with the same gener-
alization error. Denote a sample size |Ψ| = m that is required to train a predictor FΨ : Y d → X n ,
such that Ψ ∼ PX,Y . An algorithm minimizes the training error (empirical error or empirical risk)
                                                    m
                                               1 X
                                  LΨ (FΨ ) =         ℓ(FΨ (yi ), xi ),                                (1)
                                               m i=1

where 0 ≤ ℓ(x, x̂) ≤ 1 is some loss function. The empirical error over the training set at the end
of the training, for the specific trained predictor hΨ is LΨ (hΨ ) ≤ ∆m << 1. The true error, or the
generalization error, in this setting is

                                   L(hΨ ) = E(x,y)∼PX,Y ℓ hΨ (y), x ,                            (2)
where E(x,y)∼PX,Y (·) denotes the expectation over PX,Y .
Theorem 3 (AEP learning for systems with a surjective mapping). Assume the generalization error
of the trained predictor F : Y d → X n over the typical set Anǫ (PX ) is at most εF     A . Then, the
generalization error of the trained predictor F : Y d → X n over the entire distribution is at most εF
                                                                                                     A.


                                                    3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Theorem 4 (sample size for learning with a surjective mapping). Assume a training set that is
        by randomly drawing samples from PX and n×1
generated                                                  labeling them by the target function g(·),
Ψ = {yi , xi }m i=1  : x i ∼ P X , y i =  g(x i ), x i ∈ R    , yi ∈ Rd×1 . g(·) is a deterministic
                        −1
function, and f (·) = g (·) is a surjective function. Assume the predictor was trained successfully
to yield LΨ (hΨ ) ≤ ∆m << 1. The sample size m and the true error obey

                L(hΨ ) ≤ ∆m ,      m ≥ 2dH(Y )
                                            1−∆
                L(hΨ ) ≤ ∆,        2dH(Y )        ≤ m < 2dH(Y ) ,          ∆m ≤ ∆ ≤ 1.                  (3)
                                           1 − ∆m

In other words, as long as the sample size is larger or equal to the typical set size, we are guaranteed
to have a generalization error that is as small as the training error. Otherwise, the upper bound on
the generalization error depends on the ratio between the sample size and the input typical set size.
Theorem 5 (sample size for learning with a surjective mapping in noisy environment). Assume a
                             by randomly drawing samples from PX and labelingn×1
training set that is generated                                                         them by the target
function such that, Ψ = {yi , xi }m i=1 : xi ∼ PX ,     yi = g(xi ) + ni , xi ∈ R         , yi ∈ Rn×1 ,
where g(·) is a deterministic known or unknown function, and ni is an additive i.i.d noise ni ∼
N n (µ, σn2 ). The sample size m and the true error obey

               L(hΨ ) ≤ ∆m ,       m ≥ 2nI(X;Y )
                                            1−∆
               L(hΨ ) ≤ ∆,       2nI(X;Y )        ≤ m < 2nI(X;Y ) ,         ∆m ≤ ∆ ≤ 1,                 (4)
                                           1 − ∆m
where I(X; Y ) = H(Y ) − H(X|Y ) is the mutual information between X and Y .
Note that given EY 2 < σx2 + σn2 we know I(X; Y ) ≤ 12 log(1 + σx2 /σn2 ).
In this case, we can resolve an input yin as xni if they are jointly typical. For each (typical) output
sequence xn , there are approximately 2nH(Y |X) possible y n sequences, all of them equally likely.
We assume that no two xn sequences produce the same y n output sequence, (otherwise, we will
not be able to decide which xn sequence it originated from). Hence, the total number of possible
(typical) y n sequences is approx 2nH(Y ) . This set has to be divided into sets of size 2nH(Y |X) ,
corresponding to the different xn sequences. The total number of disjoint sets is less than or equal
to 2n(H(Y )−H(Y |X)) = 2nI(X;Y ) . Hence, we can have at most 2nI(X;Y ) distinguishable sequences of
length n. The proofs for Theorems 3-5 can be found in Appendix B.
Remark 1. Theorem 4 is a specific case of theorem 5, since in our setting, in the absence of noise
I(X; Y ) = H(Y ).
Remark 2. The theorems and their proofs can be generalized to the continuous case with Anǫ (pX )
and differential entropy h(pX ).
Remark 3. It is often possible to assume that X and Y are discrete alphabets as a result of quantiza-
tion of real values, and therefore we can discuss discrete entropy.
Remark 4. The size of the typical set is exponential by n. Therefore, one could claim the size of a
typical training set is still large relative to standard training sets that represent the entire probability
distribution. However, it is known that data compression and source coding are based on the AEP.
And though the size of the typical set is exponential by n, compression algorithms, such as JPEG
(Wallace, 1991), can compress an image by a factor of 10. In the noiseless case, there are 2n log2 r
possible output sequences, where r = |Y|. Using the AEP it should be possible to train with signif-
icantly less examples, because we only try to generalize over 2nH(Y ) possible output sequences.
Remark 5: Zontak & Irani (2011) postulate that patches of the same images are internally repeated,
but unlikely to be found in other images. This notion might appear as a contradiction to the proposed
analysis. However, note that although the probability of finding a sequence that belongs to Anǫ is
close to one, the probability of finding a specific sequence in the typical set is very small.
The AEP tells us that there exists a relatively small group of training examples that would be suffi-
cient for generalization. However, the AEP property does not define this set, nor the correct coding,
learning or prediction method. It just reassures us that there exists a set of the sort. How do we
find the typical learning set? One option may be by predefined or learned dictionary coding: build
a training set that represents the typical set, consisting of the most common structures, in a similar
manner to universal source coding based on a known dictionary (Cover & Thomas, 2006).


                                                     4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


3     P RELIMINARIES

3.1    RNN F RAMEWORK

Assume an observation data sequence y = [y0 , y1 , ..., yL−1 ], yt ∈ RN ×1 , t ∈ [0, L − 1], and
a corresponding output sequence x = [x0 , x1 , ..., xL−1 ], xt ∈ RP ×1 . The RNN forms a map
f : y → z, from the input data to the latent space variables. That is, for input yt and state zt
of time step t, the RNN output is generally formulated as zt = f (zt−1 , yt ) (Pascanu et al., 2013).
Hereafter, we will focus on the specific parametrization:
                                         T        T
                                 zt = σ(Wzy yt + Wzz zt−1 + b),                                     (5)

where σ is an activation function, Wzy ∈ RN ×nn and Wyy ∈ Rnn ×nn are weight matrices and
b ∈ Rnn ×1 is the bias vector, assuming nn number of neurons in an RNN cell. At t = 0 previous
outputs are zero. Here, we use the ReLU activation function, ReLU(z) = max{0, z}. At this stage,
we wrap the cell with a fully connected layer such that the desired final output is xt = FC(zt ).
Traditionally, RNNs are used for processing of time related signals, to predict future outcomes,
and for natural language processing tasks such as handwriting recognition (Graves et al., 2009) and
speech recognition (Graves et al., 2013). In computer vision RNNs are less popular, due to gradient
exploding and gradient vanishing issues (Pascanu et al., 2013), and their expensive computational
complexity compared to CNNs. Liang & Hu (2015) proposed the use of recurrent convolutional
networks (RCNNs) for object recognition. Pixel-RNN (Van Den Oord et al., 2016) sequentially pre-
dicts pixels in an image along the two spatial dimensions.

3.2    S PARSE C ODING & I TERATIVE S HRINKAGE A LGORITHMS

In sparse coding (SC) a signal y ∈ RN ×1 is modeled as a sparse superposition of feature vectors
(Elad, 2010; Chen et al., 2001). Formally, the observation signal obeys y = Dz, where D ∈ RN ×M
is a dictionary of M atoms di ∈ RN ×1 , i = 1, ..., M , and z ∈ RM ×1 is a sparse vector of the
atoms weights. Over the years, many efforts have been invested in sparse coding, both in a noise
free environment, or when allowing some error,
                                 min kzk1       s.t.      ky − Dzk2 ≤ ε,                            (6)
                                      z
                               pP
where kzk1 , i |zi |, kzk2 ,           2
               P
                                    i zi and ε is the residual noise or error energy. Further details
on sparse coding are in Appendix A.
Consider the cost function,
                                          1         2
                                            ky − Dzk2 + λkzk1 ,
                                      f (z) =                                              (7)
                                          2
for some scalar λ. Following Majorization Minimization (MM) strategy, we can build a surrogate
function (Daubechies et al., 2004; Elad, 2010)
                                      1         2          c             1
    Q(z, zθ ) = f (z) + d(z, zθ ) =     ky − Dzk2 + λkzk1 + kz − zθ k22 − kDz − Dzθ k22 .           (8)
                                      2                    2             2
The parameter c is chosen such that the added expression
                                                     c              1
                   d(z, zθ ) = Q(z, zθ ) − f (z) =     kz − zθ k22 − kDz − Dzθ k22                  (9)
                                                     2              2
is strictly convex, requiring its Hessian to be positive definite, cI − DT D ≻ 0. Therefore c >
kDT Dk2 = αmax (DT D), i.e., greater than the largest eigenvalue of the coherence matrix DT D.
The term d(z, zθ ) is a measure of proximity to a previous solution zθ . If the vector difference z − zθ
is spanned by D, the distance drops to nearly zero. Alternatively, if D is not full rank and the change
z − zθ is close to the null space of D, the distance is simply the approximate Euclidean distance
between the current solution to the previous one. The sequence of iterative solutions minimizing
Q(z, zθ ) instead of f (z), is generated by the recurrent formula zθ+1 = arg minz Q(z, zθ ), where
θ ∈ N is the iteration index. We can find a closed-form solution for its global minimizer that can be
intuitively viewed as an iterative projection of the dictionary on the residual term, starting from the
initial solution that is a thresholded projection of the dictionary on the observation signal (z0 = 0):


                                                     5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023



                             1                           1            1
             zθ+1 = S λ        DT (y − Dzθ ) + zθ = S λ    D T y + I − D T D zθ ,                (10)
                        c    c                        c  c            c
where the Sβ (z) = (|z| − β)+ sgn(z) is the soft threshold operator. Assuming the constant c is
large enough, it was shown in Daubechies et al. (2004), that (10) is guaranteed to converge to its
global minimum. Over time, faster extensions have been suggested, such as: Fast-ISTA (FISTA)
(Beck & Teboulle, 2009a), and Learned-ISTA (LISTA) (Gregor & LeCun, 2010),

                                  zθ+1 = S λ Wy + Szθ .                                      (11)
                                                  c

                                                              m
W and S are learned over a set  of training samples {yi , zi }i=1 . W and S re-parametrize the
matrices 1c DT and I − 1c DT D , respectively. Note that W and S are no longer constrained by D.

4    RNN A NALYZED VIA S PARSE C ODING
Observing the similar structure of (5) and (11), we redefine the cost function (7)
                                             1            2
                                 f (zt ) =     kyt − Dzt k2 + λkzt k1 .                          (12)
                                             2
Now, building a surrogate function
                                       1              2            c                 1
Q(zt , zt−1 ) = f (zt )+d(zt , zt−1 ) =  kyt − Dzt k2 +λkzt k1 + kzt −zt−1 k22 − kDzt −Dzt−1 k22 ,
                                       2                          2                  2
                                                                                                (13)
where the added term d(zt , zt−1 ) represents the distance between the current solution and the pre-
vious solution at the preceding time step (rather than the previous iteration), yields
                                         1
                              zt = S λ      DT (yt − Dzt−1 ) + zt−1 ,                           (14)
                                      c   c
which in its learned version can be re-parametrized as,

                                                T          T
                                  zt = Sβ Wzy      yt + Wzz  zt−1 .                             (15)

Clearly, (15) is equivalent to (5). In other words, a RNN can be viewed as unfolding of one iteration
of a learned sparse coder, based on an assumption that the solution at time t is close to the solution
in time t − 1. In subsection 3.1, the RNN state encodes the vector to a latent space. Then the FC net
decodes the latent variable back to a space of the required dimensions. Given this interpretation, it
may be claimed that RNN’s use should not be restricted to data with obvious time or depth relations.
The RNN merely serves as an encoder providing a rough estimation of the sparse code of the input
data. The RNN’s memory serves the optimization process by starting the computation from a closer
solution. Thus placing the initial solution in a “close neighborhood” or close proximity, and help-
ing the optimization gravitate more easily towards the latent space sparse approximation. Clearly,
convergence is not guaranteed.

5    F EW S HOT L EARNING VIA RNN
The setting described in this subsection has been previously employed for various applications.
Biswas et al. (2018) and Pereg et al. (2020a) used a similar framework to facilitate automatic ve-
locity analysis, where they used a portion of the acquired data for training and let the system infer
the rest of the missing velocities. Pereg et al. (2020b) used a similar framework to perform seis-
mic inversion with synthetic training data. Here, we expand and elaborate its application, while
connecting it to the theoretical intuition in Section 2. The description below is formulated for two-
dimensional (2D) input signals, but can be easily adapted to other input data dimensions. We use
similar definitions and notations as previously described in (Pereg et al., 2020a;b).
Definition 1 (Analysis Patch): We define an analysis patch as a 2D patch of size Lt × N enclosing
Lt time (depth) samples of N consecutive neighboring columns of the observed image S ∈ RLr ×J .
Assume {nL , nR ∈ N : nL + nR = N − 1}. The analysis patch A(i,j) associated with an image
point at location (i, j), such that element (k, l) of A(i,j) is
                    (i,j)
                  Ak,l = {Si+k,j+l : k, l ∈ Z, 1 − Lt ≤ k ≤ 0, −nL ≤ l ≤ nR }.


                                                      6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


An analysis patch A(i,j) ∈ RLt ×N is associated with a pixel Ri,j in the output image. To produce
a point in the estimated R̂i,j , we set an input to the RNN as y = A(i,j) . Each time step input
is a group of N neighboring pixels of the same corresponding time (depth). In other words, in
                                                                  T
our application yt = [Si−Lt +1+t,j−nL , ..., Si−Lt +1+t,j+nR ] . We set the size of the output vector
xt to one expected pixel (P = 1), such that x is expected to be the corresponding segment, x =
                           T
  Ri−(Lt −1),j , ..., Ri,j . Lastly, we ignore the first Lt −1 values of the output x and set the predicted
pixel R̂i,j as the last one, xLt . The analysis patch moves through the input image and produces
all expected output points in the same manner. Each analysis patch and a corresponding output
vector are an instance for the net. The size and shape of the analysis patch defines the geometrical
distribution of columns and samples that are considered in each output point computation.
Note that, in the above framework the number of hidden units is typically much larger than the
dimension of the input, nn >> N , (N << M ). The dimension of the latent space can be 3 orders
of magnitude larger than the input space dimension. In accordance with that, it has been observed
that over-parametrized neural networks generalize better (Neyshabur et al., 2018) and that dictionary
recovery may be facilitated with over-realized models (Sulam et al., 2022).
RFN-RNN. Employing one projection assuming xt−1 is close to xt may throw us far away from
the desired solution. RFN (Pereg et al., 2021) refers to local signal normalization, in an attempt
to find the detected features’ support in fewer iterations, by avoiding the liability of unbalanced
energy. Since the RNN is essentially a sparse solver, we propose to apply 2D-RFN, prior to applying
the RNN. We then multiply the latent space support normalized weights by the non-normalized
projection of the learned dictionary on the original input signal to regain the local energy. Appendix
C describes 2D-RFN, and provides the proposed method’s forward pass in Algorithm 1. The RFN
signal’s distribution is confined to a smaller set of values. Thus, RFN decreases the signal’s entropy
and the size of the typical set associated with the input distribution.


6     N UMERICAL E XPERIMENTS

6.1   C ASE S TUDY: I MAGE D EBLURRING

We studied the RNN framework in Section 5 and Algorithm 1 (RNN-RFN) for Gaussian deblurring.
First, we follow the same Gaussian deblurring experiment performed in Romano et al. (2017), using
the set of natural images provided by the authors. All pixel values are in the range of [0,255]. The
images were convolved with a 2D Gaussian PSF 25×25 with standard deviation of 1.6. RGB images
are converted to YCbCr color-space. Inversion is applied to the luminance channel, and the result
is converted back to the RGB domain. As a figure of merit, we used the peak signal to noise ratio
(PSNR) and the SSIM, both computed on the estimated luminance channel of the ground truth and
the estimated image. We investigated the basic RNN and RNN-RFN frameworks,     √     and studied the
effect of different training and testing images, with additive WGN with σn = 2.
For each experiment, we used one of the images for training and the remaining 9 images for testing.
The assumption that the latent space representation is sparse was verified in the numerical experi-
ments. Table 1 presents the optimal PSNR and SSIM scores obtained for each image, and compares
the PSNR scores to state-of-the-art image deblurring methods: FISTA (Beck & Teboulle, 2009b),
NCSR (Dong et al., 2013) and RED (Romano et al., 2017). Note that most deblurring methods re-
quire prior knowledge of the degradation process. Whereas the proposed approach requires only one
example of the degraded image and its corresponding ground truth. The best scores were obtained
by training with either one of the images: butterfly, boats, parrot, starfish and peppers. Hence, it
is safe to assume that the patches in these images reliably represent the typical set associated with
natural images to a certain degree. Figures 2-3 present examples of the proposed methods. Fig-
ure 6 show the evolution
                     √ of the PSNR scores for RNN and RNN-RFN with increasing additive noise
variance σn ∈ [0, 10 2] . As the noise level is increased RFN suppresses noise better. Additional
examples and training details are in Appendix D.1.
At this stage, we are not suggesting that the results are competitive with state-of-the-art denois-
ers. Currently, the main advantage is substantial speed. Tensorflow (Abadi et al., 2016) imple-
mentation converges in about 1700 iterations in an average of 14.29 seconds on a laptop GPU
(NVIDIA GeForce GTX Ti 1650 with 4GB video memory) and 2.01 minutes on i-7 CPU. Pytorch


                                                    7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


        (a)                   (b)                  (c)                   (d)                  (e)
Figure 2: Visual comparison of deblurring of the image starfish: (a) Ground truth; (b) input, 24.8dB; (c)
RED-SD, PSNR=32.42dB; (d) RNN 29.18dB; (e) RNN-RFN, 28.45dB.


        (a)                   (b)                  (c)                   (d)                  (e)
Figure 3: Visual comparison of deblurring of the parrot image: (a) Ground truth; (b) input, 25.33dB; (c)
RED-SD, PSNR=33.18dB; (d) RNN 30.10dB; (e) RNN-RFN, 29.64dB;

(Paszke et al., 2019) implementation training converges in 40 epochs on average in 30.73 seconds
on a GPU NVIDIA GeForce RTX 2080 Ti, and 2.73 minutes on i-7 CPU. Inference takes ∼500
msec. For reference, RED-SD takes 15-20 minutes of processing for each image, on a CPU.
As the focus of this study is to bridge between theory and application for few-shot learning, and
to provide theoretical justifications, rather than to achieve state-of-the-art results, we verified the
theoretical results in Theorem 5 for the image deblurring case. To this end, we trained the RNN
network with varying sample sizes while trying to keep a constant training error, LΨ (hΨ ) ≤ ∆m .
The training data consists of patches belonging to a single image (starfish). We consider the recovery
error, denoted as L̂(hΨ ), over the other non-training 9 images as an empirical approximation for the
generalization error. Figure 9 shows the evolution of the recovery error with increasing sample size
chosen uniformly in the range [1, 61752]. Evidently, L̂(hΨ ) ≥ LΨ (hΨ ), while LΨ (hΨ ) ≤ ∆m , which
implies that m < 2I(X;Y ) . In this region L(hΨ ) ≤ 1 − m2−nI(X;Y ) (1 − ∆m ) ≤ ∆ (see proof). Hence,
empirically we can deduce I(X; Y ) ≥ 0.33. Our code will be available upon acceptance.

6.2   C ASE S TUDY: OCT S PECKLE S UPPRESSION

OCT uses low coherence interferometry to produce cross-sectional tomographic images of internal
structure of biological tissue. It is routinely used for diagnostic imaging of the anterior eye, the
retina, and, through a fiber-optic catheter, the coronary arteries. Unfortunately, OCT images are
degraded by the presence of speckle (Schmitt et al., 1999; Goodman, 2007), which appear as grain-
like structures in the image, with a size equivalent to the nominal spatial resolution of the OCT
system. Speckle significantly degrade images and complicate interpretation and medical diagnosis
by confounding tissue anatomy and masking changes in tissue scattering properties. Though speckle
share many statistical properties with noise, it is essentially unresolved spatial information as a result
of the interference of many sub-resolution spaced scatterers (Curatolo et al., 2013).
Here, we show two examples of supervised learning speckle suppression with OCT experimental
data, for demonstration. We used intensity OCT tomograms displaying the log-scaled squared norm
of the complex-valued tomogram. As ground truth for training and for evaluation of the general-
ization, we used hardware-based speckle mitigation obtained by dense angular compounding, in
a method similar to Desjardins et al. (2007). We investigated two challenging cases of mismatch
between the training data and the testing data: (1) Tissue type mismatch. (2) Tissue type and ac-
quisition system mismatch. Namely, in the first case, OCT tomograms of chicken tissue and a
blueberry were acquired by the same system and used as training image and testing image, respec-
tively. Whereas, in the second case, the training image was a tomogram of chicken-skin acquired
by one system, and the learning performance was tested on a tomogram of cucumber imaged with a
different OCT system. Further details are in Appendix D.2.


                                                    8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


         (a)                    (b)                   (c)                    (d)                   (e)
Figure 4: OCT speckle suppression with tissue mismatch and identical imaging system: Training images:
(a) Chicken muscle with speckle (PSNR = 26.03 dB); (b) Ground truth, speckle-suppressed tomogram; (c)
Blueberry with (PSNR = 21.39 dB) and (d) without speckle (ground truth); (e) Predicted speckle-suppressed
tomogram (PSNR=31.1dB). Scale bars: 200µm.


         (a)                    (b)                   (c)                    (d)                   (e)
Figure 5: OCT speckle suppression with tissue and system mismatch: Training images: (a) Chicken skin with
speckle (PSNR = 28.96 dB); (b) Ground truth, speckle-suppressed tomogram; (c) Cucumber with (PSNR =
29.40 dB) and (d) without speckle (ground truth), imaged with inferior lateral resolution and lower lateral sam-
pling than training image; (e) Predicted speckle-suppressed tomogram (PSNR=31.34dB). Scale bars: 200µm.

Figures 4(a)-(b) show the speckle-corrupted and speckle-suppressed tomograms of chicken tissue
used for training. The speckle-suppressed tomogram in Fig. 4(b) has a homogeneous appearance,
whereas the speckled signal in Fig. 4(a) is strongly textured, exhibiting a grainy pattern with spots of
bright, high intensity signal, alternating with regions of very low signal. Figures 4(c)-(d) show the
speckle-corrupted and speckle-suppressed tomograms of the blueberry used for testing. As shown in
the inferred result in Fig. 4(e), the system is able to significantly reduce speckle while maintaining
spatial resolution, despite the structural differences between the training and the testing images.
Figures 5(a)-(b) show the original and compounded tomograms of chicken skin used for training.
Visibly the training data is non-stationary and of complex structure. Figures 5(c)-(d) show the orig-
inal and compounded tomograms of cucumber used for testing. The cucumber image was acquired
with a different sample objective lens resulting in twice poorer lateral resolution. The lateral sam-
pling space was increased from 2.5µm to 8µm, resulting in system mismatch between training and
testing data, in addition to the tissue mismatch. As can be seen, the learning system is able to de-
tect most features and to significantly remove speckle. Horizontal lines appear slightly sharper than
vertical ones.
Computational resources. The proposed framework training time is only 35.00 seconds on a stan-
dard CPU workstation equipped with an Intel(R) Core(TM) i7 -7820HQ CPU @ 2.30 GHz, or
alternatively 4.56 seconds on average on a laptop GPU NVIDIA GeForce GTX Ti 1650 with 4GB
video memory, and converges typically in less than 700 iterations.


7    C ONCLUSIONS

”The curse of dimensionality can be viewed either as the limitation on data analysis due to the
large amount of data or parameters needed to analyze the data” (Bengio et al., 2007). In this work,
we investigated the properties of the AEP in the context of supervised learning, and its practical
ramifications in relieving computational complexity in learning systems. We focused on a RNN
framework as a powerful tool for learning with limited training data. The low computational com-
plexity can be leveraged for medical areas where there is lack of data and resources. Future work
could extend the proposed work to other tasks and applications in other domains. Our future work
will extend the AEP hypothesis to the automatic design of the AEP training dataset for unsupervised
medical imaging learning tasks.


                                                       9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


R EFERENCES
Martı́n Abadi, Paul Barham, Jianmin Chen, Zhifeng Chen, Andy Davis, Jeffrey Dean, Matthieu
 Devin, Sanjay Ghemawat, Geoffrey Irving, Michael Isard, and et al. Tensorflow: A system for
 large-scale machine learning. In Symposium on Operating Systems Design and Implementation,
 pp. 265–283, 2016.
Tim   Austin.       Entropy  and  ergodic theory,                        2017.               URL
  https://www.math.ucla.edu/˜tim/entropy_21.pdf.
Randall Balestriero, Jerome Pesenti, and Yann LeCun. Learning in high dimension always amounts
  to extrapolation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.09485, 2021.
Amir Beck and Marc Teboulle. A fast iterative shrinkage-thresholding algorithm for linear inverse
 problems. SIAM J. Img. Sci., 2(1):183–202, March 2009a.
Amir Beck and Marc Teboulle. Fast gradient-based algorithms for constrained total variation image
 denoising and deblurring problems. IEEE transactions on image processing, 18(11):2419–2434,
 2009b.
T. Bendory, S. Dekel A. Bar-Zion, and A. Feuer. Stable support recovery of stream of pulses with
   application to ultrasound imaging. IEEE Transaction on Signal Processing, 64(14):3750 – 3759,
   2016.
Yoshua Bengio. Learning deep architectures for AI. Found. Trends Mach. Learn., 2(1), 2009.
Yoshua Bengio, Yann LeCun, et al. Scaling learning algorithms towards AI. Large-scale kernel
  machines, 34(5):1–41, 2007.
Reetam Biswas, Anthony Vassiliou, Rodney Stromberg, and Mrinal K. Sen. Stacking velocity esti-
  mation using recurrent neural network. In SEG Technical Program Expanded Abstracts 2018, pp.
  2241–2245, 2018.
Léon Bottou, Olivier Chapelle, Dennis DeCoste, and Jason Weston. Scaling Learning Algorithms
   toward AI, pp. 321–359. 2007.
Leo Breiman. The individual ergodic theorem of information theory. The Annals of Mathematical
  Statistics, 28(3):809–811, 1957.
Emmanuel J. Candès, Yonina C. Eldar, Deanna Needell, and Paige Randall. Compressed sensing
  with coherent and redundant dictionaries. Applied and Computational Harmonic Analysis, 31(1):
  59 – 73, 2011.
S. S. Chen, D. L. Donoho, and M. A. Saunders. Atomic decomposition by basis pursuit. SIAM Rev.,
   43(1):129–159, 2001.
Thomas M. Cover and Joy A. Thomas. Elements of Information Theory (Wiley Series in Telecom-
  munications and Signal Processing). Wiley-Interscience, USA, 2006.
Andrea Curatolo, Brendan F Kennedy, David D Sampson, and TR Hillman. Speckle in optical
  coherence tomography. Taylor & Francis, 2013.
I. Daubechies, M. Defrise, and C. De Mol. An iterative thresholding algorithm for linear inverse
   problems with a sparsity constraint. Communications on Pure and Applied Mathematics, 57(11):
   1413–1457, 2004.
A. E. Desjardins, B. J. Vakoc, W. Y. Oh, S. M. R. Motaghiannezam, G. J. Tearney, and B. E. Bouma.
  Angle-resolved optical coherence tomography with sequential angular selectivity for speckle re-
  duction. Opt. Express, 15(10):6200–6209, May 2007.
Weisheng Dong, Lei Zhang, Guangming Shi, and Xin Li. Nonlocally centralized sparse representa-
 tion for image restoration. IEEE Transactions on Image Processing, 22(4):1620–1630, 2013.
D.L. Donoho. Compressed sensing. IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, 52(4):1289–1306,
  2006.


                                               10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


M. Elad. Sparse and Redundant Representations. Springer, 2010.

Aurélien Géron. Hands-on machine learning with Scikit-Learn and TensorFlow : concepts, tools,
  and techniques to build intelligent systems. O’Reilly Media, 2017.

J.W. Goodman. Speckle phenomena in optics: theory and applications. Englewood, Colo, Roberts
  & Co, 2007.

Alex Graves, Marcus Liwicki, Santiago Fernández, Roman Bertolami, Horst Bunke, and Jürgen
  Schmidhuber. A novel connectionist system for unconstrained handwriting recognition. IEEE
  Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 31(5):855–868, 2009. doi: 10.1109/
  TPAMI.2008.137.

Alex Graves, Abdel-rahman Mohamed, and Geoffrey Hinton. Speech recognition with deep recur-
  rent neural networks. In 2013 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal
  Processing, pp. 6645–6649, 01 2013.

Robert M Gray. Entropy and information theory. Springer Science & Business Media, 2011.

Karol Gregor and Yann LeCun. Learning fast approximations of sparse coding. In Proceedings of the
  27th International Conference on International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 399–406.
  Omnipress, 2010.

Sepp Hochreiter and Jürgen Schmidhuber. Long short-term memory. Neural Computation, 9(8):
  1735–1780, 1997.

K. Jarrett, K. Kavukcuoglu, M. Ranzato, and Y. LeCun. What is the best multi-stage architecture
  for object recognition? In 2009 IEEE 12th International Conference on Computer Vision, pp.
  2146–2153, 2009.

Gerhard Kramer et al. Topics in multi-user information theory. Foundations and Trends in Commu-
  nications and Information Theory, 4(4–5):265–444, 2008.

Honglak Lee, Roger Grosse, Rajesh Ranganath, and Andrew Y. Ng. Convolutional Deep Belief Net-
  works for Scalable Unsupervised Learning of Hierarchical Representations, pp. 609–616. ACM
  New York, 2009.

Ming Liang and Xiaolin Hu. Recurrent convolutional neural network for object recognition. In 2015
 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 3367–3375, 2015.

Brockway McMillan. The basic theorems of information theory. The Annals of mathematical statis-
  tics, pp. 196–219, 1953.

B. K. Natarajan. Sparse approximate solutions to linear systems. SIAM J. Comput., 24(2):227–234,
  1995.

Behnam Neyshabur, Zhiyuan Li, Srinadh Bhojanapalli, Yann LeCun, and Nathan Srebro. To-
  wards understanding the role of over-parametrization in generalization of neural networks. CoRR,
  abs/1805.12076, 2018. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1805.12076.

Bruno Olshausen and David Field. Emergence of simple-cell receptive field properties by learning
  a sparse code for natural images. Nature, 381:607–9, 07 1996.

Vardan Papyan, Yaniv Romano, and Michael Elad. Convolutional neural networks analyzed via
  convolutional sparse coding. J. Mach. Learn. Res., 18(1):2887–2938, January 2017. ISSN 1532-
  4435.

Razvan Pascanu, Tomas Mikolov, and Yoshua Bengio. On the difficulty of training recurrent neural
  networks. In Proceedings of the 30th International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 28
  of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 1310–1318, Atlanta, Georgia, USA, 17–19
  Jun 2013.


                                               11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Adam Paszke, Sam Gross, Francisco Massa, Adam Lerer, James Bradbury, Gregory Chanan, Trevor
  Killeen, Zeming Lin, Natalia Gimelshein, Luca Antiga, Alban Desmaison, Andreas Kopf, Edward
  Yang, Zachary DeVito, Martin Raison, Alykhan Tejani, Sasank Chilamkurthy, Benoit Steiner,
  Lu Fang, Junjie Bai, and Soumith Chintala. Pytorch: An imperative style, high-performance
  deep learning library. In H. Wallach, H. Larochelle, A. Beygelzimer, F. d AlchBuc, E. Fox, and
  R. Garnett (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 32, pp. 8024–8035. 2019.
Deborah Pereg and Israel Cohen. Seismic signal recovery based on earth Q model. Signal Process-
  ing, 137:373 – 386, 2017. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.sigpro.2017.02.016.
Deborah Pereg, Israel Cohen, and Anthony A Vassiliou. Multichannel sparse spike inversion. Jour-
  nal of Geophysics and Engineering, 14(5):1290–1299, 09 2017.
Deborah Pereg, Israel Cohen, and Anthony A. Vassiliou. Three-dimensional sparse seismic decon-
  volution based on earth Q model. Signal Processing, 154:97 – 107, 2019.
Deborah Pereg, Israel Cohen, and Anthony A. Vassiliou. Sparse seismic deconvolution via recurrent
  neural network. Journal of Applied Geophysics, 175:103979, 2020a. ISSN 0926-9851.
Deborah Pereg, Israel Cohen, Anthony A. Vassiliou, and Rod Stromberg. Prestack time migration
  velocity analysis using recurrent neural networks. Journal of Applied Geophysics, 181:104160,
  2020b. ISSN 0926-9851.
Deborah Pereg, Israel Cohen, and Anthony A. Vassiliou. Convolutional sparse coding fast approxi-
  mation with application to seismic reflectivity estimation. IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and
  Remote Sensing, pp. 1–19, 2021. doi: 10.1109/TGRS.2021.3105300.
Yaniv Romano, Michael Elad, and Peyman Milanfar. The little engine that could: Regularization by
  denoising (red). SIAM Journal on Imaging Sciences, 10(4):1804–1844, 2017.
Stefan Roth and Michael J Black. Fields of experts. International Journal of Computer Vision, 82
  (2):205–229, 2009.
Joseph M. Schmitt, S. H. Xiang, and Kin Man Yung. Speckle in optical coherence tomography.
  Journal of Biomedical Optics, 4, 1999.
Shai Shalev-Shwartz and Shai Ben-David. Understanding Machine Learning - From Theory to
  Algorithms. Cambridge University Press, 2014.
Claude Elwood Shannon. A mathematical theory of communication. The Bell System Technical
  Journal, 27:379–423, 1948.
Emma Strubell, Ananya Ganesh, and Andrew McCallum. Energy and policy considerations for
  modern deep learning research. Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence,
  34(09):13693–13696, Apr. 2020.
Jeremias Sulam, Chong You, and Zhihui Zhu. Recovery and generalization in over-realized
   dictionary learning. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 23(135):1–23, 2022. URL
   http://jmlr.org/papers/v23/20-1360.html.
Aäron Van Den Oord, Nal Kalchbrenner, and Koray Kavukcuoglu. Pixel recurrent neural networks.
  In International conference on machine learning, pp. 1747–1756. PMLR, 2016.
Vladimir N. Vapnik. The Nature of Statistical Learning Theory. Springer, 1999.
Pascal Vincent, Hugo Larochelle, Yoshua Bengio, and Pierre-Antoine Manzagol. Extracting and
  composing robust features with denoising autoencoders. ICML ’08, pp. 1096–1103, New York,
  NY, USA, 2008. Association for Computing Machinery.
Gregory K Wallace. The jpeg still picture compression standard. Communications of the ACM, 34
  (4):30–44, 1991.
Yair Weiss and William T Freeman. What makes a good model of natural images? In 2007 IEEE
  Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 1–8. IEEE, 2007.


                                               12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Chiyuan Zhang, Samy Bengio, Moritz Hardt, Benjamin Recht, and Oriol Vinyals. Understanding
  deep learning (still) requires rethinking generalization. Communications of the ACM, 64(3):107–
  115, 2021.
Maria Zontak and Michal Irani. Internal statistics of a single natural image. In CVPR 2011, pp.
 977–984, 2011. doi: 10.1109/CVPR.2011.5995401.


A    S PARSE R EPRESENTATIONS
Sparse coding (SC) is a popular task in many fields, such as: image processing (Elad, 2010),
computer vision (Jarrett et al., 2009), compressed sensing (Donoho, 2006), ultrasound imaging
(Bendory et al., 2016), seismology (Pereg & Cohen, 2017; Pereg et al., 2017; 2019; 2021), and vi-
sual neurosciense (Olshausen & Field, 1996; Lee et al., 2009).
A sparse representations model (Elad, 2010) assumes a signal y ∈ Rd×1 that is analyzed as a sparse
linear combination of some dictionary basis components:
                                                 y = Dz,                                        (16)
              d×M                                                                         d×1
where D ∈ R         is a matrix called the dictionary, built of the atoms di ∈ R , i = 1, ..., M , as
its columns, and z ∈ RM ×1 is the sparse vector of the atoms weights. Sparse coding, that is, the
recovery of z, has been the center of tremendous research efforts. Finding the sparsest solution, the
one with the smallest ℓ0 -norm, is basically attempting to solve
                            (P0 ) :         min kzk0            s.t.       y = Dz,              (17)
                                             z

where kzk0 denotes the number of non-zeros in z. Unfortunately, P0 is in general NP-Hard
(Natarajan, 1995), therefore the ℓ0 -norm is often replaced with the ℓ1 -norm
                            (P1 ) :         min kzk1            s.t.       y = Dz,              (18)
                                             z

where kzk1 , i |zi |. In many real-life scenarios, such as in the presence of noise or when some
                P
error is allowed, we solve
                       (P1,ε ) :       min kzk1              s.t.        ky − Dzk2 ≤ ε,         (19)
                                        z
                pP
where kzk2 ,            2
                    i zi . The sparsest solution to P0 and P1 is unique under certain conditions,
and can be obtained with known algorithms, such as orthonormal matching pursuit (OMP) or basis
pursuit (BP),         on the dictionary’s properties and the degree of sparsity of z. That is, when
            depending
                 1
kzk0 < 21 1 + µ(D)    , where µ(D) is the mutual coherence defined as

                                                                dTi dj
                                      µ(D) = max                            ,                   (20)
                                                 i6=j   kdi k2 · kdj k2
the true sparse code z can be perfectly recovered (Candès et al., 2011).
An intuitive way to recover z is to project y on the dictionary, and then extract the atoms with the
strongest response by taking a hard or a soft threshold, i.e., z = Hβ (DT y) or z = Sβ (DT y), where
the hard threshold and the soft threshold operators are respectively defined as
                                                                 
                                                                 z + β, z < −β
                             z, |z| > β
                 Hβ (z) =                  , and Sβ (z) = 0,               |z| ≤ β .
                             0, |z| ≤ β
                                                                   z − β, z > β
                                                                 

Note that the ReLU activation function obeys

                                                                             0,       z≤β
                  ReLU(z − β) = max(z − β, 0) = Sβ+ (z) ,                                 .
                                                                             z − β,   z>β
Therefore, the soft threshold solution can be also written as
           z = Sβ+ (DT y) − Sβ+ (−DT y) = ReLU(DT y − β) − ReLU(−DT y − β).


                                                        13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


It is possible to assume a nonnegative sparse code such that the weights are solely positive, es-
sentially assuming a compounded dictionary [D, −D] (Papyan et al., 2017). Hence a nonnegative
model does not affect the expressiveness
                                         of the model. Perfect
                                                               support recovery by simple threshold-
                                     1        1 |z|min
ing is guaranteed only when kzk0 < 2 1 + µ(D) |z|max , where |z|min , and |z|max are the minimum
and maximum values of the vector |z| on the support, implying that this approach may have stability
issues when the data is unbalanced.
In the special case where D is a convolutional dictionary, the task of extracting z is referred to as
convolutional sparse coding (CSC). In this case, the dictionary D is a convolutional matrix con-
structed by shifting a local matrix of filters in all possible positions. Papyan et al. (2017) show that
the forward pass of CNNs is equivalent to the layered thresholding algorithm designed to solve the
CSC problem.


B     P ROOFS

B.1   P ROOF OF T HEOREM 3

We assume a training set Ψ, where {xi }m                          n
                                          i=1 are sampled from Aǫ (PX ) and labeled by some function
as ground truth, Ψ = {{yi , xi }m
                                i=1 : x i ∈ A n
                                              ǫ (P X )}. The output of a predictor F : Y → X . Assume
an algorithm that minimizes the training error (empirical error or empirical risk)
                                                   m
                                             1 X
                                  LΨ (FΨ ) =       ℓ(FΨ (xi ), yi )                                 (21)
                                             m i=1


Assuming a discrete source PX (·) that emits i.i.d sequences xn of symbols (for example: patches
in an image, segments of an audio signal, etc.). The estimator has access only to the observed
signal y d . (In an inverse problem y d would be a degraded signal originating in xn , where the
relationship between xn and y d could be linear or non-linear, deterministic or stochastic. Generally,
y d = g(xn ) + e(xn ).) Given y d , we produce an estimate x̂n . However the following proof is
not restricted to this framework. For the sake of the following theoretical analysis we restrict the
mapping F : Y d → X n to be a surjective function. In other words, for every xn , there is a y d such
that f (y d ) = xn . In other words, every element xn is the image of at least one element of y d . It is
not required that y d be unique. In the presence of noise this condition can only be met if the noise’s
power is under a certain threshold. The goal is to prove that learning with Anǫ (PX ) is equivalent to
training with the entire distribution with the same generalization error.
A sequence y d of symbols is passed to the learning system. For example, it is possible that this
system is built as an encoder-decoder, such that the encoder “compresses” y d into a latent space
representation vector z k and sends z k into the decoder. The decoder reconstructs xn from z k , as
x̂n (z k ). Generally speaking, the predictor reconstruct x̂n from y d and is said to be successful if
x̂n = xn . We consider the case where every source sequence xn is assigned a unique z k . Therefore
one can reconstruct xn perfectly. Note that the same latent space z k can represent different observed
sequences y d . This assumption is true if and only if the mapping F : Y d → X n is unique. In other
words, every xn can be mapped to more than one y d , but every y d can only be mapped to one xn .
The goal is to prove that learning by training over the typical set Anǫ (PX ) is sufficient.
Denote A = {xn : xn ∈ Anǫ (PX )}, B = {xn : xn ∈           / Anǫ (PX )}, |B| = δǫ (n). We train the
                                        d  n m       n
predictor with a training set ΨA = {{yi , xi }i=1 : xi ∈ A}, such that the generalization error (risk)
over xn ∈ A is at most εF                                 d      n d       n
                          A . Now, given some test input y , if x (y ) ∈ Aǫ (PX ) the encoder passes
to the decoder the z that represents this sequence. In the general case, the predictor deciphers y d
                     k

as trained by generalization. However if xn (y d ) ∈
                                                   / Anǫ (PX ) we can assume some unknown output
x̂ (the encoder sends to the decoder some unknown z k generated by the trained learning system),
  n

with error εF
            B . The average error is upperbounded by

           L(hΨ ) ≤ P r{xn ∈ Anǫ (PX )}εF        n
                                        A + P r{x ∈/ Anǫ (PX )}εF    F          F
                                                                B ≤ εA + δǫ (n)εB .                 (22)

But since δǫ (n) → 0 as n → ∞, we have L(hΨ ) ≤ εF
                                                 A.


                                                   14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


An alternative way to derive the same result is as following. The generalization error of the trained
predictor hΨ is
                                                       X
           L(hΨ ) = E(x,y)∼PX,Y ℓ hΨ (y), x =                 PX,Y (x, y) ℓ hΨ (y), x
                                                          (x,y)∼PX,Y
                        X                X
                   =           PX (x)             PY |X (y|x) ℓ hΨ (y), x
                       x∼PX             y∼PY |X
                           X                  X
                                                       PY |X (y|x) ℓ hΨ (y), x = LA (hΨ ) ≤ εF

                   =                PX (x)                                                   A,
                       x∈An
                          ǫ (PX )            y∼PY |X

where LA (hΨ ) denotes the generalization error over the typical set Anǫ (PX ). The third equality
follows from P r[xn ∈ Anǫ (PX )] = 1. Throughout the proofs we sometimes omit the superscript n
for simplicity. Note that this derivation is symmetric for x and y, therefore it is possible to build a
training set by drawing samples y d ∈ Adǫ (PY ) and pairing them with the corresponding xn , under
the assumption that the mapping F : Y d → X n is a surjective function. Alternatively, it is possible
to define the jointly typical set B = {(xn , y d ) : (xn , y d ) ∈ An,d
                                                                    ǫ (PX,Y ), y
                                                                                 n
                                                                                    ∈ Adǫ (PY ), xn ∈
Anǫ (PX )} and assume the training input-output pairs are drawn from B.

B.2   P ROOF OF T HEOREM 4

Assume a supervised learning algorithm with a training set Ψ, sampled from an unknown distribu-
tion PX and paired with y by some target function g(·), to learn a predictor hΨ : Y d → X n . (Here,
the subscript Ψ emphasizes that the output predictor depends on Ψ.) The goal of the algorithm is
to find FΨ that minimizes the error with respect to the unknown PX,Y (·) over X n × Y d . Since the
learner does not know PX,Y (·), the true error is not available to the learner. A useful notion of error
that can be calculated by the learner is the training error (the error over the training sample), a.k.a
the empirical error or empirical risk,
                                                         m
                                                 1 X
                                        LΨ (h) =       ℓ h(xi ), yi                                   (23)
                                                 m i=1

where m = |Ψ| and ℓ(x, x̂) is some loss function, such as: MSE, ℓ1 norm, etc. The training sample
is only a glimpse into the world that is available to the learner. This learning paradigm coming up
with a predictor that minimizes LΨ (FΨ ) is called Empirical Risk Minimization or ERM for short
(Shalev-Shwartz & Ben-David, 2014). We define the true error, or the generalization error, in our
framework as
                                L(hΨ ) = E(x,y)∼PX,Y ℓ hΨ (y), x ,                             (24)
where E(x,y)∼PX,Y (·) denotes the expectation over PX,Y .
Let the learner’s output sequence x ∈ Rn×1 be a finite sequence whose i’th entry xi takes on values
in a discrete and finite alphabet X . We write X n for the Cartesian product of the set X with itself n
times. In other words, our hypothesis class H obeys H = {h : Y d → X n }. For a training sample Ψ
the trained predictor hΨ , minimizing (23),
                                             hΨ ∈ arg min LΨ (h)
                                                         h∈H

Assume the predictor was trained successfully to yield LΨ (hΨ ) ≤ ∆m << 1. Recall the sequences
that serve as the examples in the training set are independently and identically distributed (i.i.d.).
We are interested in finding the sample size of m sequences of instances that will lead to a bounded
generalization error for the specific trained predictor, L(hΨ ) ≤ ∆. Namely,
                                                    X
             L(hΨ ) = E(x,y)∼PX,Y ℓ hΨ (y), x =            PX,Y (x, y) ℓ hΨ (y), x
                                                              x,y
                           X                                        X
                       =       PY (y) ℓ hΨ (y), f (y) =                    PY (y) ℓ hΨ (y), f (y) ,
                           y                                  y∈Ad
                                                                 ǫ (PY )


the second equation follows from P (X, Y ) = P (Y )P (X|Y ). Recall that we assumed g(·) is a
deterministic function, and that f (·) is a subjective function, therefore P (X = f (y)|Y = y) = 1.


                                                         15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


And the third equation follows from P r[y d ∈ Adǫ ] = 1. If m ≥ 2dH(Y ) , and since |Adǫ (PY )| =
2dH(Y ) , and PY (y d ) = 2−dH(Y ) , then clearly L(hΨ ) = LΨ (hΨ ) ≤ ∆m . Otherwise, m < 2dH(Y )
and
                       L(hΨ ) ≤ (2dH(Y ) − m)2−dH(Y ) + m∆m 2−dH(Y ) ≤ ∆,
where we have used the fact that l(x, x̂) ≤ 1. We now have
                                   1 − m2−dH(Y ) (1 − ∆m ) ≤ ∆,                                   (25)
And since ∆m << 1,
                                       1−∆
                        m ≥ 2dH(Y )          ≈ 2dH(Y ) (1 − ∆)(1 + ∆m ),                          (26)
                                      1 − ∆m
or approximately
                                        m ≥ 2dH(Y ) (1 − ∆).                                      (27)
Equivalently,
                                                 m
                                    ∆≥1−                 (1 − ∆m ).                               (28)
                                               2dH(Y )
Hence the ratio between the sample size and the input data typical set determines the upper bound
on the generalization error.

B.3   P ROOF OF T HEOREM 5

Since y = g(x) + n, each of the possible y sequences induces a probability distribution on the x
sequences. Since two different y n may originate in the same xn sequence, the xn are confusable.
For a “non-confusable” subset of input sequences, such that with high probability there is only one
highly likely xn that could have caused the particular output, we can reconstruct the sequence at
the output with a negligible probability of error, by mapping the observations into the appropri-
ate “widely spaced” hidden sequences. We can define the conditional entropy H(Y |X) assuming
they are ergodic and have a stationary coupling (Gray, 2011). Defining their mutual information
I(X; Y ) = H(Y ) − H(Y |X), their jointly typical set follows similar properties (Cover & Thomas,
2006). Define B = {(xn , y n ) : (xn , y n ) ∈ Anǫ (PX,Y ), y n ∈ Anǫ (PY ), xn ∈ Anǫ (PX )},and
Anǫ (PX,Y |xn ) = {y n : (xn , y n ) ∈ Anǫ (PX,Y )}. Observe that Anǫ (PX,Y |xn ) = ∅ if xn ∈
                                                                                            / Anǫ (PX )
(Kramer et al., 2008).
                               Pr[Y n ∈ Anǫ (PX,Y |xn )|X n = xn ] ≈ 1.                            (29)

                                  Pr[(xn , y n ) ∈ B] ≈ 2−nI(X;Y ) .                              (30)

                                          |B| ≈ 2nI(X;Y ) .                                     (31)
                                              n     n
Roughly speaking, we can resolve an input yi as xi if they are jointly typical. For each (typical)
output xn sequence, there are approximately 2nH(Y |X) possible y n sequences, all of them equally
likely. We wish to ensure that no two xn sequences produce the same y n output sequence, otherwise,
we will not be able to decide which xn sequence it was originated from. The total number of possible
(typical) y n sequences is approx 2nH(Y ) . This set has to be divided into sets of size 2nH(Y |X)
corresponding to the different input X sequences. The total number of disjoint sets is less than
or equal to 2n(H(Y )−H(Y |X)) = 2nI(X;Y ) . Hence, we can have at most 2nI(X;Y ) distinguishable
sequences of length n. Therefore,
                                      X                                 X
L(hΨ ) = E(x,y)∼PX,Y ℓ hΨ (y), x =         PX,Y (x, y) ℓ hΨ (y), x =         PX,Y (x, y) ℓ hΨ (y), x ,
                                        x,y                             x,y∈B

where the last equation follows from (29). If m ≥ 2nI(X;Y ) , and since |B| = 2nI(X;Y ) , and
Pr[(xn , y n ) ∈ B] = 2−nI(X;Y ) , then clearly L(hΨ ) = LΨ (hΨ ) ≤ ∆m . Otherwise, when m <
2nI(X;Y ) , we have
                   L(hΨ ) ≤ (2nI(X;Y ) − m)2−nI(X;Y ) + m∆m 2−nI(X;Y ) ≤ ∆,
assuming ℓ(x, x̂) ≤ 1. We now have
                                  m2−nI(X;Y ) (1 − ∆m ) ≥ 1 − ∆,                                  (32)


                                                  16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Assuming 1 − ∆m ≈ 1,
                                       m ≥ 2nI(X;Y ) (1 − ∆).                                                   (33)
Equivalently
                                                      m
                                     ∆≥1−                    (1 − ∆m ).                                         (34)
                                                   2nI(X;Y )



C    R ECEPTIVE F IELD N ORMALIZATION
Pereg et al. (2021) propose a fast alternative algorithm, inspired by the classic iterative thresholding
algorithms, that produces a relatively good approximation of a convolutional sparse code. Most
solvers are slowed down by the use of one global threshold (bias) to detect each local feature shift
along the signal, or a predetermined constant local threshold. When we apply a global threshold at
each iteration, if the threshold is too high, weak expressions are annihilated, and strong expressions
can “shadow” over low-energy regions in the signal, which in turn, can be interpreted as false-
positive support locations. On the other hand, if the threshold is very small, as often is the case in
ISTA, many iterations are required to compensate for false detections of early iterations. This issue
is aggravated in the presence of noise, and in real-time applications due to model perturbations. The
proposed remedy is to normalize each data point by a locally focused data energy measure, before
applying a threshold. In other words, each receptive field of the data is scaled with respect to the
local energy. This way even when the data is inherently unbalanced, we can still use a common bias
for all receptive fields, without requiring many iterations to detect the features support.
We briefly reformulate RFN for 2D signals.
Definition C.1 (2D Receptive Field Normalization Kernel): A kernel h[k, l], k, l ∈ Z, can be referred
to as a receptive field normalization kernel if
      1. The kernel is positive: h[k, l] ≥ 0       ∀k, l.
      2. The kernel is symmetric: h[k, l] = h[−k, −l]                 ∀k, l.
      3. The kernel’s global maximum is at its center: h[0, 0] = 1 ≥ h[k, l]                      ∀k, l 6= 0.
                                       P
      4. The kernel’s energy is finite: k,l h[k, l] < ∞.

Definition C.2 (2D Receptive Field Normalization): We define the local weighted energy centered
around S[k, l], a sample of a 2D observed signal S ∈ RLr ×J ,
                                         Lh −1                                         ! 21
                                          X2
                                                              ′   ′   2        ′   ′
                       σS [k, l] ,                       h[k , l ]S [k − k , l − l ]          ,                 (35)
                                                 Lh −1
                                     k′ ,l′ =−     2


where h[k, l] is a RFN window function of size Lh × Lh , Lh << Lr is an odd number of samples.
For our application we used a truncated Gaussian-shaped window, but one can use any other window
function depending on the application, such as: a rectangular window, Epanechnikov window, etc.
The choice of the normalization window and its length affects the thresholding parameters. If h[k, l]
is a rectangular window, then σS [k, l] is simply the Frobenius norm of a data patch centered around
the [k, l]th location. Otherwise, if the chosen RFN window is attenuating, then the energy is focused
in the center of the receptive field, and possible events at the margins are repressed. RFN is em-
ployed by dividing each data point by the local weighted energy, before projecting the signal on the
dictionary and taking a threshold. We compute local weighted energy as defined in (35). Namely,
                                                 p
                                      σS [k, l] = h[k, l] ∗ S 2 [k, l],                          (36)
where h[k, l] is a receptive field normalization window, and ∗ denotes the convolution operation.
Then, we normalize the signal by dividing each data point by the corresponding receptive field
energy. In order to avoid amplification of low energy regions, we use a clipped version of σS [k].
Namely,

                                              σS [k, l] σS [k, l] ≥ τ
                                σ̃S [k, l] =                          ,                      (37)
                                              1         σS [k, l] < τ

                                                         17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


where τ > 0 is a predetermined threshold. Empirically, for our application 0.15 ≤ τ ≤ 0.4 works
well. The RFN image S̃ image is
                                                  S[k, l]
                                      S̃[k, l] =            .                              (38)
                                                 σ̃S [k, l]

Assuming an analysis patch {yi }JL  i=1 ∈ R
                                       r      Lt ×N
                                                    from RFN image S̃ ∈ RLr ×J (as defined in Def-
inition 5), given a normalized convolutional dictionary D, an initial solution x0 = 0, the detected
support (at the first iteration) is
                                           qi = Iβ1 (DT yi ),                                  (39)
where I is an element-wise thresholding indicator function

                                                    1 |xk | ≥ β1
                                      Iβ1 (xk ) =                                              (40)
                                                    0 |xk | < β1 .

Algorithm 1: 2D RFN-RNN (forward pass)
input : Input image S ∈ RLr ×J , RFN-kernel h ∈ RLh ×Lh , Wzy , Wzz , T
Init: z0 = 0, q0 = 0, θ = 0
compute:                                     p
                                 σS [k, n] , h[k, l] ∗ S 2 [k, l].

                                           σy [k, l] |σS [k, l]| ≥ τ
                            σ̃S [k, l] =                             ,
                                           1         |σS [k, l]| < τ
                                         S̃[k, l] = S[k, l]/σ˜S [k, l]
for k to Lr do
    for l to J do
        set: analysis patch {yi }JL
                                  i=1 ∈ R
                                     r      Lt ×N
                                                   from image S ∈ RLr ×J , and its corresponding
                               JLr      Lt ×N
          analysis patch {ỹi }i=1 ∈ R          from RFN image S̃ ∈ RLr ×J
        for t = 1 to T do
                        T           T
             qt = σ(Wzy    ỹt + Wzz   zt−1 + b)
                       T
             rt = c1 Wzy yt
             zt = q t ⊙ rt
        end
    end
end

The implied assumption is that Wzy represents 1c D, therefore, it is also possible to add additional
regularization loss terms enforcing yt = Dzt , ỹt = Dz̃t , where ỹt is the RFN-input signal and z̃t
is the RFN latent supports vector.

D     E XPERIMENTS D ETAILS
D.1   I MAGE D EBLURRING

                    Table 1: PSNR (dB) and SSIM scores for natural image deblurring
                 Butterfly   Boats   C.Man   House    Parrot   Lena      Barbara   Starfish   Peppers   Leaves   Avg
  Input PSNR     22.84       26.40   23.30   28.52    27.05    26.33     23.84     24.80      25.97     22.26    25.26
  FISTA          30.36       29.36   26.81   31.50    31.23    29.47     25.03     29.65      29.42     29.36    29.22
  NCSR           30.84       31.49   28.34   33.63    33.39    31.26     27.91     32.27      30.16     31.57    31.09
  RED:SD-TNRD    31.57       31.53   28.31   33.71    33.19    31.47     26.62     32.46      29.98     31.95    31.08
  RNN            27.80       29.40   25.44   31.27    30.25    29.00     27.75     29.25      28.17     26.82    28.52
                 0.93        0.91    0.88    0.93     0.95     0.92      0.82      0.92       0.90      0.94     0.91
  RNN-RFN        26.16       28.46   25.16   30.65    29.81    28.49     24.47     28.73      28.01     25.61    27.56
                 0.91        0.90    0.88    0.92     0.94     0.91      0.81      0.92       0.91      0.91     0.90



To test the systems’ performance under more challenging setting
                                                              √ we tested RNN and RNN-RFN
with increasing additive noise variance σn in the range [0, 10 2]. We trained the network with a


                                                       18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023



                                                                                               √
single example of the blurred image boat contaminated by Gaussian noise with variance σn = 2.
As can be seen in Fig. 6 as the noise level is increased - RFN suppresses noise
                                                                              √better. Figures
                                                                                             √7-8
provide additional examples of the reconstruction of image starfish for σn = 2 2 and σn = 7 2.
                                30
                                                                       PSNRin
                                29                                     PSNRout - RNN
                                                                       PSNRout - RNN-RFN
                                28

                                27

                                26

                                25

                                24

                                23

                                22

                                21
                                     0   2     4     6            8   10         12        14

                                                              n



                  Figure 6: PSNR[dB] as a function of number of noise variance σn .


           (a)                           (b)                               (c)                     (d)
Figure 7: Visual comparison of deblurring of the image starfish for different noise levels: (a) Ground truth; (b)
input, PSNR=24.25dB, σn = 4.24; (c) RNN result, PSNR=28.07dB ; (d) RNN-RFN result, PSNR=27.91dB.


           (a)                           (b)                               (c)                     (d)
Figure 8: Visual comparison of deblurring of the image starfish for different noise levels: (a) Ground truth; (b)
input, PSNR=23.02dB, σn = 9.90; (c) RNN result, PSNR=25.02dB ; (d) RNN-RFN result, PSNR=25.07dB.


D.2    OCT S PECKLE S UPREESION

The learning system is the RNN framework described in section 5. We denote S ∈ RLr ×J as
a cropped single intensity image of a coherent tomogram aligned with a speckle suppressed to-
mogram R ∈ RLr ×J . We then define an analysis patch as a 2D patch of size Lt × N enclos-
ing Lt time (depth) samples of N consecutive traces of the observed image S. An analysis patch
A(i,j) associated with a pixel Ri,j in the speckle suppressed intensity tomogram. To produce a
point in the final tomogram Ri,j , we set the input to the RNN as y = A(i,j) . Each time step in-
put is a group of N neighboring pixels of the same corresponding time (depth). In other words,
                                              T
yt = [Si−Lt +1+t,j−nL , ..., Si−Lt +1+t,j+nR ] is row t of the corresponding analysis patch. We set
the size of the output vector xt to one expected pixel: P = 1. Such that x is the expected segment


                                                         19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                               0



                             -0.5



                              -1



                             -1.5



                              -2



                             -2.5



                              -3
                                      1      2      3      4     5      6
                                                                        104


Figure 9: Recovery error L̂(hΨ ) and training error LΨ (hΨ ) ≤ ∆m (log10 scale) as a function
of the sample size m. Empirically, LΨ (hΨ ) < 1 − am, where a = 2−nI(X;Y ) (1 − ∆m ), for
I(X; Y ) ≥ 0.33.

                                                                          T
of the corresponding enhanced tomogram, x = Ri−(Lt −1),j , ..., Ri,j . Lastly, we ignore the first
Lt − 1 values of the output x, and set the predicted pixel R̂i,j as the last one, xLt
The analysis patch moves through the image and produces all predicted speckle suppressed intensity
tomogram points in the same manner. Each output pixel is recovered by taking into consideration
its relations to neighboring pixels: Lt−1 preceding pixels in the axial direction at the same lateral
position, and (N − 1)Lt pixels from N − 1 laterally neighboring surrounding pixels (in space), from
adjacent A-lines. For all experiments, we set the number of neurons as nn = 1000. Increasing the
number of neurons did not improve the results significantly, but increases training time.
In a recurrent neural network the nodes of the graph are connected by both feedforward connections
and feedback connections (Hochreiter & Schmidhuber, 1997; Géron, 2017): At a current state, the
current output depends on current inputs, and on outputs at previous states. In a sense, we can say
that the network is able to make decisions that are based also on the memory of its past decisions,
that it ”remembers” its past outputs and takes them into consideration when computing the current
output. We believe RNN fits this task because it is able to “remember” both in space and time
dimensions. Most OCT images have layered structure, and exhibit string relations along the axial
and lateral axes. RNNs can efficiently capture those relations and exploit them.
Figures 4(a)-(b) show the speckle-corrupted and speckle-suppressed tomograms of chicken tissue of
size 341 × 691 used for training. The analysis patch size was of size [Lt , N ] = [9, 9]. The axial and
lateral spacing for both training and testing data are ∆x = 3.06µm, ∆z = 6µm.
In Figs. 5(a)-(b) a tomogram of size 300 × 643 was used for training. Here, the lateral and axial
spatial sampling spacing are ∆x = 2.5µm, ∆z = 4.78µm, respectively. Whereas, the cucumber
axial and lateral spacing are ∆x = 8µm, ∆z = 4.78µm, respectively. Note that, the cucumber
image is sampled at significantly lower rate along the lateral direction. Due to the system mismatch
between the training data and the testing data, we set the analysis patch size to [8,7], to match the
testing data parameters, rather than the optimal analysis patch size that would fit the training data.


                                                  20
