To all reviewers:

Thank you for your comments and suggestions to improve this work. We feel that in using the
concept as defined in our paper, models can be simplified, with more transparent and better
understood outcomes. Additionally, with the findings of our study, models can be made more
efficient as to training time. We expand on this below in italics.
Reviewer ZHzr:

   1. The paper defines "node stability" as

               "the number of epochs wherein nodes held their rank in terms of weight value
               compared to their rank on the last epoch".

By this definition, stability will always reach 100% in the last epoch, and little can be determined
from the "exponential-looking" curve of DNNs stability. The high increase in the end is, by
definition, inevitable, and does not really indicate the network's weights are "more stable".
However, the underlying idea of measuring NN stability is interesting. Perhaps it would be better
measured as stability of rank between each two consecutive epochs, and not using the last epoch
as an anchor.

Yes, the stability must always reach 100 percent by our definition. That, however, is not critical.
The issue is when each node stabilizes. That process, over time, forms a tree structure. The
importance of the definition is in establishing decision tree behavior and the implications thereof
in model simplification.

   2. Equivalence between node significance and its weight value is unfounded (although
      proving this would be interesting).

Throughout the paper the absolute weight value of a node is used equivalently to its
"significance" or "influence in performance". This is actually not backed up by theory or by
empirical results. A node with high weight value may consistently receive inputs with very low
absolute value (depending on the dataset), and a node with low weight value may receive inputs
with high absolute value. The relationship between absolute weight value and the influence of
that node on model performance is never tested in the paper.

It would indeed be interesting to have an experiment where each node (or group of nodes) is
pruned at a time, and performance of the pruned model is assessed, so we could draw some
empirical conclusions on whether intermediate nodes are indeed less valuable than higher rank
nodes.

That is intrinsic in the definition of node rank. If the rank is maintained, the weights must be of
high absolute value. If the weight absolute value is high for a node, that node must have been fed
high valued weights, or it would lose its rank along training. And a high weight value must be
more influential in model outcomes.

   3. The use of the term "decision tree", both in the title and throughout the paper, is a bit
      misleading. No DTs are actually used anywhere in the paper, it is continuously used as
      (somewhat arbitrary) analogy. Nodes with high absolute weight value do not behave as
      root nodes do in DTs (or at least this is not proven in the paper).
This needs a much better explanation in the text, as we are not using a decision tree. We are
remarking that the neuron stabilization forms the shape of a tree and therefore forms the
decision tree structure. Below is one possible correction to the misunderstanding.

To strengthen the decision tree behavior claim above, presenting an illustration from a
fictitious case may be of use. In the illustration, a node configuration as to rank stability of
the flattened focus layer after ordering according to node weight may be expressed as in
Figure X. Figure X shows two root nodes stabilized in the first of four epochs and exactly two
additional child nodes per parent node stabilized after each subsequent epoch, showing a
shape resembling a decision tree (Step 1). The tree behavior observed in this study deviated
from the illustration below but held the same general pattern from this fictitious example.
Additionally, Step 2 in Figure X shows a different perspective of the decision tree layout,
where the extremes of the ordered flattened focus layer are stable nodes of either highly
negative or highly positive values, which also have the highest rank stabilities. In Step 3, a
bar chart is presented as a visualization aid for Step 2. It is worth mentioning that in the
fictitious example, the root nodes stabilize at the first epoch. This is unlikely to be the case in
the actual observations of this study. It is, however, the case in the illustration due to the
limited number of epochs used in the interest of saving space. Additionally, no groupings
were necessary in the example, as only 11 nodes are illustrated.
Figure X. Tree behavior according to node rank stability during a fictitious neural network
training progression; number above bars are rank stability values.

4. The reader is left wandering what is a possible outcome of discovering "decision tree
   behavior" in NNs? How can this be used? A lot of hedging is used throughout the paper
   with respect to possible utility of its results ("may", "might", "can", "possibly", etc.)

Perhaps the main contribution of this study’s findings is in model simplification. With a
simplified model, outcomes thereof may be made more transparent and understanding. An
additional contribution is in training efficacy, as the tree behavior may aid in determining
early stopping points during training.
Reviewer b5kq:

Major issues:

   •   The actual work presented in the paper is quite different from the title, the introduction,
       related work, and most of the abstract. While the narrative on XAI is interesting, the only
       connection with the work is perhaps in future work. This may perhaps be due to a misuse
       of the term XAI / Explainable Artificial Intelligence, but even so, the paper does not
       provide any way to "reap the fruits of decision trees" either.

   Yes, and we see that being the case. This, however, can be addressed by connecting XAI to
   model simplification more clearly, the main contribution of this study’s findings. With a
   simplified model, outcomes thereof may be made more transparent and understanding. An
   additional contribution is in training efficacy, as the tree behavior may aid in determining
   early stopping points during training

   •   In particular, what do the results tell us about how a neural network has made its
       decisions?

   The results show resemblance to a decision tree, with its implications in model
   simplification. We are highlighting that the neuron stabilization is in the shape of a tree and
   therefore forms the decision tree structure.

   •   The stability criterion set to 90% accuracy seems fairly arbitrary, and it seems it should
       rather be task specific (what if a network cannot achieve 90% accuracy on a task?). In
       general, the notion of "stable models" in the paper is confusing; I think the authors tried
       to determine when the network stopped learning (so that weights ranks would be
       finalized), but in that case it would have been better to calculate the magnitude of
       changes to the total weights vector directly, and/or use learning rate annealing to
       guarantee convergence (and thus rank stability).

   Yes, arbitrary. However, it is hard to envision a successful neural network result being
   adopted with less than 90% accuracy. The value was selected as a minimum criterion. That
   figure was chosen, again, to highlight decision tree behavior. If the model cannot achieve
   acceptable accuracy, it may not be possible to simplify it using what we proposed.

   •   The authors stress the importance of analyzing individual units in a neural network (in the
       abstract and introduction), yet in the actual work performed they ignore all units except
       those of the last hidden layer of the network.

   The individual units are the aim. The groupings are to enable better visualization. We can
   clarify that.

   •   I am not sure how weights are ranked when multiple output units are used instead of a
       single one: are all connections from all units in the last hidden layer and ALL the output
       units considered? Or is the analysis performed separately for each output unit?
It can be clarified that it is the output weight to the softmax that is the focus.

•   The paper is mostly related to the purported 'decision tree dynamics of neural networks',
    yet the authors never really explain what this means. It is perhaps a concept known in
    literature that I am not aware of (if so, it should be cited in the paper), but it would be
    useful to explain it clearly. The concept is developed a bit further at the end of the paper,
    but still not clearly.

Yes, pasted below is what we answered above as a possible explanation. We are stating that
neuron stabilization is shaped like a tree, forming the decision tree structure

To strengthen the decision tree behavior claim above, presenting an illustration from a
fictitious case may be of use. In the illustration, a node configuration as to rank stability of
the flattened focus layer after ordering according to node weight may be expressed as in
Figure X. Figure X shows two root nodes stabilized in the first of four epochs and exactly two
additional child nodes per parent node stabilized after each subsequent epoch, showing a
shape resembling a decision tree (Step 1). The tree behavior observed in this study deviated
from the illustration below but held the same general pattern from this fictitious example.
Additionally, Step 2 in Figure X shows a different perspective of the decision tree layout,
where the extremes of the ordered flattened focus layer are stable nodes of either highly
negative or highly positive values, which also have the highest rank stabilities. In Step 3, a
bar chart is presented as a visualization aid for Step 2. It is worth mentioning that in the
fictitious example, the root nodes stabilize at the first epoch. This is unlikely to be the case in
the actual observations of this study. It is, however, the case in the illustration due to the
limited number of epochs used in the interest of saving space. Additionally, no groupings
were necessary in the example, as only 11 nodes are illustrated.
    Figure X. Tree behavior according to node rank stability during a fictitious neural
    network training progression; number above bars are rank stability values.



•   I also don't understand how node rank stability would be related to the decision tree
    behavior of the network? Is it because some of the nodes that get 'fixed' early are made to
    correspond to early decision nodes in a decision tree, etc?

Yes, this can again be made clear as above. That process, over time, forms a tree structure.
The importance of the definition is in establishing decision tree behavior and the
implications thereof in model simplification.

•   I am not entirely convinced that the results demonstrate 'decision tree behavior' in neural
    networks; it seems to me that the observed dynamics are more likely due to gradient
    descent in high dimensional spaces. The authors write that "Such nodes [groups] are
    analogous to the concept of decision tree roots. The timing when those weights and their
    ranks were established might have varied among individual runs but did show a clear
    pattern according to groups." So, the units in those groups may learn earlier or later than
    others, but at runtime they are all run at the same time, non-hierchically. I understand it
    may be used as a type of combinatorial code perhaps, but that is not really assessed (e.g.,
       can we actually see what the neurons in the earlier vs later groups encode?). I would be
       grateful again if the authors could explain the concept more clearly.

   We agree. What needs to be made clear is the objective, ie, model simplification. Gradient
   descent behavior would be more likely dependent on the input data, i. e., tweaking the input
   and noticing how the change is represented in the neuron space. Our study does not depend
   on the input data to reveal the findings. The decision tree behavior, as we show, is always
   represented in the neuron space, independently of manipulation in the input data.

   •   In any case, I suspect you would see the same exact behavior even in simple logistic
       regression (for example, inputs -in this case corresponding to the last hidden layer- more
       correlated to the classification task would increase in weight earlier, leading to a larger
       MRS; isn't this what happens in the paper? Wouldn't it be easier to study it in this or
       similar simpler case first?). This experiment would be useful even if the dynamics
       observed were found to be different, as it could be used to make a stronger argument.

   This again became an issue because of our unclear details on the objectives. The contention
   we are making is that node importance in determining model outcomes during training
   follows a tree behavior. Early nodes (root and parents) are also the most important in
   determining model outcomes.

Minor issues:

   •   Clarity of the text can be improved greatly (mostly organization of the text, but also some
       language issues and misuse of technical terms); for example "especially when realizing
       that weight values may not be as random as previously thought", or "Node analysis
       consisted of an assessment of whether the progression of nodes from the initial run to
       stabilization could be modeled by a decision tree, potentially identifying the most
       significant nodes in determining model accuracy early in the training process.".

   We have revisited grammatical/unclear sections of the manuscript.

   •   The distinction between 'Convolutional' vs 'Deep Neural Networks' is not entirely correct.
       While one may imagine a very shallow CNN, they are in practice always deep. In
       particular, the CNN used in this paper is deeper than the 'DNN' network (3 layers + the
       same MLP as the other network). Further, what the authors call a DNN is actually a fully-
       connected MLP.

   This section has been rewritten in light of the above.

   •   Evaluation is performed only on 3 very simple datasets, and only 2 network architectures.
       It would have been more useful to also include realistic architectures (for example,
       ResNets), and some simple and well understandable ones (e.g., a simple logistic
       regression / single-layer nn, as I discussed above).
We did not focus on the input data. We aimed at the internals. Three very distinct input
datasets were selected to show that the approach is not dependent on the data feeding the
model.

•   In the MLP (called 'DNN' in the paper), the authors mention that each layer has "30x30
    nodes"; however, it does not make sense to report the layer sizes like this, as the layers
    are fully connected (i.e., all spatial arrangement is lost, so whether they are 900 units
    arranged on a line, a square, or a thorus, it makes no difference).

Correct. This was done for visualization and ease of understanding.

•   "All experimental runs converged after 150 epochs" -> I think you mean "converged
    within 150 epochs"?

Correct, within. We modified the text to reflect this.
Reviewer cBc4:

Weakness:

   1. The contributions of the paper are not clearly enlisted or self-revealing

   We feel that the main contributions of this work are primarily in model simplification and
   second in model training efficiency. With a simplified model, outcomes may be made more
   transparent and understanding. As for training efficacy, as the tree behavior may aid in
   determining early stopping points during training.

   2. The gaps wrt prior art in Related work section should be highlighted instead of mere
      referring them

   We rewrote and modified to add gaps in research and how our contributions will assist in
   filling them.

   3. Reduction of dataset size to 100 images and then experiments is going south of
      experimental result validity

   We need to clarify that the focus is less on the input data as it is on showing decision tree
   behavior and its implications. We randomly took 100 NMIST images for each class, totaling
   1,000 images representative of the ‘population’ of NMIST images.

   4. converge to at least 0.90 - why this threshold? any ablation?

   We will clarify that the threshold is not critical, as long as tree behavior emerges. As for the
   threshold, it is hard to envision a successful neural network result being adopted with less
   than 90% accuracy. The value was selected as a minimum criterion. That figure was chosen,
   again, to highlight decision tree behavior. If the model cannot achieve acceptable accuracy,
   it may not be possible to simplify it using what we proposed.

   5. Not clear about the data distribution and balance affecting results

   We selected three very distinct datasets as input to the models. These data were to ensure
   variability in inputs and, thus, minimize any possible contention that the tree behavior is an
   artifact of input data.

   6. how will it behave under adversarial attacks?

   The focus, which needs clarification, is model simplification.

Suggestions:

   1. Abstract should be to the point
   2. The related work section should follow the current trend - topic-wise listing of prior art
   3. Dataset section can be reduced and key contributions be elaborated more
   4. Clarity needed - what specific problem you are trying to solve and give the logic behind
      the approach

   We agree and addressed those limitations in the text.

Miscellaneous:

   1. Break long sentences in smaller forms

   We rephrased large sections in the manuscript based on above suggestions.

   2. mimicking an empty, black background -> what about white (1)

   Input data is not the focus

   3. Analyses in this work were based, according to weight magnitude, etc. - many grammar /
      sentence construction mistakes

   We have made grammatical adjustments.

   4. quasi-Poisson link function - link?

   It is the distribution that applies to count data where the residual variance is larger than the
   conditional mean, i. e., the quasi-Poisson GLM fits an extra parameter for the over
   dispersion.

   5. The Tukey’s Honest Significance post-hoc GLM - link?

   No, post-hoc analysis

   6. ANOVA - is correct abbrev in place of AOV

   Changed to ANOVA throughout.
Reviewer 5BfE:

The paper has a clearly defined experiment setup and meaningful spread of experiments to study
a method. I think the paper does not sufficiently discuss how to draw conclusions from the
proposed visualizations and summarizations. Adding that would help substantiate the authors
claim that this way of looking at neural network training does allow for future improvements.

We agree. Clarifications as to the objectives and conclusions were incorporated.

The paper proposes a visualization and demonstrates it in various examples, but does not show
how to draw practical conclusions from those visualizations to motivate using those
visualizations while designing new applications for neural networks.

With the clarifications above, we can show how decision tree behavior can assist in model
simplification and how that will contribute to XAI. Additionally, below is how the visualization
we proposed has been better explained in the manuscript, giving a better idea of how a decision
tree is inferred from this study’s findings.

   To strengthen the decision tree behavior claim above, presenting an illustration from a
   fictitious case may be of use. In the illustration, a node configuration as to rank stability of
   the flattened focus layer after ordering according to node weight may be expressed as in
   Figure X. Figure X shows two root nodes stabilized in the first of four epochs and exactly two
   additional child nodes per parent node stabilized after each subsequent epoch, showing a
   shape resembling a decision tree (Step 1). The tree behavior observed in this study deviated
   from the illustration below but held the same general pattern from this fictitious example.
   Additionally, Step 2 in Figure X shows a different perspective of the decision tree layout,
   where the extremes of the ordered flattened focus layer are stable nodes of either highly
   negative or highly positive values, which also have the highest rank stabilities. In Step 3, a
   bar chart is presented as a visualization aid for Step 2. It is worth mentioning that in the
   fictitious example, the root nodes stabilize at the first epoch. This is unlikely to be the case in
   the actual observations of this study. It is, however, the case in the illustration due to the
   limited number of epochs used in the interest of saving space. Additionally, no groupings
   were necessary in the example, as only 11 nodes are illustrated.
Figure X. Tree behavior according to node rank stability during a fictitious neural
network training progression; number above bars are rank stability values.
