Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


L EARNING L OW D IMENSIONAL S TATE S PACES WITH
OVERPARAMETERIZED R ECURRENT N EURAL N ETS
 Edo Cohen-Karlik1 , Itamar Menuhin-Gruman1 , Raja Giryes1 , Nadav Cohen1 & Amir Globerson1,2
 1
   Tel Aviv University 2 Google Research
 {edocohen,menuhin}@mail.tau.ac.il
 {raja,cohennadav,gamir}@tauex.tau.ac.il



                                            A BSTRACT

         Overparameterization in deep learning typically refers to settings where a trained
         neural network (NN) has representational capacity to fit the training data in many
         ways, some of which generalize well, while others do not. In the case of Recurrent
         Neural Networks (RNNs), there exists an additional layer of overparameterization,
         in the sense that a model may exhibit many solutions that generalize well for
         sequence lengths seen in training, some of which extrapolate to longer sequences,
         while others do not. Numerous works have studied the tendency of Gradient
         Descent (GD) to fit overparameterized NNs with solutions that generalize well.
         On the other hand, its tendency to fit overparameterized RNNs with solutions
         that extrapolate has been discovered only recently and is far less understood.
         In this paper, we analyze the extrapolation properties of GD when applied to
         overparameterized linear RNNs. In contrast to recent arguments suggesting an
         implicit bias towards short-term memory, we provide theoretical evidence for
         learning low-dimensional state spaces, which can also model long-term memory.
         Our result relies on a dynamical characterization which shows that GD (with
         small step size and near-zero initialization) strives to maintain a certain form
         of balancedness, as well as on tools developed in the context of the moment
         problem from statistics (recovery of a probability distribution from its moments).
         Experiments corroborate our theory, demonstrating extrapolation via learning
         low-dimensional state spaces with both linear and non-linear RNNs.


1    I NTRODUCTION
Neural Networks (NNs) are often overparameterized, in the sense that their representational capacity
far exceeds what is necessary for fitting training data. Surprisingly, training overparameterized NNs
via (variants of) Gradient Descent (GD) tends to produce solutions that generalize well, despite exis-
tence of many solutions that do not. This implicit generalization phenomenon attracted considerable
scientific interest, resulting in various theoretical explanations (see, e.g., Woodworth et al. (2020);
Yun et al. (2020); Zhang et al. (2017); Li et al. (2020); Ji & Telgarsky (2018); Lyu & Li (2019)).
Recent studies have surfaced a new form of implicit bias that arises in Recurrent Neural Networks
(RNNs) and their variants (e.g., Long Short-Term Memory Hochreiter & Schmidhuber (1997) and
Gated Recurrent Units Chung et al. (2014)). For such models, the length of sequences in training
is often shorter than in testing, and it is not clear to what extent a learned solution will be able to
extrapolate beyond the sequence lengths seen in training. In the overparameterized regime, where the
representational capacity of the learned model exceeds what is necessary for fitting short sequences,
there may exist solutions that generalize but do not extrapolate, meaning that their accuracy is high
over short sequences but arbitrarily poor over long ones (see Cohen-Karlik et al. (2022)). In practice
however, when training RNNs using GD, accurate extrapolation is often observed. We refer to this
phenomenon as the implicit extrapolation of GD.
As opposed to the implicit generalization of GD, little is formally known about its implicit extrap-
olation. Existing theoretical analyses of the latter focus on linear RNNs — also known as Linear
Dynamical Systems (LDS) — and either treat infinitely wide models (Emami et al., 2021), or models
of finite width that learn from a memoryless teacher (Cohen-Karlik et al., 2022). In these regimes,


                                                  1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


GD has been argued to exhibit an implicit bias towards short-term memory. While such results are
informative, their generality remains in question, particularly since infinitely wide NNs are known to
substantially differ from their finite-width counterparts, and since a memoryless teacher essentially
neglects the main characteristic of RNNs (memory).
In this paper, we theoretically investigate the implicit extrapolation of GD when applied to overpa-
rameterized finite-width linear RNNs learning from a teacher with memory. We consider models
with symmetric transition matrices, in the case where a student (learned model) with state space
dimension d is trained on sequences of length k generated by a teacher with state space dimension d.ˆ
                                                                                      ˆ
Our interest lies in the overparameterized regime, where d is greater than both k and d, meaning that
the student has state space dimensions large enough to fully agree with the teacher on sequences
of length k, while potentially disagreeing with it on longer sequences. As a necessary assumption
on initialization, we follow prior work and focus on a certain balancedness condition, which is
known (see experiments in Cohen-Karlik et al. (2022), as well as our theoretical analysis) to capture
near-zero initialization as commonly employed in practice.
Our main theoretical result states that GD originating from a balanced initialization leads the student
to extrapolate, irrespective of how large its state space dimension is. Key to the result is a surprising
connection to a moment matching theorem from Cohen & Yeredor (2011), whose proof relies on
ideas from compressed sensing (Elad, 2010; Eldar & Kutyniok, 2012) and neighborly polytopes
(Gale, 1963). This connection may be of independent interest, and in particular may prove useful
in deriving other results concerning the implicit properties of GD. We corroborate our theory with
experiments, which demonstrate extrapolation via learning low-dimensional state spaces in both the
analyzed setting and ones involving non-linear RNNs.
The implicit extrapolation of GD is an emerging and exciting area of inquiry. Our results suggest that
short-term memory is not enough for explaining it as previously believed. We hope the techniques
developed in this paper will contribute to a further understanding of this phenomenon.

2    R ELATED W ORK
The study of linear RNNs, or LDS, has a rich history dating back to at least the early works of Kalman
(Kalman, 1960; 1963). An extensively studied question relevant to extrapolation is that of system
identification, which explores when the parameters of a teacher LDS can be recovered (see Ljung
(1999)). Another related topic concerns finding compact realizations of systems, i.e. realizations
of the same input-output mapping as a given LDS, with a state space dimension that is lower (see
Antoulas (2005)). Despite the relation, our focus is fundamentally different from the above — we
ask what happens when one learns an LDS using GD. Since GD is not explicitly designed to find a
low-dimensional state space, it is not clear that the application of GD to an overparameterized student
allows system identification through a compact realization. The fact that it does relate to the implicit
properties of GD, and to our knowledge has not been investigated in the classic LDS literature.
The implicit generalization of GD in training RNNs has been a subject of theoretical study for at
least several years (see, e.g., Hardt et al. (2016); Allen-Zhu et al. (2019); Lim et al. (2021)). In
contrast, works analyzing the implicit extrapolation of GD have surfaced only recently, specifically
in Emami et al. (2021) and Cohen-Karlik et al. (2022) Emami et al. (2021) analyzes linear RNNs
in the infinite width regime, suggesting that in this case GD is implicitly biased towards impulse
responses corresponding to short-term memory. Cohen-Karlik et al. (2022) studies finite-width linear
RNNs (as we do), showing that when the teacher is memoryless (has state space dimension zero),
GD emanating from a balanced initialization successfully extrapolates. Our work tackles an arguably
more realistic and challenging setting — we analyze the regime in which the teacher has memory.
Our results suggest that the implicit extrapolation of GD does not originate from a bias towards
short-term memory, but rather a tendency to learn low-dimensional state spaces.1 We note that there
have been works studying extrapolation in the context of non-recurrent NNs, e.g. Xu et al. (2020).
    1
      There is no formal contradiction between our results and those of (Emami et al., 2021) and (Cohen-Karlik
et al., 2022). These works make restrictive assumptions (namely, the former assumes that the teacher is stable
and its impulse response decays exponentially fast, and the latter assumes that the teacher is memoryless) under
which implicit extrapolation via learning low-dimensional state spaces leads to solutions with short-term memory.
Our work on the other hand is not limited by these assumptions, and we show that in cases where they are
violated, learning yields solutions with low-dimensional state spaces that do not result in short-term memory.


                                                       2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


This type of extrapolation deals with the behavior of learned functions outside the support of the
training distribution, and thus fundamentally different from the type of extrapolation we consider,
which deals with the behavior of learned functions over sequences longer than those seen in training.
Linear RNNs fundamentally differ from the commonly studied model of linear (feed-forward) NNs
(see, e.g., Arora et al. (2018); Ji & Telgarsky (2018); Arora et al. (2019a;b); Razin & Cohen (2020)).
One of the key differences is that a linear RNN entails different powers of a parameter (transition)
matrix, leading to a loss function which roughly corresponds to a sum of losses for multiple linear NNs
having different architectures and shared weights. This precludes the use of a vast array of theoretical
tools tailored for linear NNs, rendering the analysis of linear RNNs technically challenging.
On the empirical side, extrapolation of NNs to sequence lengths beyond those seen in training
has been experimentally demonstrated in numerous recent works, covering both modern language
and attention models (Press et al., 2022; Anil et al., 2022; Zhang et al., 2022), and RNNs with
transition matrices of particular forms (Gu et al., 2022; 2021; 2020; Gupta, 2022). The current paper
is motivated by these findings, and takes a step towards theoretically explaining them.

3    L INEAR R ECURRENT N EURAL N ETWORKS
Our theoretical analysis applies to single-input single-output (SISO) linear RNNs with symmetric
transition matrices. Given a state space dimension d P N, this model is defined by the update rule:
                            st`1 “ Ast ` Bxt , yt “ Cst , t “ 0, 1, 2, . . . ,                         (3.1)
                dˆd            dˆ1                 1ˆd
where A P R , B P R                and C P R           are configurable parameters, the transition matrix A
satisfies A “ AJ ; x0 , x1 , . . . P R form an input sequence; y0 , y1 , . . . P R form the corresponding
output sequence; and st P Rdˆ1 represents the internal state at time t, assumed to be equal to zero at
the outset (i.e. it is assumed that s0 “ 0). As with any linear time-invariant system (Porat, 1996), the
input-output mapping realized by the RNN is determined by its impulse response.
Definition 1. The impulse response of the RNN is the output sequence corresponding to the input
sequence px0 , x1 , x2 , . . .q “ p1, 0, 0, . . .q. Namely, it is the sequence pCB, CAB, CA2 B, . . . q.
For brevity, we employ the shorthand Θ :“ pA, B, Cq. The d ˆ d symmetric transition matrix A is
parameterized through a dpd ` 1q{2-dimensional vector holding its upper triangular elements, and
with a slight overloading of notation, the symbol A is also used to refer to this parameterization.
We note that our theory readily extends to multiple-input multiple-output (MIMO) networks, and
the focus on the SISO case is merely for simplicity of presentation. Note also that the restriction to
symmetric transition matrices is customary in both theory (Hazan et al., 2018) and practice (Gupta,
2022), and represents a generalization of the canonical modal form, which under mild non-degeneracy
conditions does not limit generality (Boyd & Lessard, 2006).
Given a length k input sequence, x “ px0 , . . . , xk´1 q P Rk , consider the output at the last time step,
i.e. y :“ yk P R, and denote it ␣`
                                by RN N pxq.
                                          ˘ Using    ` this output˘(
                                                                   as a label, we define an empirical loss
induced by a training set S “ xp1q , y p1q , . . . , xpN q , y pN q Ă Rk ˆ R:
                                                  N
                                            1 ÿ ´               ´     ¯      ¯
                          LS pA, B, Cq “             ℓ RN N xpiq , y piq ,                           (3.2)
                                           N i“1
where ℓpy, ŷq “ py ´ ŷq2 is the square loss. By the update rule of the RNN (Equation 3.1), we have:
                                               ˜                               ¸2
                                            N    k´1
                                         1 ÿ ÿ           k´1´j      piq    piq
                     LS pA, B, Cq “                  CA         Bxj ´ y           .             (3.3)
                                        N i“1 j“0
Suppose that ground truth labels are generated by an RNN as defined in Equation 3.1, and denote the
state space dimension and parameters of this teacher network by dˆ and Θ̂ “ pÂ, B̂, Ĉq respectively.
We employ the common assumption (e.g., see Hardt et al. (2016)) by which input sequences are
drawn from a whitened distribution, i.e. a distribution where E rxj xj 1 s equals 1 if j “ j 1 and 0
otherwise. The population loss over length k sequences can then be written as (see Lemma E.1):
                                            k´1
                                             ÿ´                     ¯2
                            LpA, B, Cq “          CAj B ´ Ĉ Âj B̂ .                           (3.4)
                                               j“0


                                                     3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Equation 3.4 implies that a solution Θ “ pA, B, Cq achieves zero population loss over length k
sequences if and only if CAj B “ Ĉ Âj B̂ for j “ 0, . . . , k ´ 1. To what extent does such a solution
imply that the student (i.e., the learned RNN) extrapolates to longer sequences? This depends on how
close CAj B is to Ĉ Âj B̂ for j ě k.
Definition 2. For ϵ ě 0 and q P N, we say that the student ϵ-extrapolates with horizon q with respect
to (w.r.t) the teacher if:
                         |CAj B ´ Ĉ Âj B̂| ď ϵ,      @j P t0, 1, . . . , q ´ 1u .                (3.5)
If the above holds for all q P N then the student is said to ϵ-extrapolate w.r.t the teacher, and if it
holds for all q P N with ϵ “ 0 then the student is simply said to extrapolate w.r.t the teacher.
Per Definition 2, ϵ-extrapolation with horizon q is equivalent to the first q elements of the student’s
impulse response being ϵ-close to those of the teacher’s, whereas extrapolation means that the
student’s impulse response fully coincides with the teacher’s. The latter condition implies that
the student realizes the same input-output mapping as the teacher, for any sequence length (this
corresponds to the notion of system identification; see Section 2).
Notice that when the student is overparameterized, in the sense that d is greater than k and d,ˆ it may
perfectly generalize, i.e. lead the population loss over length k sequences (Equation 3.4) to equal
zero, and yet fail to extrapolate, as stated in the following proposition.
Proposition 3. Assume d ą k, and let ϵ ě 0 and q P tk ` 1, k ` 2, . . .u. Then, for any teacher
parameters Θ̂, there exist student parameters Θ with which the population loss in Equation 3.4 equals
zero, and yet the student does not ϵ-extrapolate with horizon q.

Proof sketch (for complete proof see Appendix E.1.2). The result follows from the fact that the first d
elements of the student’s impulse response can be assigned freely via a proper choice of Θ.

We are interested in the extent to which student parameters learned by GD extrapolate in the
overparameterized regime. Proposition 3 implies that, regardless of how many (length k) sequences
are used in training, if GD leads to any form of extrapolation, it must be a result of some implicit
bias induced by the algorithm. Note that in our setting, extrapolation cannot be explained via classic
tools from statistical learning theory, as evaluation over sequences longer than those seen in training
violates the standard assumption of train and test data originating from the same distribution.
To decouple the question of extrapolation from that of generalization, we consider the case where
the training set S is large, or more formally, where the empirical loss LS p¨q (Equation 3.3) is well
represented by the population loss Lp¨q (Equation 3.4). We model GD with small step size via
Gradient Flow (GF), as customary in the theory of NNs — see Saxe et al. (2013); Gunasekar et al.
(2017); Arora et al. (2018; 2019b); Lyu & Li (2019); Li et al. (2020); Azulay et al. (2021) for
examples where it is used and Elkabetz & Cohen (2021) for a theoretical justification of its usage.
Using the GF formulation, we analyze the following dynamics:
                                 d            B `                    ˘
                      αpτ
                       9 q :“      αpτ q “ ´ L Apτ q, Bpτ q, Cpτ q , τ ě 0 ,                     (3.6)
                                dτ           Bα
where α P tA, B, Cu. If no assumption on initialization is made, no form of extrapolation can
be established (indeed, the initial point may be a global minimizer of Lp¨q that fails to extrapolate,
and GF will stay there). Following prior work (see Cohen-Karlik et al. (2022)), we assume that the
initialization adheres to the following balancedness condition:
Definition 4. An RNN with parameters Θ “ pA, B, Cq is said to be balanced if B “ C J .
It was shown empirically in Cohen-Karlik et al. (2022) that the balancedness condition captures
near-zero initialization as commonly employed in practice. We support this finding theoretically in
Section 4.3. Aside from the initialization of the student, we will also assume that the teacher adheres
to the balancedness condition.

4    T HEORETICAL A NALYSIS
We turn to our theoretical analysis. Section 4.1 proves that in the setting of Section 3, convergence of
GF to a zero loss solution leads the student to extrapolate, irrespective of how large its state space


                                                   4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


dimension is. Section 4.2 extends this result by establishing that, under mild conditions, approximate
convergence leads to approximate extrapolation. The results of sections 4.1 and 4.2 assume that GF
emanates from a balanced initialization, which empirically is known to capture near-zero initialization
as commonly employed in practice (see Section 3). Section 4.3 theoretically supports this empirical
premise, by showing that with high probability, random near-zero initialization leads to balancedness.
We introduce notations that will be used throughout the analysis. For a matrix Q P Rmˆn , we let
}Q}F , }Q}8 and }Q}2 denote the Frobenius, ℓ8 and ℓ2 (spectral) norms, respectively. For a vector
v P Rm , we use }v} to denote the Euclidean norm and vi to denote its ith entry.

4.1   C ONVERGENCE L EADS TO E XTRAPOLATION

Theoretical analyses of implicit generalization often assume convergence to a solution attaining zero
loss (see, e.g., Azulay et al. (2021); Gunasekar et al. (2017); Lyu & Li (2019); Woodworth et al.
(2020)). Under such an assumption, Theorem 5 below establishes implicit extrapolation, i.e. that
the solution to which GF converges extrapolates, irrespective of how large the student’s state space
dimension d is. A condition posed by the theorem is that the training sequence length k is greater
than two times the teacher’s state space dimension d.ˆ This condition is necessary — see Appendix A
for theoretical justification and Section 5 for empirical demonstration.
Theorem 5. Assume that d ą k ą 2d,      ˆ the teacher parameters Θ̂ are balanced (Definition 4), and
the student parameters Θ are learned by applying GF to the loss Lp¨q (Equation 3.4) starting from
a balanced initialization. Then, if GF converges to a point Θ˚ satisfying LpΘ˚ q “ 0, this point
extrapolates (Definition 2).

In order to prove Theorem 5, we introduce two lemmas: Lemma 6, which shows that balancedness is
preserved under GF; and Lemma 7, which (through a surprising connection to a moment problem
from statistics) establishes that a balanced solution attaining zero loss necessarily extrapolates. With
Lemmas 6 and 7 in place, the proof of Theorem 5 readily follows.
Lemma 6. Let Θpτ q, with τ ě 0, be a curve brought forth by applying GF to the loss Lp¨q starting
from a balanced initialization. Then, Θpτ q is balanced for every τ ě 0.

Proof sketch (for complete proof see Appendix E.1.5). The result follows from the symmetric role of
B and C in the loss Lp¨q.
Lemma 7. Suppose that d ą k ą 2d,ˆ the teacher is balanced, and that the student parameters Θ are
balanced and satisfy LpΘq “ 0. Then Θ extrapolates.

Proof sketch (for complete proof see Appendix E.2). The proof is based on a surprising connection
that we draw to the moment problem from statistics (recovery of a probability distribution from its
moments), which has been studied for decades (see, e.g., Schmüdgen (2017)).
Without loss of generality, we may assume that Â is diagonal (if this is not the case then we apply an
orthogonal eigendecomposition to Â and subsequently absorb eigenvectors into B̂ and Ĉ). We may
also assume that Ĉ B̂ “ 1 (otherwise we absorb a scaling factor into B and/or C). Since Ĉ J “ B̂
(teacher is balanced), we may define a probability vector (i.e. a vector with non-negative entries
                                 ˆ                               ˆ We let Ẑ denote the random variable
summing up to one) p̂ P Rd via p̂i “ Ĉi B̂i , i “ 1, . . . , d.
supported on tÂ1,1 , . . . , Âd,                                                                         ˆ
                                ˆ dˆu, which assumes the value Âi,i with probability p̂i , i “ 1, . . . , d.
Notice that for every j P N:
                                                  ÿdˆ
                                      Ĉ Âj B̂ “     p̂i Âji,i “ ErẐ j s ,
                                                  i“1
meaning that the elements of the teacher’s impulse response are precisely the moments of Ẑ.
Similarly to above we may assume A is diagonal, and since LpΘq “ 0 it holds that CB “ Ĉ B̂ “ 1.
We may thus define a probability vector p P Rd via pi “ Ci Bi , i “ 1, . . . , d, and a random variable Z
which assumes the value Aii with probability pi , i “ 1, . . . , d. For every j P N:
                                            ÿd
                                 CAj B “           pi Aji,i “ ErZ j s ,
                                                  i“1
and so the elements of the student’s impulse response are precisely the moments of Z.


                                                     5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


The probabilistic formulation we set forth admits an interpretation of extrapolation as a moment
problem. Namely, since LpΘq “ 0 (i.e. CAj B “ Ĉ Âj B̂ for j “ 0, . . . , k´1) the random variables
Z and Ẑ agree on their first k ´ 1 moments, and the question is whether they agree on all higher
moments as well. We note that this question is somewhat more challenging than that tackled in classic
instances of the moment problem, since the support of the random variable whose moments we
match (Z) is not known to coincide with the support of the random variable we seek to recover (Ẑ).
Luckily, a recent powerful result allows addressing the question we face — Cohen & Yeredor (2011)
showed that the first 2n moments of a discrete random variable X taking at most n P N values
uniquely define X, in the sense that any discrete random variable agreeing with these 2n moments
must be identical to X. Translating this result to our setting, we have that if Z agrees with Ẑ on
its first 2dˆ moments, it must be identical to Ẑ, and in particular it must agree with Ẑ on all higher
moments as well. The fact that k ´ 1 ě 2dˆ then concludes the proof.
To attain some intuition for the result we imported from Cohen & Yeredor (2011), consider the
simple case where dˆ “ 1. The transition matrix Â is then a scalar â P R, the random variable
Ẑ is deterministically equal to â, and the teacher’s impulse response is given by the moments
ErẐ j s “ âj , j “ 0, 1, . . .. Since we assume k ą 2d,  ˆ the fact that LpΘq “ 0 means the random
variable corresponding to the student, Z, agrees with the first two moments of Ẑ. That is, Z satisfies
ErZs “ â and ErZ 2 s “ â2 . This implies that VarrZs “ ErZ 2 s ´ ErZs2 “ 0, and therefore Z is
deterministically equal to â, i.e. it is identical to Ẑ. The two random variables thus agree on all of
their moments, meaning the impulse responses of the student and teacher are the same.


Proof of Theorem 5. By Lemma 6 (as well as continuity considerations) Θ˚ is balanced. Therefore,
Lemma 7 implies that it extrapolates.

4.2   A PPROXIMATE C ONVERGENCE L EADS TO A PPROXIMATE E XTRAPOLATION

Theorem 5 in Section 4.1 proves extrapolation in the case where GF converges to a zero loss solution.
Theorem 8 below extends this result by establishing that, under mild conditions, approximate
convergence leads to approximate extrapolation — or more formally — for any ϵ ą 0 and q P N,
when GF leads the loss to be sufficiently small, the student ϵ-extrapolates with horizon q.
Theorem 8. Assume the conditions of Theorem 5, and that the teacher parameters Θ̂ are stable,
i.e. the eigenvalues of Â are in r´1, 1s. Assume also that Θ̂ are non-degenerate, in the sense
that the input-output mapping they realize is not identically zero. Finally, assume that the student
parameters Θ learned by GF are confined to some bounded domain in parameter space. Then, for
any ϵ ą 0 and q P N, there exists δpϵ, qq ą 0 such that whenever LpΘq ď δpϵ, qq, the student
ϵ-extrapolates with horizon q.


Proof sketch (for complete proof see Appendix E.3). Let δ ą 0 be a constant whose value will be
chosen later, and suppose GF reached a point Θ satisfying LpΘq ď δ.
Following the proof of Lemma 7, Θ̂ is identified with a distribution supported on the eigenvalues of Â,
whose jth moment is m̂j :“ Ĉ Âj B̂pĈ B̂q´1 for every j P N. Similarly, Θ is identified with a dis-
tribution supported on the eigenvalues of A, whose jth moment ?      is mj :“ CAj BpCBq´1 for every?
j P N. The fact that LpΘq ď δ implies |CB ´ Ĉ B̂| ď δ, and in addition |m̂j ´ mj | ď Op δq
for every j “ 1, . . . , k ´ 1. To conclude the proof it suffices to show that

                              |m̂j ´ mj | ď Opϵq       @j P t1, . . . , q ´ 1u                     (4.1)

given a small enough choice for δ (this choice then serves as δpϵ, qq in the theorem statement).
We establish Equation 4.1 by employing the theory of Wasserstein distances (Vaserstein, 1969).
For p P N, denote by Wp the p-Wasserstein distance      ? between the distributions identified with Θ̂
                   ˆ it holds that |m̂j ´ mj | ď Op δq for every j “ 1, . . . , 2d.
and Θ. Since k ą 2d,                                                               ˆ Proposition 2 in
                                              1{4dˆ                              1{p
Wu & Yang (2020) then implies W1 ď Opδ             q. For any p P N, Wp ď OpW1 q (see Section 2.3
in Panaretos & Zemel (2019)) and |m̂p ´ mp | ď OpWp q (see Section 1.2 in Biswas & Mackey
                                                                                     ˆ
(2021)). Combining the latter three inequalities, we have that |m̂p ´ mp | ď Opδ 1{4dp q for any p P N.
                   ˆ
                 4dpq´1q
Choosing δ “ Opϵ          q therefore establishes Equation 4.1.


                                                   6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


4.3   BALANCEDNESS C APTURES N EAR -Z ERO I NITIALIZATION

Theorems 5 and 8 assume that GF emanates from a balanced initialization, i.e. from a point
Θ “ pA, B, Cq satisfying B “ C J . It was shown in Cohen-Karlik et al. (2022) that theoreti-
cal predictions derived assuming balanced initialization faithfully match experiments conducted with
near-zero initialization (an initialization commonly used in practice). Proposition 9 below theoreti-
cally supports this finding, establishing that with high probability, random near-zero initialization
leads GF to arrive at an approximately balanced point, i.e. a point Θ “ pA, B, Cq for which the
difference between B and C J is negligible compared to their size.
Proposition 9. Suppose that: (i) d ą 20; (ii) the teacher parameters Θ̂ are balanced and are
non-degenerate, in the sense that the input-output mapping they realize is not identically zero; and
(iii) the student parameters are learned by applying GF to the loss Lp¨q. Let Θ̃ be a random point in
parameter space, with entries drawn independently from the standard normal distribution. For ϵ ą 0,
consider the case where GF emanates from the initialization ϵΘ̃, and denote the resulting curve by
Θϵ pτ q “ pAϵ pτ q, Bϵ pτ q, Cϵ pτ qq, with τ ě 0. Then, w.p. at least 0.75, for every ϵ ą 0 there exists
τϵ ě 0 such that:
                                           ||Bϵ pτϵ q ´ CϵJ pτϵ q||F
                                      lim                            “ 0.                           (4.2)
                                     ϵÑ0 ||Bϵ pτϵ q ` CϵJ pτϵ q||F
                                         `



Proof sketch (for complete proof see Appendix E.4). The idea behind the proof is as follows. Assume
ϵ is sufficiently small. Then, when the entries of Θ “ pA, B, Cq are on the order of ϵ, we have
 B                        J        B                        J
BB LpΘq « ´2Ĉ B̂ ¨ C and BC LpΘq « ´2Ĉ B̂ ¨ B . This implies that during the first part of
                                  d
the curve Θϵ pτ q it holds that dτ pBϵ pτ q ´ Cϵ pτ qq « ´2Ĉ B̂ ¨ pBϵ pτ q ´ CϵJ pτ qq and similarly
                                                  J
 d               J
dτ pBϵ pτ q ` Cϵ pτ qq «      2Ĉ B̂ ¨ pBϵ pτ q ` CϵJ pτ qq. Since Ĉ B̂ ą 0 (follows from the teacher
parameters being balanced and non-degenerate), the entries of Bϵ pτ q ´ CϵJ pτ q shrink exponentially
fast while those of LBϵ pτ q ` CϵJ pτ q grow at the same rate. This exponential shrinkage/growth leads
}Bϵ pτ q ´ CϵJ pτ q} }Bϵ pτ q ` CϵJ pτ q} to become extremely small, more so the smaller ϵ is.

5     E XPERIMENTS
In this section we present experiments corroborating our theoretical analysis (Section 4). The latter
establishes that, under certain conditions, a linear RNN with state space dimension d extrapolates
when learning from a teacher network with state space dimension dˆ via training sequences of length k,
irrespective of how large d is compared to dˆ and k. A key condition underlying the result is that
                   ˆ Section 5.1 below considers the theoretically analyzed setting, and empirically
k is larger than 2d.
evaluates extrapolation as k varies. Its results demonstrate a phase transition, in the sense that
extrapolation takes place when k ą 2d, ˆ in compliance with theory, but fails when k falls below 2d,ˆ
in which case the theory indeed does not guarantee extrapolation. Section 5.2 displays the same
phenomenon with linear RNNs that do not adhere to some of the assumptions made by the theory
(in particular the assumption of symmetric transition matrices, and those concerning balancedness).
Finally, Section 5.3 considers non-linear RNNs (specifically, Gated Recurrent Unit networks Chung
et al. (2014)), and shows that they too exhibit a phase transition in extrapolation as the training
sequence length varies. For brevity, we defer some of the details behind our implementation, as well
as additional experiments, to Appendix B.

5.1   T HEORETICALLY A NALYZED S ETTING

Our first experiment considers the setting described in Section 3 and theoretically analyzed in Sec-
tion 4. As representative values for the state space dimensions of the teacher and (overparameterized)
student, we choose dˆ “ 5 and d “ 40 respectively (higher state space dimensions for the student,
namely d “ 100 and d “ 200, yield qualitatively identical results). For a given training sequence
length k, the student is learned via GD applied directly to the population loss defined in Equation 3.4
(applying GD to the empirical loss defined in Equation 3.3, with N “ 10, 000 training examples, led
to similar results). Figure 1(a) reports the extrapolation error (quantified by the ℓ8 distance between
the impulse response of the learned student and that of the teacher) as a function of k. As can be seen,
extrapolation exhibits a phase transition that accords with our theory: when k ą 2dˆ extrapolation
error is low, whereas when k falls below 2dˆ extrapolation error is high.


                                                   7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


5.2   OTHER S ETTINGS W ITH L INEAR R ECURRENT N EURAL N ETWORKS

To assess the generality of our findings, we experiment with linear RNNs in settings that do not
adhere to some of the assumptions made by our theory. Specifically, we evaluate settings in which:
(i) the teacher is unbalanced, meaning B̂ ‰ Ĉ J , and its transition matrix Â is non-symmetric;
(ii) the student’s transition matrix A is not restricted to be symmetric; (iii) learning is implemented
by optimizing the empirical loss defined in Equation 3.3 (rather than the population loss defined
in Equation 3.4); and (iv) optimization is based on Adam Kingma & Ba (2014) (rather than GD),
emanating from standard near-zero initialization which is generally unbalanced (namely, B ‰ C J ).
Figure 1(b) reports the results of an experiment where the state space dimensions of the teacher and
(overparameterized) student are dˆ “ 10 and d “ 50 respectively (higher state space dimensions for
the student, namely d “ 100 and d “ 200, yield qualitatively identical results), and where the teacher
implements a delay line of dˆ time steps (for details see Appendix C.2.2). Similar results obtained
with randomly generated teachers are reported in Appendix B. As can be seen, despite the fact that
our theory does not apply to the evaluated settings, its conclusions still hold — extrapolation error is
low when the training sequence length k is greater than 2d,   ˆ and high when k falls below 2d.ˆ


            (a) Theoretically analyzed setting             (b) Other setting with linear RNN

Figure 1: Demonstration of implicit extrapolation with linear RNNs. Plots show extrapolation error
(average over three random seeds, with shaded region marking standard deviation) as a function
of training sequence length k, for a student with state space dimension d learning from a teacher
with state space dimension d, ˆ where d " d. ˆ (a) Models adhere to the setting described in Section 3
and theoretically analyzed in Section 4, with dˆ “ 5, d “ 40. (b) Models do not adhere to some
of the assumptions made by the theory, and dˆ “ 10, d “ 50. Notice that extrapolation exhibits a
phase transition that accords with theory — when k ą 2dˆ extrapolation error is low, and when k
falls below 2dˆ extrapolation error is high. The gradual transition exhibited is due to numerical errors
introduced by the optimization not reaching an exact global minimum. For further details see Sections
5.1 and 5.2 and Appendix B.



5.3   N ON -L INEAR R ECURRENT N EURAL N ETWORKS

As a final experiment, we explore implicit extrapolation with non-linear RNNs, namely GRU networks.
Specifically, we evaluate the extent to which a student GRU with state space dimension dg “ 100
extrapolates when learning from a teacher GRU with state space dimension dˆg “ 10 (higher state
space dimensions for the student, namely dg “ 200 and dg “ 500, yield qualitatively identical
results). The student is learned by optimizing an empirical loss comprising training sequences of
length kg , where kg is predetermined. Optimization is based on Adam emanating from standard near-
zero initialization. Figure 2(a) reports the extrapolation error (quantified by the ℓ8 distance between
the response of the learned student and that of the teacher, averaged across randomly generated input
sequences) for different choices of kg . As can be seen, similarly to the case with linear RNNs (see
Sections 5.1 and 5.2), there exists a critical threshold for the training sequence length kg , above
which extrapolation error is low and below which extrapolation error is high (note that this critical
threshold is around four times the teacher’s state space dimension, whereas with linear RNNs the
critical threshold was around two times the teacher’s state space dimension; theoretically explaining
this difference is an interesting direction for future work). Figure 2(b) displays the average output
response over different inputs of the teacher alongside those of two students — one trained with


                                                   8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


    (a) Extrapolation vs. training sequence length         (b) Average output over several inputs

Figure 2: Demonstration of implicit extrapolation with non-linear RNNs, namely GRU networks.
Plots show results for a student with state space dimension dg “ 100 learning from a teacher with state
space dimension dˆg “ 10 using training sequences of length kg , where kg varies. (a) Extrapolation
error (average over ten random seeds, with shaded region marking standard deviation) as a function
of kg . (b) Average output over several inputs of teacher and student for different choices of kg . Notice
that, similarly to the case with linear RNNs, there exists a critical threshold for kg above which
extrapolation error is low and below which extrapolation error is high. See details in Appendix B.


sequences of length kg “ 30, and the other with sequences of length kg “ 60.2 As expected, the
impulse response of each student tracks that of the teacher for the first kg time steps (where kg is
student-dependent). However, while the student for which kg “ 30 fails to track the teacher beyond
kg time steps, the student for which kg “ 60 succeeds, thereby exemplifying implicit extrapolation.


6     C ONCLUSION

This paper studies the question of extrapolation in RNNs, and more specifically, of whether a student
RNN trained on data generated by a teacher RNN can capture the behavior of the teacher over
sequences longer than those seen in training. We focus on overparameterized students that can
perfectly fit training sequences while producing a wide range of behaviors over longer sequences.
Such a student will fail to extrapolate, unless the teacher possesses a certain structure, and the learning
algorithm is biased towards solutions adhering to that structure. We show — theoretically for linear
RNNs and empirically for both linear and non-linear RNNs — that such implicit extrapolation takes
place when the teacher has a low dimensional state space and the learning algorithm is GD.
Existing studies of implicit extrapolation in (linear) RNNs (Emami et al., 2021; Cohen-Karlik et al.,
2022) suggest that GD is biased towards solutions with short-term memory. While low dimensional
state space and short-term memory may coincide in some cases, in general they do not, and a solution
with low dimensional state space may entail long-term memory. Our theory and experiments show
that in settings where low dimensional state space and short-term memory contradict each other, the
implicit extrapolation chooses the former over the latter.
An important direction for future work is extending our theory to non-linear RNNs. We believe it is
possible, in the same way that theories for linear (feed-forward) NNs were extended to account for
non-linear NNs (see, e.g., Razin et al. (2021; 2022); Lyu & Li (2019)). An additional direction to
explore is the applicability of our results to the recently introduced S4 model (Gu et al., 2022).


7     ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

This work was supported by the European Research Council (ERC) under the European Unions
Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme (grant ERC HOLI 819080), the Tel-Aviv University
Data-Science and AI Center (TAD), a Google Research Scholar Award, a Google Research Gift, the
Yandex Initiative in Machine Learning, the Israel Science Foundation (grant 1780/21), Len Blavatnik
and the Blavatnik Family Foundation, and Amnon and Anat Shashua.

   2
     Note that with GRU networks, in contrast to linear RNNs, the impulse response does not identify the
input-output mapping realized by a network. It is presented in Figure 2(b) for demonstrative purposes.


                                                     9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


R EFERENCES
Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, and Zhao Song. On the convergence rate of training recurrent neural
  networks. Advances in neural information processing systems, 32, 2019.

Cem Anil, Yuhuai Wu, Anders Andreassen, Aitor Lewkowycz, Vedant Misra, Vinay Ramasesh,
  Ambrose Slone, Guy Gur-Ari, Ethan Dyer, and Behnam Neyshabur. Exploring length generalization
  in large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.04901, 2022.

Athanasios C Antoulas. Approximation of large-scale dynamical systems. SIAM, 2005.

Sanjeev Arora, Nadav Cohen, and Elad Hazan. On the optimization of deep networks: Implicit
  acceleration by overparameterization. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp.
  244–253. PMLR, 2018.

Sanjeev Arora, Nadav Cohen, Noah Golowich, and Wei Hu. A convergence analysis of gradient
  descent for deep linear neural networks. International Conference on Learning Representations
  (ICLR), 2019a.

Sanjeev Arora, Nadav Cohen, Wei Hu, and Yuping Luo. Implicit regularization in deep matrix
  factorization. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), pp. 7413–7424,
  2019b.

Shahar Azulay, Edward Moroshko, Mor Shpigel Nacson, Blake E Woodworth, Nathan Srebro, Amir
  Globerson, and Daniel Soudry. On the implicit bias of initialization shape: Beyond infinitesimal
  mirror descent. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 468–477. PMLR, 2021.

Niloy Biswas and Lester Mackey. Bounding wasserstein distance with couplings. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2112.03152, 2021.

S Boyd and L Lessard. Ee263: Introduction to linear dynamical systems. Online Lecture Notes,
  Stanford University, Spring Quarter, 2007, 2006.

Junyoung Chung, Caglar Gulcehre, KyungHyun Cho, and Yoshua Bengio. Empirical evaluation of
  gated recurrent neural networks on sequence modeling. arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.3555, 2014.

Anna Cohen and Arie Yeredor. On the use of sparsity for recovering discrete probability distributions
  from their moments. In 2011 IEEE Statistical Signal Processing Workshop (SSP), pp. 753–756.
  IEEE, 2011.

Edo Cohen-Karlik, Avichai Ben David, Nadav Cohen, and Amir Globerson. On the implicit bias of
  gradient descent for temporal extrapolation. International Conference on Artificial Intelligence
  and Statistics, 2022.

Michael Elad. Sparse and Redundant Representations: From Theory to Applications in Signal and
 Image Processing. Springer Publishing Company, Incorporated, 2010.

Yonina C. Eldar and Gitta Kutyniok. Compressed Sensing: Theory and Applications. Cambridge
  University Press, 2012.

Omer Elkabetz and Nadav Cohen. Continuous vs. discrete optimization of deep neural networks.
 Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34, 2021.

Melikasadat Emami, Mojtaba Sahraee-Ardakan, Parthe Pandit, Sundeep Rangan, and Alyson K.
 Fletcher. Implicit bias of linear rnns, 2021.

David Gale. Neighborly and cyclic polytopes. In Proc. Sympos. Pure Math, volume 7, pp. 225–232,
 1963.

Albert Gu, Tri Dao, Stefano Ermon, Atri Rudra, and Christopher Ré. Hippo: Recurrent memory
  with optimal polynomial projections. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:
  1474–1487, 2020.


                                                10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Albert Gu, Isys Johnson, Karan Goel, Khaled Saab, Tri Dao, Atri Rudra, and Christopher Ré.
  Combining recurrent, convolutional, and continuous-time models with linear state space layers.
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34, 2021.
Albert Gu, Karan Goel, and Christopher Re. Efficiently modeling long sequences with structured
  state spaces. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2022.
Suriya Gunasekar, Blake E Woodworth, Srinadh Bhojanapalli, Behnam Neyshabur, and Nati Srebro.
  Implicit regularization in matrix factorization. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  30, 2017.
Ankit Gupta. Diagonal state spaces are as effective as structured state spaces. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2203.14343, 2022.
Moritz Hardt, Tengyu Ma, and Benjamin Recht. Gradient descent learns linear dynamical systems.
 arXiv preprint arXiv:1609.05191, 2016.
Elad Hazan, Holden Lee, Karan Singh, Cyril Zhang, and Yi Zhang. Spectral filtering for general
  linear dynamical systems. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 31, 2018.
Sepp Hochreiter and Jürgen Schmidhuber. Long short-term memory. Neural Computation, 9(8):
  1735–1780, 1997. doi: 10.1162/neco.1997.9.8.1735.
Ziwei Ji and Matus Telgarsky. Gradient descent aligns the layers of deep linear networks. In
  International Conference on Learning Representations, 2018.
Rudolf E Kalman. On the general theory of control systems. In Proceedings First International
  Conference on Automatic Control, Moscow, USSR, pp. 481–492, 1960.
Rudolf Emil Kalman. Mathematical description of linear dynamical systems. Journal of the Society
  for Industrial and Applied Mathematics, Series A: Control, 1(2):152–192, 1963.
Diederik P Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1412.6980, 2014.
Beatrice Laurent and Pascal Massart. Adaptive estimation of a quadratic functional by model selection.
  Annals of Statistics, pp. 1302–1338, 2000.
Zhiyuan Li, Yuping Luo, and Kaifeng Lyu. Towards resolving the implicit bias of gradient descent
  for matrix factorization: Greedy low-rank learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2012.09839, 2020.
Soon Hoe Lim, N Benjamin Erichson, Liam Hodgkinson, and Michael W Mahoney. Noisy recurrent
  neural networks. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:5124–5137, 2021.
Lennart Ljung. System identification. Wiley encyclopedia of electrical and electronics engineering,
  pp. 1–19, 1999.
Kaifeng Lyu and Jian Li. Gradient descent maximizes the margin of homogeneous neural networks.
  In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2019.
Victor M Panaretos and Yoav Zemel. Statistical aspects of wasserstein distances. Annual review of
  statistics and its application, 6:405–431, 2019.
Boaz Porat. A course in digital signal processing. John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 1996.
Ofir Press, Noah Smith, and Mike Lewis. Train short, test long: Attention with linear biases enables
  input length extrapolation. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2022.
Noam Razin and Nadav Cohen. Implicit regularization in deep learning may not be explainable by
  norms. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2020.
Noam Razin, Asaf Maman, and Nadav Cohen. Implicit regularization in tensor factorization.
 International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2021.


                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Noam Razin, Asaf Maman, and Nadav Cohen. Implicit regularization in hierarchical tensor factor-
  ization and deep convolutional neural networks. International Conference on Machine Learning
 (ICML), 2022.
Andrew M Saxe, James L McClelland, and Surya Ganguli. Exact solutions to the nonlinear dynamics
  of learning in deep linear neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1312.6120, 2013.
Konrad Schmüdgen. The moment problem, volume 9. Springer, 2017.
Leonid Nisonovich Vaserstein. Markov processes over denumerable products of spaces, describing
  large systems of automata. Problemy Peredachi Informatsii, 5(3):64–72, 1969.
Blake Woodworth, Suriya Gunasekar, Jason D Lee, Edward Moroshko, Pedro Savarese, Itay Golan,
  Daniel Soudry, and Nathan Srebro. Kernel and rich regimes in overparametrized models. In
  Conference on Learning Theory, pp. 3635–3673. PMLR, 2020.
Yihong Wu and Pengkun Yang. Optimal estimation of gaussian mixtures via denoised method of
  moments. The Annals of Statistics, 48(4):1981–2007, 2020.
Keyulu Xu, Mozhi Zhang, Jingling Li, Simon S Du, Ken-ichi Kawarabayashi, and Stefanie Jegelka.
  How neural networks extrapolate: From feedforward to graph neural networks. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2009.11848, 2020.
Chulhee Yun, Shankar Krishnan, and Hossein Mobahi. A unifying view on implicit bias in training
  linear neural networks. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2020.
Chiyuan Zhang, Samy Bengio, Moritz Hardt, Benjamin Recht, and Oriol Vinyals. Understanding
  deep learning requires rethinking generalization. In 5th International Conference on Learning
  Representations, ICLR 2017, Toulon, France, April 24-26, 2017, Conference Track Proceedings.
  OpenReview.net, 2017. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=Sy8gdB9xx.
Yi Zhang, Arturs Backurs, Sébastien Bubeck, Ronen Eldan, Suriya Gunasekar, and Tal Wagner.
  Unveiling transformers with lego: a synthetic reasoning task. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.04301,
  2022.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A     N ECESSITY OF L OWER B OUND ON T RAINING S EQUENCE L ENGTH

Our theoretical guarantees of implicit extrapolation (Theorems 5 and 8) assumed that the training
sequence length k is greater than two times the teacher’s state space dimension d.     ˆ Below we show
that this assumption is necessary (up to a small additive constant). More precisely, we prove that if
k ď 2dˆ ´ 1, implicit extrapolation cannot be guaranteed.
Lemma A.1. For any dˆ P N, there exist two configurations of teacher parameters Θ̂1 “ pÂ1 , B̂1 , Ĉ1 q
and Θ̂2 “ pÂ2 , B̂2 , Ĉ2 q, both balanced (Definition 4), stable (meaning the eigenvalues of Â1 and Â2
are in r´1, 1s) and non-degenerate (meaning the input-output mappings realized by Θ̂1 and Θ̂2 are
not identically zero), such that:

                         B̂1 Âj1 Ĉ1 “ B̂2 Âj2 Ĉ2 for all j “ 0, 1, . . . , 2dˆ ´ 2 ,
and yet:
                                B̂1 Âj1 Ĉ1 ‰ B̂2 Âj2 Ĉ2 for j “ 2dˆ ´ 1 .

Proof. A derivation as in the proof sketch of Lemma 7 shows that any d-atomic  ˆ        distribution (i.e. any
                                     ˆ
distribution supported on a set of d real numbers) can be associated with a balanced configuration of
teacher parameters Θ̂ “ pÂ, B̂, Ĉq satisfying Ĉ B̂ “ 1, such that the values to which the distribution
assigns non-zero probability are the eigenvalues of Â, and the jth moment of the distribution is equal
to Ĉ Âj B̂ for every j P N. In light of this, and of the fact that any configuration of teacher parameters
Θ̂ “ pÂ, B̂, Ĉq satisfying Ĉ B̂ “ 1 is non-degenerate (the first element of its impulse response is
                                                        ˆ
non-zero), it suffices to prove that there exist two d-atomic     distributions supported on r´1, 1s which
agree on their first 2dˆ ´ 2 moments yet disagree on their p2dˆ ´ 1q’th moment. This follows from
Lemmas 4 and 30 in Wu & Yang (2020).

Corollary A.2. Assume the conditions of Theorem 5, but with k ą 2dˆ replaced by k ď 2dˆ ´ 1. Then,
the stated result does not hold, i.e. GF may converge to a point Θ˚ satisfying LpΘ˚ q “ 0 which
does not extrapolate (Definition 2). Similarly, replacing k ą 2dˆ by k ď 2dˆ ´ 1 in the conditions
of Theorem 8 renders the stated result false, meaning there exist ϵ ą 0 and q P N such that for
every δ ą 0, there is some Θ satisfying LpΘq ď δ which does not ϵ-extrapolate with horizon q
(Definition 2).

Proof. In the context of either Theorem 5 or Theorem 8, if k ď 2dˆ´ 1 then by Lemma A.1 there exist
two configurations of teacher parameters — both satisfying the conditions of the theorem — which
lead to a different impulse response (Definition 1) yet induce the same loss Lp¨q (Equation 3.4). If the
result stated in the theorem were true, it would mean extrapolation, or ϵ-extrapolation with horizon q
for arbitrarily small ϵ ą 0 and arbitrarily large q P N (see Definition 2), simultaneously with respect
to both teachers, and this leads to a contradiction.


B     F URTHER E XPERIMENTS

In this section we provide additional experiments that are not included in the main manuscript due to
space constraints.

B.1     BALANCED T EACHER

In Section 5.1, we have experimented with our proposed theoretical setup. In this section we provide
additional figures and experiments.

B.1.1      U NBALANCED S TUDENT
In this experiment we use the same balanced teacher with dˆ “ 5 as done in Section 5.1. Instead of the
diagonal student with balanced initialization, we use a general (non-diagonal) student with weights
sampled from a Gaussian with scale 10´5 and d “ 40. Results are depicted in Figure 3(a). A similar
phase transition phenomenon to the one in Figure 1 is found also here.


                                                      13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


(a) Balanced teacher and general (unbalanced) student (b) Random (unbalanced) teacher and general (unbal-
                                                      anced) student

Figure 3: Extrapolation error as a function of the training sequence length k. (a) a balanced teacher
with state dimensions dˆ “ 5 and a general (unbalanced and non diagonal) student with d “ 40.
(b) a random unbalanced teacher (see Section B.2) with dimension dˆ “ 5, and a student that has a
non-diagonal transition matrix and is trained with standard (small) initialization, with state dimension
d “ 50. In both plots results are averaged over 3 seeds.


Figure 4: Extrapolation error as a function of training sequence length k for different initialization
scales. Extrapolation error increases along with the scale of initialization.


B.1.2    E FFECT OF THE I NITIALIZATION S CALE

Proposition 9 provides theoretical support for the fact that under near-zero initialization, the learned
RNN tends to balancedness, which according to theorems 5 and 8 guarantees extrapolation. Below
we empirically explore the impact of varying the initialization scale. We use the same setting as in
Section B.1.1, and repeat the experiment with different initialization scales for the students’ weights.
As can be seen in Figure 4, the extrapolation deteriorates for larger initialization scale, in the sense
that it requires longer training sequences for getting good extrapolation error. This suggests that the
condition of small initialization required by our theory is not an artifact of our proof technique, but
rather a necessary condition for extrapolation to occur.

B.2     U NBALANCED T EACHER

In Section 5.2, we have tested the extrapolation with respect to a specific unbalanced teacher and have
observed a similar phase transition as predicted by the theory of Section 4 and empirical evaluation of
Section 5.1. Here we show that the phase transition is not limited to the specific teacher discussed by


                                                  14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 5: Balanced teacher and student impulse response. Students trained with: k “ 10, 20
with respect to the balanced teacher described in Section C.2.1. As can be seen, both students track
the teacher up to the k used in training, for k “ 10 there is no extrapolation for larger values of k,
whereas k “ 20 tracks the teacher well beyond the sequence length used in training.


testing with respect to a randomly generated unbalanced (non-diagonal) teacher (see Section C.2.2).
The teacher is set to dˆ “ 5 and student to d “ 50. Results are presented in Figure 3 (b). Here too we
can observe the phase transition phenomena.

B.3   I MPULSE R ESPONSE F IGURES

In Section 5 we have presented the extrapolation performance in different settings. In order to better
convey the meaning of extrapolating vs non-extrapolating solutions we present here figures of the
impulse response of different models.
We start with the impulse response corresponding to the experiment described in Section 5.1. Figure 5
depicts the balanced teacher with dˆ “ 5 and two selected students (with d “ 40), one trained with
k “ 10 and the other with k “ 20.
We can see that the student trained with k “ 10 tracks the teacher several steps beyond the 10th
time step and then decays to zero. For k “ 20 we can see near perfect extrapolation for the horizon
evaluated.
Next we turn to Section 5.2 and depict the average impulse responses (Figure 6) of the “delay teacher”
and the students trained with respect to the mentioned teacher.
Since the teacher here has dˆ “ 10, a model trained with k “ 8 is trained with respect to the zero
impulse response (see Section C.2.2 for details on delay teacher), and as expected results with the
‘zero’ solution. we can see that for k “ 18 the student diverges from the teacher shortly after the
18th time step. For k “ 20 we can see near perfect extrapolation up to the horizon considered.

C     I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS
All the experiments are implemented using PyTorch.

C.1   O PTIMIZATION

In Section 5.1 we optimize the population loss, which entails minimizing Equation 3.4 with respect
to the parameters of the learned model. We use 15K optimization steps with Adam optimizer and a
learning rate of 10´3 . In this experiment, the results were not sensitive to the initialization scale of
the (balanced) student. In Section 5.2 and Section 5.3 in the experiments that involve minimizing
the empirical loss, we use 50K optimization steps with early stopping (most experiments required
less than 10K steps). The batch size is set to 100, data is sampled from a Gaussian with zero mean


                                                   15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 6: Unbalanced teacher (delay) and student impulse response. Students trained with:
k “ 8, 18, 20 with respect to the unbalanced delay teacher described in Section C.2.2. We can see
that for k “ 18 the student diverges for longer sequences while k “ 20 which is trained for merely
two additional time steps extrapolates and tracks the teacher almost perfectly.


and scale of 1. Experiments were not sensitive to most hyper-parameters other than learning rate and
initialization scale. The examination of the effect of initialization scale presented in Section B.1.2
is done with learning rate scheduler torch.optim.lr_scheduler.MultiStepLR using
milestones at r5000, 10000, 15000, 30000s and a decaying factor of γ “ 0.1.

C.2     T EACHER G ENERATION

One of the main challenges in empirically evaluating extrapolation is that randomly sampling weights
from a Gaussian distribution may result with an RNN of lower effective rank (i.e. the resulting RNN
may be accurately approximated with another RNN with a smaller hidden dimension). We will now
describe the teacher generation scheme for the different experiments.

C.2.1    BALANCED T EACHER G ENERATION
A balanced teacher consists of d entries corresponding to the diagonal teacher and d entries repre-
senting B̂ “ Ĉ J . In order to avoid cases of rapid decay in the impulse response on the one hand,
and exponential growth on the other, we set the eigenvalues to distribute uniformly between 0.6 and
1.05. The values of B̂ and Ĉ are randomly sampled from a Gaussian around 0.5 and scale 1 and then
normalized such that Ĉ B̂ “ 1.

C.2.2    U NBALANCED T EACHER G ENERATION
In this experiment, the teacher has a general (non-symmetrid) matrix Â and B̂ ‰ Ĉ J . We set the
weights as described next.

Delay Teacher A ‘delay’ teacher has an impulse response of 1 at time step i “ dˆ ´ 1, that is, the
teacher has an impulse response of p0, . . . , 0, 1, 0, . . . q. In order to generate the mentioned impulse
response we set the weights as follows,

                          0 1                   0          0                 1
                         ¨                          ˛     ¨ ˛               ¨ ˛
                                       ..                 ˚ .. ‹             0‹
                                            .
                         ˚                        ‹                         ˚
                       A“˚                        ‹ , B “ ˚ . ‹ , and C J “ ˚ . ‹ .                  (C.1)
                                                                            ˝.‚
                          0 0                   1          0                  .
                         ˝                        ‚       ˝ ‚
                          0 0                   0          1                 0

Note that B, C above are set to extract the last entry of the first row of Ai and A is a Nilpotent shift
matrix. It is straightforward to verify that CAi B “ 1 for i “ dˆ ´ 1 and 0 otherwise.


                                                        16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Random Unbalanced Teacher The second unbalanced teacher is randomly generated. In order to
avoid the caveats mentioned in Section B.1, we randomly sample the diagonal (from a Gaussian with
zero mean and scale 0.1) and super diagonal (from a Gaussian with mean 0.7 and scale 0.1) of A.
We set B, C as in equation C.1. The structure of A ensures similar properties to that of the delayed
teacher, specifically, that the first entries of the impulse response is zero and the teacher is ‘revealed’
only after dˆ time steps.

C.2.3    N ON -L INEAR T EACHER G ENERATION
As opposed to the linear teacher discussed in previous sections, when the teacher is a Gated Recurrent
Units (GRU), it is unclear how to generate a non-trivial teacher. When randomly generating a teacher
GRU the result is either a trivial model that quickly decays to zero or a teacher with an exploding
impulse response (depending on the scale of the initialization). In order to produce a teacher with
interesting extrapolation behaviour, we initialize a model with an initialization scale of 10´6 and
train for 1000 step the model to mimic an arbitrarily chosen impulse response. The result of the
mentioned procedure is a teacher GRU with non-trivial behaviour. Figure 2(b) shows that we get
with this non-trivial teacher the phase transition phenomena as described in Section 5.3.

C.3     E XTRAPOLATION E RROR

The concept of extrapolation is very intuitive, and yet it does not admit any standard error measure.
A proper extrapolation error measure should: (a) capture fine differences between two models with
good extrapolation behaviour; and on the other hand, (b) be insensitive to the scale in which two
non-extrapolating model explode. A natural approach which we take here is to report the ℓ8 norm
difference on the tail of the impulse response. A model is considered non-extrapolating if the
extrapolation error is worse than the extrapolation error of a trivial solution which has an impulse
response of zeros.

D     ACCUMULATING L OSS
In the main paper the analysis is performed for the loss function defined in Section 3, which
corresponds to a regression problem over sequences. Another important and common loss function
is an accumulating loss defined over the full output sequence. Specifically, the empirical loss of
Equation 3.3 is replaced with,
                                               N k´1
                                            1 ÿ ÿ ´         ´
                                                              piq
                                                                  ¯
                                                                    piq
                                                                        ¯
                         LS pA, B, Cq “               ℓ RN N xj , yj ,                              (D.1)
                                            N i“1 j“0

In this section we discuss the adaptations required to accommodate our theory with the loss defined
in Equation D.1.

D.1     P OPULATION L OSS

A similar derivation of the population loss described in Appendix E.1.1 can be applied to Equation D.1.
The difference is that an additional summation is introduced and is preserved throughout the analysis
to result with,             «                        ff
                             k´1                          k´1 j
                              ÿ                           ÿ ÿ   `               ˘2
                    Ex„D         ℓ pRN N pxj q , yj q “           CAi B ´ wi .                   (D.2)
                             j“0                          j“0 i“0

The loss above can be viewed as a different weighting of the original population loss, i.e. Equation D.2
can be written as
                                     k´1
                                     ÿ
                                         pk ´ iqpCAi B ´ wi q2 .                                   (D.3)
                                      i“0

It is clear that the minimizers of Equation D.2 are the same minimizers of Equation 3.4 (i.e. CAi B “
wi for i “ 0, . . . , k ´ 1). Thus Lemma 7 holds with no additional modifications.


                                                   17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


D.2     A PPROXIMATE E XTRAPOLATION

For Theorem 8 the analysis in the proof makes use         ? of the fact that the difference in the moments
defined by the student and teacher is bounded by Op δq. The same        a is true for the case of the?weighted
loss, specifically, if the loss ď δ, then for all i “ 0, . . . , k ´ 1,a pk ´ iqpCAi B ´ wi q ď? δ. Since
k ´ i ě 1 for i “ 0, . . . , k ´ 1 we have pCAi B ´ wi q ď pk ´ iqpCAi B ´ wi q ď δ and the
remainder of the proof is the same.


D.3     I MPLICIT B IAS FOR BALANCEDNESS

The proof of the implicit bias for balancedness involve the gradients of the population loss defined
in Equation 3.4. For the weighted population loss the gradients differ, but the symmetries are
all preserved (the gradient computation boils down to adding an external summation to the terms
computed in Section E.1.4. The same steps described in Section E.4 apply for the weighted loss.



E     D EFERRED P ROOFS

Here we provide complete proofs for the results in the paper.


E.1     AUXILARY P ROOFS

In this section we provide missing proofs from the main paper and additional lemmas to be used in
the main proofs.


E.1.1    P OPULATION L OSS

Lemma E.1 (Proof of Equation 3.4). Assume x „ D such that Ex„D rxs “ 0, Ex„D rxxJ s “ Ik P
Rk,k , where Ik is the identity matrix. y is given by y “ RN
                                                           { N pxq where RN
                                                                          {   N p¨q denotes the output
                                                          i
of a teacher RNN, Θ̂ “ pÂ, B̂, Ĉq. Denote wi “ Ĉ Â B̂, the loss for the student RNN satisfies:



                                                          k´1
                                                          ÿ     `                ˘2
                           Ex„D rℓ pRN N pxq , yqs “                CAi B ´ wi        .                 (E.1)
                                                          i“0


Proof of Lemma E.1. The population loss for training with sequences of length k is


                                             »˜                                              ¸2 fi
                                                  k´1
                                                  ÿ                        k´1
                                                                           ÿ
        Ex„D rℓ pRN N pxq , yqs “ Ex„D –                CAk´1´i Bxi ´            wk´1´j xj      fl .    (E.2)
                                                  i“0                      j“0


Reversing the order of summation, expanding the terms,


                                                     18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                   »˜                                                  ¸2 fi
                                                        k´1
                                                        ÿ                            k´1
                                                                                     ÿ
          Ex„D rℓ pRN N pxq , yqs “ Ex„D –                    CAi Bxk´1´i ´                wj xk´1´j      fl   (E.3)
                                                        i“0                          j“0

                     k´1
                     ÿ       “                             ‰
                 “            CAi BCAj B ´ 2CAi Bwj ` wi wj Ex„D rxk´1´i xk´1´j s                              (E.4)
                     i,j“0
                     k´1
                     ÿ       “                             ‰
                 “            CAi BCAj B ´ 2CAi Bwj ` wi wj 1k´1´i“k´1´j                                       (E.5)
                     i,j“0
                     k´1
                     ÿ       “                                ‰
                 “               CAi BCAj B ´ 2CAi Bwj ` wi wj 1i“j                                            (E.6)
                     i,j“0
                     k´1
                     ÿ     “                         ‰ k´1
                                                        ÿ`           ˘2
                 “          pCAi Bq2 ´ 2CAi Bwi ` wi2 “    CAi B ´ wi .                                        (E.7)
                     i“0                                              i“0

where the transition from the second to third rows is by our assumption that Ex„D rxi xj s “ 1i“j .
Therefore we have,

                                                                k´1
                                                                ÿ     `                ˘2
                                  Ex„D rℓ pRN N pxq , yqs “               CAi B ´ wi        .                  (E.8)
                                                                i“0

concluding the proof.


E.1.2      P ERFECT G ENERALIZATION AND FAILED E XTRAPOLATION

Proposition E.2 (Proposition 3 in main paper). Assume d ą k, and let ϵ ě 0 and q P tk `
1, k ` 2, . . .u. Then, for any teacher parameters Θ̂, there exist student parameters Θ with which the
population loss in Equation 3.4 equals zero, and yet the student does not ϵ-extrapolate with horizon q.


Proof. Consider a student, Θ, such that A is symmetric (and therefore has an orthogonal eigen-
decomposition). Denote A “ U ΛU J . The impulse response at time step i can be expressed as
CAi B “ CU Λi U J B. The latter can be written compactly in matrix form as V g where V is the
Vandermonde matrix with diagpΛq as its values,

                                             1           1       ...        1
                                             ¨                                  ˛
                                           ˚ λ1          λ2      ...        λd ‹
                                           ˚ λ2          λ22     ...        λ2d ‹
                                        V “˚
                                           ˚ .
                                               1                                ‹,
                                           ˝ ..           ..                 .. ‹
                                                           .                  . ‚
                                                 λd´1
                                                  1     λd´1
                                                         2       ...       λd´1
                                                                            d

and g is defined as g ” pCU qJ d U J B.3 A known result on square Vandermonde matrices is that
they are invertible if and only if λi ‰ λj , @i ‰ j. Given a fixed set of distinct values pλ1 , . . . , λd q
and an arbitrary impulse response r P Rd , in order for the student to generate the impulse response r
(i.e. V g “ r), one can set the coefficient vector, g “ V ´1 r and end up with a symmetric student
with r as its impulse response of length d.
Consider a teacher RNN, Θ̂ “ pA, B, Cq, we can set and the first k entries of r to ri “
Ĉ Âi´1 B̂, @i “ t1, . . . , ku. We are therefore left with d ´ k degrees of freedom which yields
many different students that correspond to the first k entries of the teacher while fitting arbitrary
values beyond the k considered.
   3
       Here d denotes the Hadamard (elementwise) product.


                                                          19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


E.1.3   E QUIVALENCE B ETWEEN BALANCED RNN S WITH S YMMETRIC AND D IAGONAL
        T RANSITION M ATRICES
Lemma E.3. A balanced RNN, Θ “ pA, B, Cq, with a symmetric transition matrix (i.e. B “
C J and A “ AJ ) has an equivalent (i.e. generating the same impulse response) RNN, Θ1 “
pA1 , B 1 , C 1 q, which is balanced and its transition matrix is diagonal.

Lemma E.3 allows alternating between systems with symmetric and diagonal matrices. This is useful
to simplify the analysis in Section 4.

Proof of Lemma E.3. Any symmetric matrix admits an orthogonal eigendecomposition with real
(non-imaginary) eigenvalues. Denote A “ U ΛU J . We can define
                          A1 “ Λ,     B1 “ U JB       and   C 1 “ CU ,
The ith index of the impulse response is given by
                                                      ` ˘i
                             CAi B “ CU Λi U J B “ C 1 A1 B 1
concluding that Θ and Θ1 have the same impulse response of any length.

E.1.4   G RADIENT D ERIVATION
For completeness and Section E.4, we compute the gradients for the general setting.
Lemma E.4. Given the population loss
                                           k´1
                                           ÿ´                         ¯2
                           LpA, B, Cq “          CAj B ´ Ĉ Âj B̂         .          (3.4 revisited)
                                           j“0

Denote ∇ℓi “ CAi B ´ wi , the derivatives of the loss with respect to B, and C satisfy:

                                         k´1
                                    BL   ÿ
                                       “     ∇ℓi pAi qJ C J ,                                  (E.9)
                                    BB   i“0

                                         k´1
                                    BL   ÿ          ` ˘J
                                       “     ∇ℓi B J Ai .                                     (E.10)
                                    BC   i“0


Proof of Lemma E.4. Here, we will compute the gradient of the population loss.
Note that for j ě 0, the derivative of CAj B with respect to to B is given by
                                    BpCAj Bq
                                             “ pAj qJ C J .                                   (E.11)
                                       BB
Similarly, the derivative of CAj B with respect to to C is given by
                                   BpCAj Bq
                                               “ B J pAj qJ .                              (E.12)
                                       BC
Using these derivatives, we can calculate the derivative of the population loss, (assigning wi “
B̂ Âi Ĉ),
                                                            k´1
                                                            ÿ`               ˘2
                LpA, B, Cq “ Ex„D rℓ pRN N pxq , yqs “           CAi B ´ wi .              (E.13)
                                                             i“0

Denoting ∇ℓi “ CAi B ´ wi , and noting that wi is constant (depends on Θ̂), we have for X P
tB, Cu:
          ÿ B CAi B ´ wi 2
          k´1                    k´1
               `            ˘               `             ˘ k´1         `       ˘
    BL                            ÿ      B CAi B ´ wi          ÿ       B CAi B
        “                      “     ∇ℓi                    “      ∇ℓi            .   (E.14)
    BX    i“0
                   BX            i“0
                                                 BX            i“0
                                                                          BX


                                                 20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Plugging in Equation E.11 and Equation E.12, we have:
                               k´1
                                        `       ˘ k´1
                        BL     ÿ       B CAi B        ÿ
                            “      ∇ℓi            “       ∇ℓi pAi qJ C J ,                         (E.15)
                        BB     i“0
                                          BB          i“0


                               k´1
                                        `      ˘ k´1
                          BL   ÿ       B CAi B    ÿ
                             “     ∇ℓi          “     ∇ℓi B J pAi qJ ,                             (E.16)
                          BC   i“0
                                          BC      i“0


E.1.5    L EMMA 6 (C ONSERVATION OF BALANCEDNESS )
Lemma E.5. [Lemma 6 in main paper] When optimizing equation 3.4 with GF emenating from a
balanced initialization Θp0q, the parameters Θpτ q are balanced for all τ P R` .

We prove the above result by first showing it for GD and then translating the result to GF. The GD
result is stated below, and generalizes a result that was shown in Cohen-Karlik et al. (2022) for the
memoryless case.
Lemma E.6. When optimizing equation 3.4 with GD with balanced initial conditions, then @t P N,
Θ has a balanced weight configuration, i.e. Bt “ CtJ .

Proof of Lemma E.6. We prove by induction. By our assumption, the condition holds for t “ 0.
Assume Bt “ CtJ , our goal is to show the conditions hold for pBt`1 , Ct`1 q. In order to show that
                                                 ´     ¯J
          J                               BL        BL
Bt`1 “ Ct`1 , we only need to show that BB   t
                                               “   BCt    . Writing the gradients (Lemma E.4), we
have
                  ˆ      ˙J k´1                    k´1
                     BL           ÿ                ÿ                      BL
                              “      ∇ℓi Ait Bt “      ∇ℓi pAJ   i J
                                                             t q Ct “          ,             (E.17)
                    BCt          i“0               i“0
                                                                         BB  t

where the inequality follows from the induction assumption and the symmetric structure of At . To
conclude, the gradients at time t are the same and Bt “ CtJ by the induction assumption, arriving at
                                                         ˆ     ˙J
                                            BL             BL
                        Bt`1 “ Bt ´ η          “ CtJ ´ η                J
                                                                    “ Ct`1                    (E.18)
                                           BBt             BCt



The proof of Lemma 6 follows from Lemma E.6 and the fact that for sufficiently small step size GD
approximates GF with arbitrary precision (see Theorem 3 in Elkabetz & Cohen, 2021).

E.1.6    C ONSERVATION OF DIFFERENCE OF NORMS
Appendix E.1.5 shows that if weights are initialized to be balanced, this property is conserved
throughout optimization. Here we show under standard initialization schemes, the difference between
the norms of B and C is also conserved.
Lemma E.7. When optimizing equation 3.4 with GF the difference between the norms of B, C is
conserved throughout GF, i.e.,
                               d `                ˘
                                   }B}2F ´ }C}2F “ 0.                                (E.19)
                               dt

Proof of Lemma E.7. We wish to prove that the difference between the norms is conserved over
time. Consider the following expression:4
                α ” }B}2F ´ }C}2F “ T rpB J Bq ´ T rpCC J q “ B J B ´ CC J .                       (E.20)
   4
     The last equality follows since in the SISO setup, B J B and CC J are scalars and therefore the trace
operator can be omitted.


                                                   21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


With this notation, we just need to prove that α9 “ 0. The derivative of B, C with respect to time is
given by,
                                             k´1
                                              ÿ
                                     B9 “ ´       ∇ℓi pAJ qi C J ,                             (E.21)
                                                          i“0
                                                          k´1
                                                          ÿ
                                                 C9 “ ´          ∇ℓi B J pAJ qi .                                       (E.22)
                                                          i“0
Using the interchangeability of derivative and transpose, we have:

                        α9 “ B9J B ` B J B9 ´ CC
                                              9 J ´ C C9J “ 2B J B9 ´ 2CC
                                                                       9 J.                                             (E.23)
Plugging equation E.21 and equation E.22, we get
                          ˜                     ¸   ˜                    ¸
                              k´1
                              ÿ                        k´1
                                                       ÿ
                α9 “ 2B J ´       ∇ℓi pAJ qi C J ´ 2 ´     ∇ℓi B J pAJ qi C J                                           (E.24)
                                           i“0                                   i“0
                         «       ˜                       ¸                 ˜                    ¸           ff
                                     k´1
                                     ÿ                                     k´1
                                                                           ÿ
                             J                     J i       J         J                  J i           J
                  “ ´2 B                   ∇ℓi pA q          C ´B                    ∇ℓi pA q       C            “ 0.   (E.25)
                                     i“0                                       i“0

                  d
                     `              ˘
establishing that dt   }B}2F ´ }C}2F “ 0.



E.2      L EMMA 7 (E XACT E XTRAPOLATION )

Lemma E.8. [Lemma 7 in main paper] Suppose that d ą k ą 2d,   ˆ the teacher is balanced, and that
the student parameters Θ are balanced and satisfy LpΘq “ 0. Then Θ extrapolates.

Proof of Lemma E.8. By Lemma E.3, a balanced RNN with symmetric transition matrix has an
equivalent (generating the same impulse response) balanced RNN with a diagonal transition matrix.
We will continue under the assumption of diagonal transition matrices.
Without loss of generality we assume Ĉ B̂ “ 1. Otherwise, the problem can be rescaled by Ĉ B̂,
which is equivalent to rescaling the initial conditions, and providing no additional information.5
                                               J                          J
From the balanced ř assumption, we have Ĉ “ B̂. Denote p̂ “ Ĉ d B̂ “ B̂ d B̂, and we
get p̂i ě 0 and i p̂i “ 1, and therefore p̂ may be interpreted as a distribution over a random
variable with dˆ possible values. We shall assume that these values are Â1,1 , . . . , Âd,
                                                                                          ˆ dˆ, and denote the
corresponding random variable by Ẑ.
Furthermore, we can also interpret elements of the impulse response of Θ̂ as moments of this
distribution. Let us write the nth element of the impulse response as:
                                                ÿ
                                    Ĉ Ân B̂ “    p̂i âni “ Ep̂ rẐ n s,           (E.26)
                                                             i

where Ep rZs is the expected value of a random variable Z under the distribution p. In the same
way, we can define for the learned model Θ, a distribution pi “ Ci Bi , and write the learned impulse
response as:                                 ÿ
                                  CAn B “        pi ani “ Ep rZ n s.                            (E.27)
                                                             i
This view provides us with a moment matching interpretation of the learning problem. Namely, the
fact that Θ matches the first k elements of the teacher impulse response, is the same as saying they
agree on the first k ´ 1 moments Ep rZ j s for j P t1, . . . , k ´ 1u.6 The question of extrapolation is
whether equality in the first k ´ 1 moments implies an equality in all other moments.
   5
       The case for which Ĉ B̂ “ 0 is handled separately.
   6
       Equality of the 0th moment ensures the student induces a valid probability, i.e. i Ci Bi = i Ĉi B̂i =1.
                                                                                       ř         ř



                                                                 22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


In (Cohen & Yeredor, 2011, Theorem 1) and in (Wu & Yang, 2020, Lemma 4) it is shown that the
first 2dˆ moments of a discrete random variable taking at most dˆ different values uniquely define
this random variable. Therefore, any other discrete random variable identifying with the teacher on
2dˆ moments must be the same random variable and therefore identifies on higher moments as well.
Since we assumed k ą 2d,   ˆ this result immediately implies that equality in the first k ´ 1 moments
implies equality in all other moments.
For the case Ĉ B̂ “ 0, from our assumption that the teacher is balanced, we have that the condition
                                                ˆ Such a teacher has an impulse response of zeros, for
is met only if Ĉi “ B̂i “ 0 for i “ 1, . . . , d.
k ě 1, a student minimizing the loss must also satisfy CB “ 0 and therefore has the zeros as its
impulse response (recall the student is balanced) thus extrapolating with respect to the said teacher.



E.3   T HEOREM 8 (A PPROXIMATE E XTRAPOLATION )

This section is devoted to the proof of Theorem 8 which ties the approximation error of optimization
to that of extrapolation.
Theorem E.9. [Theorem 8 in main paper] Consider the minimization of Equation 3.4 and assume:
(i) d ą k ą 2d;  ˆ (ii) the teacher is balanced and stable (i.e. the eigenvalues of Â are in r´1, 1s);
(iii) the teacher is non-degenerate, i.e. the input output mapping they realize is not identically zero;
(iv) the student parameters are learned by applying GF to the loss Lp¨q, starting from a balanced
initialization; (v) the student parameters Θ are bounded.
Then, for any ϵ ą 0 and q P N, there exists δpϵ, qq ą 0 such that whenever LpΘq ď δpϵ, qq, the
student ϵ-extrapolates with horizon q.


Proof of Theorem E.9. Let δ ą 0 be a constant whose value will be chosen later, and suppose GF
reached a point Θ satisfying LpΘq ď δ. Following the proof of Lemma 7, Θ̂ is identified with a
distribution supported on the eigenvalues of Â, whose j’th moment is m̂j :“ Ĉ Âj B̂pĈ B̂q´1 for
every j P N. Similarly, Θ is identified with a distribution supported on the eigenvalues of A, whose
j’th moment is mj :“ CAj BpCBq´1 for every j P N. From our assumption that LpΘq ď δ,

                                                 k´1
                                                 ÿ´                          ¯2
                                   LpΘq “                CAj B ´ Ĉ Âj B̂        ď δ.                       (E.28)
                                                 j“0


and specifically, each term satisfies pCAj B ´ Ĉ Âj Ĉq2 ď?δ for
                                                                ? j “ 0, . . . , k ´ 1. In particular,
pCB ´ Ĉ B̂q2 ď δ. Denote β “ Ĉ B̂ ´ CB, then β P r´ δ, δs. Note that Ĉ B̂ is a (positive)
constant, multiplying the loss by pĈ B̂q´2 we have that each term ď δpĈ B̂q´2 . We can write for
each j “ 0, . . . , k ´ 1,


      ˜                            ¸2       ˜                                                      ¸2
          CAj B        Ĉ Âj B̂                CAj B       CAj B   CAj B   Ĉ Âj B̂
                   ´                    “                 ´       `       ´                                  (E.29)
           Ĉ B̂          Ĉ B̂                  Ĉ B̂       CB      CB       Ĉ B̂
                                            ¨                                                           ˛2

                                                                  CAj B        Ĉ Âj B̂ ‹
                                                 ˆ            ˙
                                          ˚          1      1
                                        “ ˚CAj B                                                             (E.30)
                                          ˚                                              ‹
                                                         ´      `            ´           ‹
                                          ˝        Ĉ B̂   CB       CB           Ĉ B̂
                                                                  loooooooooomoooooooooon‚
                                                                                         mj ´m̂j


We can further expand the term on the left,

               1           1     1          1      Ĉ B̂ ´ β ´ Ĉ B̂          β
                      ´      “       ´           “                   “                                       (E.31)
              Ĉ B̂       CB   Ĉ B̂   Ĉ B̂ ´ β    Ĉ B̂pĈ B̂ ´ βq   Ĉ B̂pβ ´ Ĉ B̂q

                                                             23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Plugging back to the above, we have
                   ˜                      ¸2 ˜                                ¸2
             ´2       CAj B     Ĉ Âj B̂          βCAj B
     δpĈ B̂q ě              ´              “                   ` pmj ´ m̂j q                                     (E.32)
                       Ĉ B̂      Ĉ B̂        Ĉ B̂pβ ´ Ĉ B̂q
                                                     “ β 2 κ2 ` 2βκpmj ´ m̂j q ` pmj ´ m̂j q2                     (E.33)
                                                                                                 2
                                                     ě 2βκpmj ´ m̂j q ` pmj ´ m̂j q                               (E.34)
                                                                                                     2
                                                     ě ´2|δκpmj ´ m̂j q| ` pmj ´ m̂j q                            (E.35)
                      j
                  CA B
where κ ” Ĉ B̂pβ´    Ĉ B̂q
                             . From assumption (ii), the teacher is stable and therefore m̂j ď Ĉ B̂ for all
j “ 0, . . . , k ´ 1. Similarly, from assumption (v) the student parameters are bounded and therefore
CAj B is bounded by τ j`2 (where τ ” maxt1, ηu and η is a bound on the Frobenous norm of
A, B, C). mj is bounded in a similar fashion by τ j .
Combining the above, for δ ă Ĉ B̂ we have,
                                     δ         ´2δτ j`2 pτ j ` 1q
                                           ě                           ` pmj ´ m̂j q2                             (E.36)
                                pĈ B̂q2           2pĈ B̂q2
                   δpĈ B̂q 2                                                ?
Setting δ 1 ă 1`τ k`1 pτ k´1 `1q
                                 , if LpΘq ď δ 1 then |mj ´ m̂j | ď              δ for j “ 1, . . . , k ´1. Proposition 2
                                                                   1{4dˆ 7
in Wu & Yang (2020) then implies W1 pΘ, Θ̂q ď Opδ      q.
             ´Ť         ¯ Ť ´Ť ˆ         ¯
                d               d
Denote Ω ”      i“1 Aii         j“1 Âjj   (the union of the supports of Θ and Θ̂), from Sec-
tion 2.3 in Panaretos & Zemel (2019), for q ą p the q th and pth Wasserstein distances sat-
isfy Wqq pΘ, Θ̂q ď Wpp pΘ, Θ̂qγ q´p where γ “ maxx,yPΩ |x ´ y|. In particular, for p “ 1,
                ´               ¯1{q
Wq pΘ, Θ̂q ď W1 pΘ, Θ̂qγ q´1         . Note that γ can is bounded by γ ď τ ` 1 ď 2τ (recall
the student is bounded and teacher is stable).
Finally, |mq ´ m̂q | ď Wq pΘ, Θ̂q (see Section 1.2 in Biswas & Mackey (2021)). Combining the steps
above, for all q P N,

                                     ´                   ¯1{q ´                 ¯1{q
                                                                     ˆ
           |mq ´ m̂q | ď Wq pΘ, Θ̂q ď W1 pΘ, Θ̂qp2τ qq´1     ď ρδ 1{4d p2τ qq´1                                   (E.37)
                                                               ˆ
where ρ is a constant satisfying W1 pΘ, Θ̂q ď ρδ 1{4d . To achieve |mj ´ m̂j | ă ϵ for any ϵ ą 0, we
                 ´ q ¯4dˆ
can set δpϵ, qq ă ργϵq´1      concluding the proof.



E.4      P ROPOSITION 9 (I MPLICIT B IAS FOR BALANCEDNESS )

The proof of Proposition 9 consists of several steps. First, we bound with high probability the norms
of B and C at initialization (Lemma E.10). We then derive bounds on the differential equations
   d                          d
of dt pBptq ` C J ptqq and dt   pBptq ´ C J ptqq (Lemma E.14). We show that when the initialization
scale tends to zero, the ratio between the differential equations tends to zero. (Lemma E.13).
Before we turn to prove Proposition 9, we first need to bound the initial values for a vector v P Rn
                        2
initialized with N p0, ϵn q.
                                                               2
Lemma E.10. Assume a vector v P Rn with N p0, ϵn q per coordinate. Then:

                                     ˆ                  ˙
                                         ϵ         3ϵ
                                Pr         ă }v} ă          ě 1 ´ 2 expp´9n{64q.                                  (E.38)
                                         2         2
   7
       Here we overload notations and denote the distributions of the teacher and student by Θ and Θ̂ respectively


                                                        24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Proof of Lemma E.10. The proof of E.10 uses known results on the Chi-square distribution Laurent
& Massart (2000), applied to?our specific setting to achieve the desired bounds. We will begin by
changing variables, ṽi “ vi ¨ ϵn . The entries ṽi , are standard Gaussian variables. The squared norm
of ṽ distributes according to the χ-squared distribution.
By (Laurent & Massart, 2000, Lemma 1), in our case (assigning x “ 9n{64) the following inequalities
hold:

                              `                      ˘
                           P r }ṽ}2 ě p1.75 ` 9{32qn ď expp´9n{64q,                               (E.39)
                              `            ˘
                           P r }ṽ}2 ď n{4 ď expp´9n{64q.                                          (E.40)

In particular,
           `            ˘                    `          ? ˘
       P r }ṽ}2 ě 2.25n ď expp´9n{64q ùñ P r }ṽ} ě 1.5 n ď expp´9n{64q.                          (E.41)

Changing variables back to v,
                                  P r p}v} ě 1.5ϵq ď expp´9n{64q.                                  (E.42)

Similarly, for the second bound:
             `        ?    ˘
         P r }ṽ} ď n{2 ď expp´9n{64q ùñ P r p}v} ď ϵ{2q ď expp´9n{64q.                            (E.43)

Taking the complementary probability, we have the desired result of
                            ˆ                ˙
                              ϵ           3ϵ
                        Pr      ă }v} ă         ě 1 ´ 2 expp´9n{64q.                               (E.44)
                              2            2


                                                                           `                ˘
Note that for a matrix X P Rmˆp , Lemma E.10 bounds its Frobenius norm, P r 2ϵ ă }X}F ă 3ϵ2 ě
1 ´ 2exp p´9mp{64q. The result is straight forward by applying the lemma to X’s vectorized form.
Proposition E.11. [Proposition 9 in main paper] Suppose that: (i) d ą 4; (ii) the teacher parame-
ters Θ̂ are balanced and are non-degenerate, in the sense that the input-output mapping they realize
is not identically zero; and (iii) the student parameters are learned by applying GF to the loss Lp¨q.
Let Θ̃ be a random point in parameter space, with entries drawn independently from the standard
normal distribution. For ϵ ą 0, consider the case where GF emanates from the initialization ϵΘ̃, and
denote the resulting curve by Θϵ pτ q “ pAϵ pτ q, Bϵ pτ q, Cϵ pτ qq, with τ ě 0. Then, w.p. at least 0.75,
for every ϵ ą 0 there exists τϵ ě 0 such that:
                                       ||Bϵ pτϵ q ´ CϵJ pτϵ q||F
                                   lim                           “ 0.                              (E.45)
                                  ϵÑ0` ||Bϵ pτϵ q ` CϵJ pτϵ q||F


The consequence of Proposition 9 is that as ϵ converges to zero, B and C converge towards each
other.
For convenience, we´ refer¯to the mentioned initialization scheme (where every coordinate in a vector
                       ϵ2
is initialized as N 0, d ) as ϵ-normal initialization. In order to prove the proposition we define a
few relevant terms,
                        Y “ B ´ C J,          W “ B ` C J,           w0 “ Ĉ B̂.                   (E.46)
We will in fact prove the stronger, following lemma, for any matrix A, not necessarily symmetric.
Lemma E.12. Assume w0 ą 0, and A, B, C are ϵ-normally initialized. Then Dt such that
                                }Y ptq}2                    }Aptq}2F
                            lim          “ 0,           lim          “ 0.                          (E.47)
                            ϵÑ0 }W ptq}2                ϵÑ0 }W ptq}2



                                                   25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


The proof of Lemma E.12 follows three steps: (1) establish a time in the optimization for which the
norms of all parameters are bounded (Lemma E.13); (2) derive upper (and lower) bounds for the
differential equations describing the evolvement of Y , W and A. Our approximations ` 1 ˘      are limited
to the initial phase of training. Concretely, we show that for 0 ď t ď 2w1 0 ln ϵ0.5      , all norms are
bounded. Thus, it is possible to obtain meaningful bounds on the ODEs of Y and W while A
remains in the magnitude of initialization (Lemma E.14); (3) using the relevant bounds, we show that
as the initialization scale tends to zero, so do the limits in Equation E.47.
                                                 ` ` 1 ˘˘
As it turns out, there is a critical time t̄ “ O ln ϵ0.5     , up until which the considered bounds are
valid (see details in the proof of Lemma E.13).
Lemma E.13. Assume d ą 20, student parameters are ϵ-normally initialized, assume also a balanced
teacher. Then w.p. at least 0.75, for all 0 ď t ď t̄, there exist M1 , M2 such that:
                                      }Cptq}, }Bptq} ă M1 ϵ0.75                                    (E.48)
and
                                            }Aptq}F ă M2 ϵ                                         (E.49)

To prove this, we note that at initialization, A, B and C satisfy these bounds. From continuity, there
exists a maximal time for which they are satisfied. We bound the rate of their growth, and thus show
that for all t as described, we are within this region.
Lemma E.14. Assume w0 ą 0 (see Lemma E.1 for definition of wi ) and assume A, B, C are
ϵ-normally initialized, we have the following bounds hold for all 0 ď t ď t̄ w.p. at least 0.75,
                                 Y ptqJ Y ptq ď c1 ϵ2 e´2w0 t ` c2 ϵ2.5 ,                          (E.50)
and
                                 W ptqJ W ptq ě c3 ϵ2 e2w0 t ´ c4 ϵ2.5 .                           (E.51)

Lemma E.14 shows that the growth rate of W ptqJ W ptq and the decay rate of Y ptqJ Y ptq both
depend on the sign of w0 . In our analysis we assume the teacher is balanced and therefore w0 ą 0,
the same analysis applies for w0 ă 0 with opposite roles for Y and W . The proof of Lemma E.14
follows from writing the leading terms of the ODE and bounding the remaining terms by their upper
bounds in the time considered. Using these lemmas, we proceed to prove Lemma E.12.
                                                                      ` 1 ˘
Proof of Lemma E.12. Consider the dynamics at time t̄ “ C ln            ϵ0.5   . By Lemma E.14, w.p. at
least 0.75, we have,
                                                  1
                 Y ptqJ Y ptq ď c1 ϵ2 e´2w0 C ln ϵ0.5 ` c2 ϵ2.5 “ pc1 e´2w0 C ` c2 qϵ2.5           (E.52)
and                                               1
                 W ptqJ W ptq ě c3 ϵ2 e2w0 C ln ϵ0.5 ´ c4 ϵ2.5 “ c3 e2w0 C ϵ1.5 ´ c4 ϵ2.5          (E.53)

We can calculate the limit (where c̃1 and c̃3 account for the relevant constant factors),
                                  }Y ptq}2          pc̃1 ` c2 qϵ2.5
                               lim        2
                                            ď lim                    “0                            (E.54)
                              ϵÑ0 }W ptq}     ϵÑ0 c̃3 ϵ1.5 ´ c4 ϵ2.5

From Lemma E.13, }Apt̄q}F ď M2 ϵ, so we can calculate the limit,

                                  }Apt̄q}2F              M 2 ϵ2
                               lim          ď lim                    “0                            (E.55)
                              ϵÑ0 }W pt̄q}2   ϵÑ0 c̃3 ϵ1.5 ´ c4 ϵ2.5

which concludes the proof.

Proof of Lemma E.13. Applying Lemma E.10 with d ą 20 results with the bounds holding
at initialization with probabilities ě 1 ´ 2expp´9 ¨ 202 {64q for A, and ě 1 ´ 2expp´9 ¨
20{64q for B and C. The probability for A, B, C satisfying the inequalities simultaneously
                           3
ě p1 ´ 2expp´9 ¨ 20{64qq « 0.83 ą 0.75.
Suppose that the norm bounds of Equation E.38 are satisfied at t “ 0. In particular, DM1 , M2 such
that
                              }Bp0q}, }Cp0q} ă 2ϵ ă M1 ϵ0.75 ,                              (E.56)


                                                      26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


and
                                           }Ap0q}F ă 2ϵ ă M2 ϵ.                                         (E.57)
Where 2 ă M2 ă 1ϵ , and M1 ą 4ϵ0.25 .
Denote by tA the minimal time for which }AptA q} “ M2 ϵ. Similarly, tB , tC are the times for which
}BptB q} “ }CptC q} “ M1 ϵ0.75 . Denote also t̄ “` min˘ttA , tB , tC u. Proving the lemma amounts
                                                     1
to showing there exists C P R such that t̄ “ C ln ϵ0.5   . Next, we turn to develop the differential
inequalities of the norms, which will later be used to lower bound the time until violation of the
mentioned bounds.
Recall the derivative of B with respect to time (see Section E.1.4),
                                                     k´1
                                                     ÿ
                                       B9 “ ´              ∇ℓi pAJ qi C J .                             (E.58)
                                                     i“0

Using Cauchy-Schwartz inequality, we have that for all t P r0, t̄s, the norm of B is upper bounded by
                          ›                      ›
                 › › › k´1                       › k´1             › ›i ›
                 › 9› › ÿ                J i J›
                                                       ÿ                        ›
                 ›B › “ ›´        ∇ℓi pA q C › ď           |∇ℓi | ›AJ ›F ›C J ›.               (E.59)
                          › i“0                  › i“0

We now bound the norms of ∇ℓi , A and C in order to transfer the inequality to a differential one.
Denote M “ maxp|wi |q ` M12 ϵ1.5 , then we have
                i

        M “ maxp|wi |q ` M12 ϵ1.5 ě maxp|wi |q ` }C}}B} ě maxp|wi |q ` |CB|,                            (E.60)
                i                              i                                  i
                                           i                                  i
           ě maxp|wi |q ` maxp|CA B|q ě maxp|wi | ` |CA B|q ě maxp|∇ℓi |q.                              (E.61)
                i                i                          i                                 i


For the norm of C, recall the conservation law from Lemma E.7 for the norms of B and C:
                                       d
                                     @t,  p}Bptq} ´ }Cptq}q “ 0.                                        (E.62)
                                       dt
From the assumption that the initial conditions are met,
                       }Bp0q}, }Cp0q} ă 2ϵ ñ p|}Bp0q} ´ }Cp0q}|q ă 4ϵ.                                  (E.63)
Therefore, we get
                                       @t, }Cptq} ă }Bptq} ` 4ϵ.                                        (E.64)
Note also that by assuming M2 ă 1ϵ , we have M2 ϵ ă 1 and
                                                   k´1
                                                   ÿ
                                                         pM2 ϵqi ă k.                                   (E.65)
                                                   i“0

Plugging the above steps into equation E.59, we have:
                           k´1
                           ÿ                                                          k´1
                                                                                      ÿ
                     9 ď
                    }B}          |∇ℓi |}pAJ q}iF }C J } ă M p}B} ` 4ϵq                      }pAJ q}iF   (E.66)
                           i“0                                                        i“0
                                                                ă M kp}B} ` 4ϵq.                        (E.67)
Denoting γ “ }B}2 “ B J B, then

                                     γ9 “ B9J B ` B J B9 “ 2B J B9                                      (E.68)
Taking absolute value and then plugging equation E.66 results with
                       9 “ |2B J B|
                      |γ|        9 ď 2}B J }}B}
                                             9 ă 2}B}M kp}B} ` 4ϵq.                                     (E.69)
Using the definition of γ, we get that
                                              ´        a ¯
                                       9 ă 2kM |γ| ` 4ϵ |γ| .
                                      |γ|                                                               (E.70)


                                                            27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023



                           ` ` 1 ˘˘                                                           ` 1 ˘
Next we show that t̄ “ O ln ϵ0.5     . Suppose this is not the case, then there exists t̃ ă ln ϵ0.5
such that one of the bounds are violated: (i) }Bpt̃q} ě M1 ϵ0.75 ą 4ϵ; (ii) }Cpt̃q} ě M1 ϵ0.75 ą 4ϵ;
or (iii) }Apt̃q} ě M2 ϵ ą 2ϵ.
Consider case (i),8 from continuity there exists t1 P R such that }Bpt1 q} “ 4ϵ, and t2 P R such that
for any t P rt1 , t2 s, 4ϵ ď }Bptq} ď M1 ϵ0.75 . In such a case, we also have
                                            ´        a ¯
                                    |γ|
                                     9 ď 2kM |γ| ` 4ϵ |γ| ď 4kM |γ|                                (E.71)

                            9 ă 4kM |γ| by t for s P rt1 , t2 s,
Integrating the inequality |γ|
                                            żs                       żs
                                                     1
                                                        |γ|dt
                                                         9    ă           4kM dt,                  (E.72)
                                                 t1 |γ|              t1
                                                                 ` 1 ˘
substituting integration variables and using 0 ď t1 ď s ď t2 ď ln ϵ0.5  ,
                      ż γpsq                                ˆ ˆ       ˙   ˙
                               1           `     1
                                                   ˘               1
                                  dγ ď 4kM s ´ t ă 4kM ln 0.5 ´ 0 .                                (E.73)
                       γpt1 q |γ|                                ϵ
The above evaluates to,                     ˆ              ˙                ˆ          ˙
                                     |γpsq|                                      1
                                       ln                      ă 4kM ln                            (E.74)
                                     |γpt1 q|                                   ϵ0.5
which may be further manipulated to reach,
                                                       1                                   1
                            |γpsq| ă e4kM ln p ϵ0.5 q |γpt1 q| “ p4ϵq2 e4kM ln p ϵ0.5 q .          (E.75)
                              1
where we have used }Bpt q} “ 4ϵ. The final bound on the norm of γpsq is therefore,
                                                     16ϵ2 4kM
                                      |γpsq| ă            e   “ 16ϵ1.5 e4kM .                      (E.76)
                                                     ϵ0.5

Denoting M12 “ 16 ¨ e4kM , and taking the square root of the above,
                                       }Bpsq} ă M1 ϵ0.75 .                                   (E.77)
                                          ` 1 ˘                                     0.75
We have shown that for all 0 ď t ď t̄ ď ln ϵ0.5 , there exists M1 s.t }Bptq} ă M1 ϵ      (the same
proof applies for case (ii)).
Consider case (iii), we need to show that the bound over }A}F applies for t P r0, t̄ s. Notice that for
a matrix, }A}2F “ T rpAJ Aq, and
                                                ˆ          ˙
                             d      J              d    J
                               T rpA Aq “ T r        pA Aq                                      (E.78)
                            dt                    dt
                                                ´      ¯      ´       ¯
                                           “ T r A9 J A ` T r AJ A9                             (E.79)
                                                 ´       ¯
                                           “ 2T r AJ A9 ,                                       (E.80)

where we have used the linearity of trace and its invariance to transpose. The derivative of A with
respect to time (see Section E.1.4),
                                           k´1
                                           ÿ           i´1
                                                       ÿ
                                  A9 “ ´         ∇ℓi         pAJ qr C J B J pAJ qi´r´1 .           (E.81)
                                           i“1         r“0

Multiplying it from the left by AJ and then taking trace provides us with
                                           k´1
                                           ÿ           i´1
                                                       ÿ          `                           ˘
                     T rpAJ Aq
                             9 “´                ∇ℓi           T r pAJ qr`1 C J B J pAJ qi´r´1 .   (E.82)
                                           i“1         r“0

   8
       The case of }Cptq} ě M1 ϵ0.75 is handled similarly.


                                                                28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Taking a transpose and then using the cyclic property of trace and, for each summand,
                        `                             ˘        `               ˘
                    T r pAJ qr`1 C J B J pAJ qi´r´1 “ T r B J pAJ qi C J                               (E.83)
                                                               `        ˘
                                                        “ T r CAi B                                    (E.84)
                                                                           i
                                                                   “ CA B.                             (E.85)
Equation E.82 evaluates to
                                       k´1
                                       ÿ           i´1
                                                   ÿ                    k´1
                                                                        ÿ
                  T rpAJ Aq
                          9 “´               ∇ℓi         CAi B “ ´             ∇ℓi ¨ i ¨ CAi B.        (E.86)
                                       i“1         r“0                  i“1

                 9
Bounding T rpAJ Aq,
                                                    k´1
                                                    ÿ
                                 T rpAJ Aq
                                         9 ď                 |∇ℓi | ¨ i ¨ |CAi B|                      (E.87)
                                                     i“1
Using the Cauchy-Schwartz inequality and then plugging M ą |∇ℓi | and the bounds found for
}C}, }B} ă M1 ϵ0.75 leads to
                |∇ℓi | ¨ i ¨ |CAi B| ď M ¨ i ¨ }C}}A}iF }B} ď M ¨ i ¨ M12 ϵ1.5 }A}iF                   (E.88)
Putting the bound of Equation E.88 into Equation E.87, results with,
                                 k´1
                                 ÿ                                                   k´1
                                                                                     ÿ
                T rpAJ Aq
                        9 ď            M ¨ i ¨ M12 ϵ1.5 }A}iF “ M ¨ M12 ϵ1.5               i ¨ }A}iF   (E.89)
                                 i“1                                                 i“1

                                                    2
Noting that }A}F ă 1 and denoting M̃2 “ k2 M ¨ M12 leads to
                             k´1
                             ÿ                            kpk ´ 1q   k2
                                   i}A}iF ă }A}F                   ă    }A|}F                          (E.90)
                             i“1
                                                             2       2
Therefore, we get that
                                                9 ă M̃2 ϵ1.5 }A}F .
                                        T rpAJ Aq                                                      (E.91)
Notice that
                                   d              d
                          }A}F ¨     p}A}F q “ 0.5 p}A}2F q “ T rpAJ Aq
                                                                      9                                (E.92)
                                  dt              dt
                                          d
                                 ñ }A}F ¨ p}A}F q ă M̃2 ϵ1.5 }A}F .                                    (E.93)
                                          dt
                                          d
                                       ñ p}A}F q ă M̃2 ϵ1.5                                            (E.94)
                                         dt
Therefore, for any 0 ď s ď t̄,
                                                        żs
                                                 d
                        }Apsq}F ´ }Ap0q}F “         p}Aptq}F qdt ă M̃2 ϵ1.5 s,                         (E.95)
                                              0  dt
                                                    ˆ     ˙
                                             1.5        1
                          ñ }Apsq}F ă M̃2 ϵ ln 0.5 ` }Ap0q}F .                                         (E.96)
                                                      ϵ
We make use of the fact that @x ą 0, lnpxq ă x to bound,
                                      ˆ     ˙
                                          1
                            M̃2 ϵ ln 0.5 ď M̃2 ϵ1.5 ϵ´0.5 “ M̃2 ϵ.
                                 1.5
                                                                                                       (E.97)
                                        ϵ
From our assumption on initialization, }Ap0q}F ă 2ϵ. Putting back together,
                                           }Apsq}F ă M̃2 ϵ ` 2ϵ.                                       (E.98)
Taking M2 “ M̃2 ` 2, we have for all 0 ď t ď t̄ that
                                              }Aptq}F ă M2 ϵ,                                          (E.99)
concluding the proof.



                                                         29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


E.4.1   B OUNDING THE DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS
Proof of Lemma E.14. Denote
                                Y ” C J ´ B,                 W ” C J ` B.                     (E.100)
Recall that
                         k´1                                         k´1
                    BL   ÿ                                   BL      ÿ
                       “     ∇ℓi pAJ qi C J ,                   “ BJ     ∇ℓi pAJ qi           (E.101)
                    BB   i“0
                                                             BC      i“0
We can write the change in Y ,
                                             k´1
                                             ÿ                    k´1
                                                                  ÿ
                        Y9 “ C9 J ´ B9 “ ´           ∇ℓi Ai B `         ∇ℓi pAJ qi C J        (E.102)
                                              i“0                 i“0
                                          k´1
                                          ÿ        `                  ˘
                                      “         ∇ℓi pAJ qi C J ´ Ai B
                                          i“0
                    i     J i                   i      J i
Denote pAi qS “ A `pA
                    2
                        q
                          and pAi qS̄ “ A ´pA
                                           2
                                              q
                                                the symmetric and anti-symmetric parts of Ai .
We can now write
                                    “             ‰     “                ‰
              pAJ qi C J ´ Ai B “ pAi qS ´ pAi qS̄ C J ´ pAi qS ` pAi qS̄ B          (E.103)
                                    “ pAi qS pC J ´ Bq ´ pAi qS̄ pC J ` Bq
                                    “ pAi qS Y ´ pAi qS̄ W

Note also that for i “ 0, we have A0 “ I and its anti-symmetric part is the zero matrix, writing i “ 0
separately and assigning equation E.103 into equation E.102,
                                          k´1
                                          ÿ            `                     ˘
                           Y9 “ ∇ℓ0 Y `             ∇ℓi pAi qS Y ´ pAi qS̄ W                  (E.104)
                                           i“1

               d
Let us look at dt pY J Y q “ Y9 J Y ` Y J Y9 “ 2Y J Y9 .
Multiplying equation E.104 from the left with Y J evaluates to

                                          k´1
                                          ÿ            `                             ˘
                  Y J Y9 “ ∇ℓ0 Y J Y `              ∇ℓi Y J pAi qS Y ´ Y J pAi qS̄ W          (E.105)
                                           i“1
We now turn to bound the terms in the sum.
                                        k´1
                                        ÿ           `                                   ˘
                Y J Y9 ď ∇ℓ0 Y J Y `          |∇ℓi | |Y J pAi qS Y | ` |Y J pAi qS̄ W |       (E.106)
                                        i“1


We can bound each term using Cauchy–Schwarz. We first need to bound }Y } and }W }, which are
trivially bounded by
                            }Y }, }W } ď }C} ` }B} ď 2M1 ϵ0.75                       (E.107)
As for the symmetric and anti-symmetric parts of A,
                   › i           ›
                   › A ` pAi qJ ›
                                 › ď 1 }Ai }F ` }pAi qJ }F “ }Ai }F ď }A}iF ,
           i
                                         `                ˘
       }pA qS }F “ ›
                   ›                                                                          (E.108)
                          2      ›
                                  F    2
where the last inequality follows again from Cauchy–Schwarz (the same considerations apply for
pAi qS̄ ).
From Cauchy–Schwarz we can bound |Y J pAi qS̄ W | ď }Y J }}pAi qS̄ }F }W } ď }Y }}A}iF }W },
denote M3 “ maxtM1 , M2 u and derive,

                    |Y J pAi qS̄ W | ď 2M1 ϵ0.75 pM2 ϵqi 2M1 ϵ0.75 ă 4M33 ϵ1.5`i ,            (E.109)


                                                      30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


which is maximized when i “ 1. We again bound: M “ maxp|wi |q ` M12 ϵ1.5 ą |∇ℓi |. We can
                                                                      i
bound the terms in equation E.106 by
                          `                                  ˘
                    |∇ℓi | |Y J pAi qS Y | ` |Y J pAi qS̄ W | ď 8 ¨ M ¨ M33 ϵ2.5          (E.110)

Plugging back into equation E.106:
                                                          k´1
                                                          ÿ
                              Y J Y9 ď ∇ℓ0 Y J Y `              8 ¨ M ¨ M33 ϵ2.5          (E.111)
                                                          i“1

We can also bound ∇ℓ0 “ pCB ´ w0 q ď ´w0 ` |CB| ď ´w0 ` }C}}B} ď ´w0 ` M12 ϵ1.5 . Note
also that we multiply by Y J Y so we can bound
                                                   M12 ϵ1.5 pM2 1ϵ0.75 q2
                           ∇ℓ0 Y J Y ď ´w0 Y J Y ` loooooooooomoooooooooon                (E.112)
                                                                    “4M14 ϵ3

putting back together, we get
                 Y J Y9 ď ´w0 Y J Y ` 4M14 ϵ3 ` pk ´ 1qpM1 ` 1q8 ¨ M ¨ M33 ϵ2.5           (E.113)
In particular, there exists M4 such that
                                      Y J Y9 ď ´w0 Y J Y ` M4 ϵ2.5                        (E.114)
                                           d
Recall that we were interested in bounding dt pY J Y q “ Y9 J Y ` Y J Y9 “ 2Y J Y9 ,
                                   d
                                      pY J Y q ď ´2w0 Y J Y ` M4 ϵ2.5                     (E.115)
                                   dt
Denoting zptq ” Y ptqJ Y ptq and xptq ” W ptqJ W ptq, and using Lemma E.15, we have the desired
bounds
                                    1 “                               ‰
                            zptq ď       p33w0 dϵ2 qe´2w0 t ` M4 ϵ2.5                  (E.116)
                                   2w0
In particular, we can write
                                   zptq ď c1 ϵ2 e´2w0 t ` c2 ϵ2.5                      (E.117)

and
                                        xptq ě c3 ϵ2 e2w0 t ´ c4 ϵ2.5                     (E.118)
where ci ’s are positive constants.
Note that the derivation of xptq is exactly the same as zptq with opposite signs and bounding from
below instead.



E.4.2    I NTEGRAL BOUND OF DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS
Lemma E.15. Assume z9 ă ´2w0 z ` M4 ϵ2.5 ă 0, x9 ą 2w0 z ´ M4 ϵ2.5 ą 0 , where w0 ą 0. Then,
under the assumptions of Lemma E.10:
                                   1 `                                         ˘
                        zpt1 q ă       expp´2w0 t1 q ¨ p75w0 dϵ2 q ` M4 ϵ2.5              (E.119)
                                  2w0
                                                           w0 ϵ2
                                        ˆ                                    ˙
                                    1                                    2.5
                          xpt2 q ą        expp2w0 t2 q ¨ p       q ` M4 ϵ                 (E.120)
                                   2w0                     25d

Proof of Lemma E.15. Assume z9 ă ´2w0 z ` M4 ϵ2.5 , where w0 ą 0, 2w0 z ą M4 ϵ2.5 . Similarly,
assume x9 ą 2w0 x ´ M4 ϵ2.5 .
Then:
                                                  z9
                                                           ă ´1                           (E.121)
                                           2w0 z ´ M4 ϵ2.5

                                                     31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                   x9
                                                            ą1                                    (E.122)
                                            2w0 x ´ M4 ϵ2.5
Integrating both sides by dt, and using integration by substitution, we get:
                 ż t1       ż t1                               ż zpt1 q
                                          1           dz                         1
          ´t1 “       ´1 ą                        2.5 dt
                                                         dt “                             dz      (E.123)
                   0          0   2w0 z ´  M  4 ϵ               zp0q    2w 0 z  ´ M4 ϵ2.5
                     ż t2     ż t2                               ż xpt2 q
                                            1           dx                         1
               t2 “       1ă                        2.5 dt
                                                           dt “                              dx   (E.124)
                      0         0  2w 0 x ´   M 4 ϵ               xp0q    2w  0 x ´  M4 ϵ2.5

We note:
    ż zpt1 q
                     1                1
                            2.5
                                dz “      rlnp2w0 zpt1 q ´ M4 ϵ2.5 q ´ lnp2w0 zp0q ´ M4 ϵ2.5 qs (E.125)
      zp0q   2w 0 z ´  M 4 ϵ         2w 0
    ż zpt1 q
                                                2w0 zpt1 q ´ M4 ϵ2.5
                                          „ ˆ                         ˙ȷ
                     1                1
  ñ                         2.5
                                dz “        ln                                                  (E.126)
      zp0q 2w0 z ´ M4 ϵ              2w0        2w0 zp0q ´ M4 ϵ2.5
    ż xpt2 q
                                                2w0 xpt2 q ´ M4 ϵ2.5
                                          „ ˆ                         ˙ȷ
                     1                1
                            2.5
                                dx “        ln                                                  (E.127)
     xp0q 2w0 x ´ M4 ϵ               2w0        2w0 xp0q ´ M4 ϵ2.5
Combining equations, we have:
                                         2w0 zpt1 q ´ M4 ϵ2.5
                                    „ ˆ                       ˙ȷ
                                 1
                                     ln                          ă ´t1                            (E.128)
                                2w0      2w0 zp0q ´ M4 ϵ2.5
                                       2w0 zpt1 q ´ M4 ϵ2.5
                                     ˆ                      ˙
                                ñ ln                          ă ´2w0 t1                           (E.129)
                                       2w0 zp0q ´ M4 ϵ2.5
                                 2w0 zpt1 q ´ M4 ϵ2.5
                                 ñ                    ă expp´2w0 t1 q                             (E.130)
                                 2w0 zp0q ´ M4 ϵ2.5
                                                           `                   ˘
                   ñ 2w0 zpt1 q ´ M4 ϵ2.5 ă expp´2w0 t1 q ¨ 2w0 zp0q ´ M4 ϵ2.5                    (E.131)
                               1 “                                                ‰
                  ñ zpt1 q ă      expp´2w0 t1 q ¨ p2w0 zp0q ´ M4 ϵ2.5 q ` M4 ϵ2.5                 (E.132)
                             2w0

                                 1 “                                                ‰
                     xpt2 q ą        expp2w0 t2 q ¨ p2w0 xp0q ´ M4 ϵ2.5 q ` M4 ϵ2.5               (E.133)
                                2w0

Note that zp0q “ ?Y J p0qY p0q. By linearity of sum of variances, Y p0q’s entries are distributed
according to N p0, 2 ¨ ϵq, by Lemma E.10:
                                   ?                   ?
                                     2               3 2
                                       ϵ ă }Y p0q} ă       ϵ                              (E.134)
                                    2                  2
From Cauchy-Schwartz, zp0q ă 3ϵ2 with high probability. W is distributed as Y , therefore,
                                      2
xp0q ą 12 ϵ2 . Assuming M4 ϵ2.5 ă w02ϵ , we have:

                                      1 `                                      ˘
                           zpt1 q ă       expp´2w0 t1 q ¨ p6w0 ϵ2 q ` M4 ϵ2.5                     (E.135)
                                     2w0
                                       1 `                                   ˘
                             xpt2 q ą      expp2w0 t2 q ¨ pw0 ϵ2 q ` M4 ϵ2.5                      (E.136)
                                      2w0
Concluding the proof.


                                                      32
