Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


S TYLE S PECTROSCOPE : I MPROVE I NTERPRETABILITY
AND C ONTROLLABILITY THROUGH F OURIER A NALY-
SIS

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                           A BSTRACT

         Universal style transfer (UST) infuses styles from arbitrary reference images into
         content images. Existing methods, while enjoying many practical successes, are
         unable of explaining experimental observations, including different performances
         of UST algorithms in preserving the spatial structure of content images. In ad-
         dition, methods are limited to cumbersome global controls on stylization, so that
         they require additional spatial masks for desired stylization. In this work, we pro-
         vide a systematic Fourier analysis on a general framework for UST. We present
         an equivalent form of the framework in the frequency domain. The form implies
         that existing algorithms treat all frequency components and pixels of feature maps
         equally, except for the zero-frequency component. We connect Fourier amplitude
         and phase with Gram matrices and a content reconstruction loss in style transfer,
         respectively. Based on such equivalence and connections, we can thus interpret
         different structure preservation behaviors between algorithms with Fourier phase.
         Given the interpretations we have, we propose two manipulations in practice for
         structure preservation and desired stylization. Both qualitative and quantitative
         experiments demonstrate the competitive performance of our method against the
         state-of-the-art methods. We also conduct experiments to demonstrate (1) the
         abovementioned equivalence, (2) the interpretability based on Fourier amplitude
         and phase and (3) the controllability associated with frequency components.


1   I NTRODUCTION

Style transfer deals with the problem of synthesizing an image which has the style characteristics
from a style image and the content representation from a content image. The seminal work (Gatys
et al., 2016) uses Gram matrices of feature maps to model style characteristics and optimizes re-
construction losses between the reference images and stylized images iteratively. For the purpose
of gaining vivid visual styles and less computation cost, more trained feed-forward networks are
proposed (Wang et al., 2020; Li & Wand, 2016; Johnson et al., 2016; Sheng et al., 2018; Li et al.,
2017b; Sty; Dumoulin et al., 2017). Recent works focus on arbitrary style transfer (Park & Lee,
2019; Chen et al., 2021a;b; Chandran et al., 2021), or artistic style (Chen et al., 2021b; Liu et al.,
2021; Chen et al., 2021c). These works capture limited types of style and cannot well generalize to
unseen style images (Hong et al., 2021).
To obtain the generalization ability for arbitrary style images, many methods are proposed for the
task of universal style transfer (UST). Essentially, the main challenge of UST is to properly extract
the style characteristics from style images and transfer them onto content images without any prior
knowledge of target style. The representative methods of UST consider various notions of style
characteristics. For example, AdaIN (Huang & Belongie, 2017) aligns the channel-wise means and
variances of feature maps between content images and style images, and WCT (Li et al., 2017a)
further matches up the covariance matrices of feature maps by means of whitening and coloring
processes, leading to more expressive colors and intensive stylization.
While these two approaches and their derivative works show impressive performances on styliza-
tion, they behave differently in preserving the structure of content images. It is observed that the
operations performed by AdaIN can do better in structure preservation of content images while those


                                                  1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


of WCT might introduce structural artifacts and distortions. Many follow-up works focus on alle-
viating the problem of WCT (Li et al., 2018; Chiu & Gurari, 2022; Yoo et al., 2019), but seldom
can analytically and systematically explain what makes the difference. In the field of UST, we need
an analytical theory to bridge algorithms with experimental phenomena for better interpretability,
potentially leading to better stylization controls. To this end, we resort to apply Fourier transform
for deep analysis, aiming to find new equivalence in frequency domain and bring new interpretations
and practical manipulations to existing style transfer methods.
In this work, we first revisit a framework by (Li et al., 2017a) which unifies several well-known UST
methods. Based on the framework, we derive an equivalent form for it in the frequency domain,
which has the same simplicity with its original form in the spatial domain. Accordingly, the derived
result demonstrates that these UST methods perform a uniform transformation in the frequency
domain except for the origin. Furthermore, these UST methods transform frequency components
(excluding the zero-frequency component) and spatial pixels of feature maps in an identical manner.
Thus, these UST methods perform manipulations on the whole frequency domain instead of specific
subsets of frequencies (either high frequencies or low frequencies).
Secondly, through the lens of the Fourier transform, we further explore the relation of Fourier phase
and amplitude with key notions in style transfer, and then we present new interpretations based on
the equivalence we have. On one hand, we prove that a content reconstruction loss between two
feature maps reaches a local minimum when they have identical Fourier phase, which implies that
Fourier phase of feature maps contributes to the structure of stylized results. On the other hand, we
prove that the Fourier amplitude of feature maps determines the diagonals of their Gram matrices,
which implies that Fourier amplitude contributes to the intensity information of stylized images.
Next, We demonstrate that AdaIN does preserve the Fourier phase of feature maps while WCT does
not, and we interpret the different behaviors between the UST methods in structure preservation as
a consequence of their different treatment with the Fourier phase of feature maps.
Thirdly, based on the connection we establish between style transfer and Fourier transfer, we propose
two manipulations on the frequency components of feature maps: 1) a phase replacement operation
to keep phase of feature maps unchanged during stylization for better structure preservation. 2) a
feature combination operation to assign different weights to different frequency components of fea-
ture maps for desired stylization. We then conduct extensive experiments to validate their efficacy.
The contributions of this paper are summarized as follows:

       • Equivalence We present a theoretically equivalent form for several state-of-the-art UST
         methods in the frequency domain and reveal their effects on frequencies. We conduct
         corresponding experiments to validate the equivalence.
       • Interpretability We connect Fourier amplitude and phase with key notions in style transfer
         and present new interpretations on different behaviors of UST methods. The interpretations
         are validated by experiments.
       • Controllability We propose two manipulations for structure preservation and desired styl-
         ization. We have experimental validation for their efficacy and controllability.


2     P RELIMINARIES

2.1   F OURIER TRANSFORM

The Fourier transform has been widely used for the analysis of the frequency components in signals,
including images and feature maps in the shallow layers of neural networks. Given an image F ∈
RC×H×W , the discrete Fourier transform (DFT) (Jenkins & Desai, 1986) decomposes it into a
unique representation F ∈ CC×H×W in the frequency domain as follows:
                                 H−1
                                 XW  −1
                                                         h    w
                                     X
                        Fu,v =             Fh,w e−j2π(u H +v W ) ,   j 2 = −1,                    (1)
                                 h=0 w=0

where (h, w) and (u, v) are the indices on the spatial dimensions and the frequency dimensions,
respectively. Since images and feature maps consist of multiple channels, we here apply the Fourier


                                                  2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


transform upon each channel separately and omit the explicit notation of channels. Each frequency
component Fu,v can be decomposed into amplitude |Fu,v | and phase ∠Fu,v :
                        q
                                 2          2                                                  (2)
               |Fu,v | = (Ru,v ) + (Iu,v ) , ∠Fu,v = atan2(Iu,v , Ru,v ),
where Ru,v and Iu,v are the real part and the imaginary part of the complex frequency component
Fu,v , respectively. Intuitively, as for images, amplitude carries much of intensity information, in-
cluding the contrast or the difference between the brightest and darkest peaks of images, and phase
crucially determines the spatial content of images (Gonzalez & Woods, 2008).

2.2   A UNIFIED FRAMEWORK FOR UNIVERSAL STYLE TRANSFER

To better demonstrate the connection between style transfer and the Fourier transform, a unified
framework of different style transfer methods is preferred to serve as a bridge. Given a content
                                                                                               c     c
image I c and a style image I s , we denote the feature maps of I c and I s as F c ∈ RC×H ×W
       s    C×H s ×W s                                                             c    s
and F ∈ R              respectively, where C denotes the number of channels, H (H ) the height
and W c (W s ) the width. For a majority of UST methods, their goal is to transform the content
image feature maps F c into stylized feature maps F cs , whose first-order and second-order statistics
are aligned with those of the style image feature maps F s . Accordingly, their methods mainly
depend on the corresponding channel-wise mean vectors µc , µs ∈ RC and the covariance matrices
Σc , Σs ∈ RC×C of F c and F s , respectively.
A framework is proposed in (Lu et al., 2019) for unifying several well-known methods under the
                                         c
same umbrella. Specifically, each pixel Fh,w of F c is first centralized by subtracting the mean vector
  c                                                                                                 c
µ , where h and w are indices on spatial dimensions. Then the framework linearly transforms Fh,w
                                      C×C                      c                               s
with the transformation matrix T ∈ R       and re-centers Fh,w by adding the mean vector µ of the
                   cs      C
style. Each pixel Fh,w ∈ R of stylized feature maps can be represented as follows:
                                     cs          c
                                                     − µc + µs ,

                                   Fh,w  = T Fh,w                                                   (3)
where the transformation matrix T has multiple forms based on a variety of configurations of differ-
ent methods. We here demonstrate the relation between the unified framework and several methods
in details.
      1. AdaIN In Adaptive Instance Normalization (AdaIN) (Huang & Belongie, 2017), the trans-
         formation matrix T = diag (Σs ) /diag (Σc ), where diag (Σ) denotes the diagonal ma-
         trix of a given matrix Σ and / denotes the element-wise division. Because of the character-
         istics of diagonal matrices, only the means and variances within each single feature channel
         of F cs are matched up to those of F s , ignoring the correlation between channels.
      2. WCT Instead of shifting a single set of intra-channel statistics, (Li et al., 2017a) pro-
         poses a Whitening and Coloring Transform (WCT) that focuses further on the align-
         ment of covariance matrices. Similar with AdaIN, the transformation matrix for WCT
                       1
                             −1
         is T = (Σs ) 2 (Σc ) 2 , leading to well-aligned second-order statistics.
      3. LinearWCT While WCT generates stylized images more expressively, it is still computa-
         tionally expensive because of the high dimensions of feature maps in neural networks. (Li
         et al., 2019) proposes LinearWCT to use light-weighted neural networks to model the linear
         transformation T by optimizing the Gram loss, known as a widely-used style reconstruction
         objective function:
                                     T = arg min ∥F cs F cs ⊤ − F s F s ⊤ ∥2F ,                   (4)
                                            T
         where F cs F cs ⊤ is the Gram matrix for F cs and ∥ · ∥2F denotes the squared Frobenius norm
         of the differences between given matrices.
      4. OptimalWCT Similarly, (Lu et al., 2019) proposes OptimalWCT to derive a closed-form
         solution for T without the help of optimization process:
                                                                      12
                                            −1         1          1
                                                                              −1
                                   T = (Σc ) 2 (Σc ) 2 Σs (Σc ) 2        (Σc ) 2 .                 (5)

         Their method reaches the theoretical local minimum for the content loss Lc = ∥F c −
         F cs ∥2F , which is widely-used in style transfer (Huang & Belongie, 2017; Gatys et al., 2016;
         Lu et al., 2019) for structure preservation of content images.


                                                  3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


3     M ETHOD
In this section, we first show an equivalent form of the framework in the frequency domain. In this
way, all the methods based on the framework in Section 2.2 can be interpreted as effecting on the
frequency domain. We further connect amplitude and phase with existing concepts in the context of
style transfer, and explain why WCT might not preserve the structure of content images. Finally, we
propose two operations for better structure preservation and desired stylization.

3.1     T HE EQUIVALENT FORM OF THE FRAMEWORK IN THE FREQUENCY DOMAIN

We theoretically analyzec the cunified framework from the angle of 2-D DFT. We denote the DFT
of F cs as F cs ∈ CC×H ×W , where C is the set of complex numbers. According to the unified
                                                                         cs
framework in Eq. (13), we can derive each complex frequency component Fu,v   as:
              c     c                                         c     c
             HX −1 WX −1                                     HX −1 WX −1
                              cs −j2π(u Hhc +v Wwc )                                                              h   w
  cs
 Fu,v =                      Fh,w e                  =                         c
                                                                          [T (Fh,w − µc ) + µs ]e−j2π(u H c +v W c )
             h=0       w=0                                    h=0   w=0
                  c     c                                                      c     c
                 HX −1 WX −1                                                  HX −1 WX −1
                                              h      w                                                  h     w
         =T                     c
                               Fh,w e−j2π(u H c +v W c ) +[µs − T µc ]                        e−j2π(u H c +v W c )
                  h=0 w=0                                                     h=0 w=0
                 |               {z                      }                    |                   {z            }
                                                                              
                    H c W c µc , if u = v = 0;                                H c W c ,         if u = v = 0;
                      F c ,         else                                         0,             else
                        u,v
                                                               HcW c
                 H c W c µs , if u = v = 0;                               s

                                                               HsW s     F0,0 , if u = v = 0;
         =           c                                =          c                            ,
                 T Fu,v ,     else                            T Fu,v ,          else
                                                                                                  (6)
where u and v are indices upon the frequency dimensions, and F c and F s are the DFTs of F c and
                                                                             PH−1 PW −1
F s , respectively. According to the Fourier transform in Eq. (1), F0,0 = h=0          w=0 Fh,w =
                                                   HcW c
                            cs

HW µ. Thus, we have Fu,v        = H c W c µs = H     sW s   F s
                                                             0,0 when  u  =  v =   0.  Therefore,  in
the frequency domain, style transfer methods based on the unified framework are simple linear
transformations on F c except for the zero-frequency component F0,0  c
                                                                        , which is replaced with the
                                          s
re-scaled zero-frequency component of F .
From Eq.(6), we find that each individual frequency component (excluding the zero-frequency com-
ponent) has an identical linear transformation with pixels on the feature maps. In this way, there is
no entanglement between different frequencies in the process of style transfer. Thus, it is feasible to
treat and manipulate each frequency component of F cs as an individual for practical usage. There-
fore, we justify the claim that mainstream methods in Section 2.2 for UST are not sole transfer on
specific subsets of frequencies (either high frequencies or low frequencies), but essentially on the
whole frequency domain.

3.2     C ONNECTIONS AND INTERPRETATIONS : AMPLITUDE AND PHASE

To better bridge style transfer with the Fourier transform, we connect phase and amplitude with a
reconstruction loss and the Gram matrix in style transfer, respectively.
Phase and the content loss We here demonstrate the relation between phase and the content loss,
which widely serves as a construction loss for optimizing the differences of spatial arrangement
between stylized images I cs and content images I c . Given their feature maps F cs , F c ∈ RC×H×W ,
corresponding DFTs F cs , F c , Fourier amplitude |F cs |, |F c | and Fourier phase ∠F cs , ∠F c , the
content loss between F cs and F c can be derived as:
                                C X
                                  H X
                                    W                                                   C     H    W
                                X                                     2        1 X X X cs
    Lc = ∥F cs − F c ∥2F =                         cs
                                                  Fk,h,w    c
                                                         − Fk,h,w         =                           c
                                                                                           |Fk,u,v − Fk,u,v |2
                                                                              HW
                                k=0 h=0 w=0                                        u=0 v=0
                                                                                        k=0
                     C X
                       H X
                         W
            1        X       cs 2         c
                                                |2 − 2|Fk,u,v
                                                        cs       c             cs        c

       =                    |Fk,u,v | + |Fk,u,v               ||Fk,u,v | cos ∠Fk,u,v − ∠Fk,u,v    ,
           HW
                     k=0 u=0 v=0
                                                                                                                          (7)


                                                               4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


where the second equality is held by the Parseval’s theorem and k, (h, w) and (u, v) are indices on
channels, spatial dimensions and frequency dimensions, respectively. When F cs is optimized for
                           cs            c
the content loss, since |Fk,u,v  | and |Fk,u,v | are non-negative numbers, the content loss Lc reaches
                              cs           c                                                   cs
a local minimum when ∠Fk,u,v = ∠Fk,u,v            for all (k, u, v). Furthermore, whenever ∠Fk,u,v  gets
             c
closer to ∠Fk,u,v , the content loss decreases, demonstrating the crucial role of phase of feature maps
in determining the spatial information of corresponding decoded images. Therefore, we can interpret
the structure preservation abilities of methods from the perspective of Fourier phase. Furthermore,
we can manipulate Fourier phase for better performances in structure preservation.
Interpretations on structure preservation Based on the equivalent form in Eq. (6) and the re-
lation between Fourier phase and the content loss, we can give interpretations to different behaviors
of methods in structure preservation. Concerning AdaIN and WCT as instances of the equivalent
                                                   cs       c
framework in the frequency domain, we have Fu,v        = T Fu,v when (u, v) ̸= (0, 0). Note that for
AdaIN, the transformation matrix T = diag (Σ ) /diag (Σc ) ∈ RC×C is a real diagonal matrix,
                                                   s

which has the same scaling upon the real part and the imaginary part of F c . As a result, AdaIN
can preserve the phase in each feature channel and keep the content loss of feature maps in a local
                                                                     1
                                                                           −1
minimum. While WCT provides a non-diagonal matrix T = (Σs ) 2 (Σc ) 2 for transformation, the
information between different channels is consequently entangled, the phase of each channel is dis-
turbed and the content loss after the process of WCT is likely to increase much more than the one
after the process of AdaIN. Therefore, WCT needs more efforts to preserve the spatial information
of content images, resulting in its less appealing performances in structure preservation.
Amplitude and Gram matrices          We theoretically demonstrate the connection between the
Fourier amplitude of feature maps and their Gram matrices. Given feature maps F ∈ RC×H×W ,
corresponding Fourier amplitude |F| and Fourier phase ∠F of their DFT F, the pixels of the Gram
matrix F F ⊤ can be derived as:
                          H X
                            W                                      H   W
                          X                                  1 XX
             F F ⊤ c ,c =                                             Fc ,u,v Fc∗2 ,u,v

                              Fc1 ,h,w Fc2 ,h,w =
                     1   2                                  HW u=0 v=0 1
                               h=0 w=0
                                                                                                    (8)
                                       H   W
                                1 XX
                             =            |Fc1 ,u,v ||Fc2 ,u,v | cos (∠Fc1 ,u,v − ∠Fc2 ,u,v ) ,
                               HW u=0 v=0

where c1 , c2 are indices on the channels, (∗) represents  complex conjugate and the second equality
is held by the Parseval’s theorem. Since F F ⊤ c1 ,c2 is a real number, we omit the imaginary part in

                                                                              PH PW
the final step. In a special case where c1 equals c2 , F F ⊤ c1 ,c2 equals HW
                                                                            1
                                                                                                     2
                                                                               u=0    v=0 |Fc1 ,u,v | .
This indicates that the sum of the square of amplitude components directly determines the diagonals
of Gram matrices. Each elements on the diagonal of Gram matrices represents infra-channel second-
order statistics of feature maps, measuring the intensity of information in each channel. Therefore,
if we only manipulate the Fourier phase of the DFTs of feature maps and keep the Fourier amplitude
unchanged, it can be expected that the intensity presentations of the corresponding decoded images
are roughly the same. For detailed proof, see the Supplementary Materials.

3.3   M ANIPULATIONS ON STYLIZED FEATURE MAPS IN THE FREQUENCY DOMAIN

The equivalent form in Eq. (6) and abovementioned connections enable further manipulations for
better structure preservation or desired stylization. We propose two simple operations upon fre-
quency components of feature maps, which we call phase replacement and frequency combination.
Phase replacement Given the DFT of the content feature maps F c and the DFT of the stylized
                                                                               C×H c ×W c
feature maps F cs , we calculate the phase of F c , denoted as ∠F c ∈ [0, 2π)             and the
              cs                 cs     C×H c ×W c
amplitude of F , denoted as |F| ∈ R+               , where R+ denotes the set of non-negative real
numbers. We then reconstruct F cs as:
                          cs
                         Fu,v = |F|cs          c         cs          c
                                   u,v ⊙ cos ∠Fu,v + j|F|u,v ⊙ sin ∠Fu,v ,                          (9)
where cos and sin are element-wise operators on vectors (e.g., cos ϕ = [cos ϕ1 , ..., cos ϕC ]), ⊙ is
the element-wise multiplication and j is the imaginary unit. Based on the connections established
in Section 3.2, when we replace the phase of F cs with ∠F c , the content loss between F cs and F c


                                                      5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


is reduced and in this way, the structure of content images is more preserved in F cs . In addition,
since the amplitude of F cs is not changed, the diagonal of F cs F cs ⊤ stays unchanged and so does
the basic intensity information of the stylized results. A similar amplitude transferring method is
proposed in (Yang & Soatto, 2020) for semantic segmentation, which shares resembling views on
phase and amplitude with ours.
Frequency combination To accommodate different requirements from users, appropriate con-
trol on the stylization is needed for practical usage. Plenty of works for style transfer use linear
combination of content feature maps F c and stylized feature maps F cs as shown in Eq. (10):
                                     F cs = αF cs + (1 − α)F c ,                                   (10)
where α is the weight for controlling on the stylization. In this way, all the global characteristics of
images (e.g., the sharp edges of trees and the smooth background of sky) are combined uniformly.
While in most cases, users are expecting for customized global changes on images (e.g., having
the details of trees less stylized but keeping the sky moderately stylized). Since high frequencies
determine the details and low frequencies determine the overview of images, we can accommodate
the customized needs of users with combination of frequencies in different proportions.
Given the DFT of content feature maps F c and the DFT of stylized feature maps F cs , we first rear-
ranges their frequency components with the zero-frequency components in the center point (u0 , v0 ),
following a common technique in digital image processing. In this way, the frequency components
close to (u0 , v0 ) are low-frequency components whereas the rest of components represent high fre-
quencies. Next, we combine F cs and F c using a weighting function α : R2 → [0, 1]:
                               cs            cs                  c
                              Fu,v = α(u, v)Fu,v + [1 − α(u, v)]Fu,v ,                             (11)
where α serves as the stylization weighting function dependent on the indices (u, v). For example,
if users want to have the details less stylized, higher frequencies of F cs need to be less weighted,
and accordingly a lower value of α can be set for (u, v) indexing higher frequencies. In practice, the
function α is set to be controlled by a hyper-parameter σ:
                                             "                           #
                                                          2            2
                                                 (u − u0 ) + (v − v0 )
                             α(u, v) = exp −                              ,                      (12)
                                                            σ

where σ represents the degree for combining the low frequencies of F cs . When σ gets larger, the
value of α(u, v) increases for every (u, v). In this way, more low frequencies of F cs (indexed by
(u, v) close to (u0 , v0 ) ) are gradually kept.

4   E XPERIMENTS

In this section, we first introduce our method specification and implementation details. Then we
compare our method with the state-of-the-art style transfer methods in terms of visual effect, struc-
ture preservation and computing time. Moreover, we conduct experiments to validate the equiva-
lence presented in Eq. (6), the interpretations on Fourier amplitude and phase introduced in Section
3.2, and the efficacy of manipulations proposed in Section 3.3. More qualitative results and imple-
mentation details are available in the Supplementary Materials.
Method specification. Based on the equivalence and connections mentioned above, the proposed
method first performs a selected UST algorithm in the frequency domain. In practice, we choose
to implement our method in conjunction with WCT because WCT produces expressive stylization
in spite of introduced distortions. To deal with the distortions, we adopt phase replacement (PR) to
substitute the Fourier phase of stylized feature maps with that of content feature maps. Since PR can
optimize the content loss to a local minimum according to Eq. (7), the structure of content images
is preserved. Finally, the proposed method uses inverse discrete Fourier transform to reverse the
frequency components back to the spatial domain.
Implementation details.      We adopt a part of the VGG-19 network (Simonyan & Zisserman,
2015) (from the layer conv1 1 to the layer conv4 1) as our encoder. The weights of our encoder
are borrowed from ImageNet-pretrained weights, following existing style transfer methods. We
train our decoder for image reconstruction by minimizing the L2 reconstruction loss. During the


                                                   6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


 Content


 Style


 AdaIN


 AdaIN
 w/ ℱ !"



 WCT


 WCT
 w/ ℱ !"



 Optimal
 WCT



 Linear
 WCT



 Ours



Figure 1: Qualitative comparison on the state-of-the-art UST algorithms. AdaIN w/ F cs and WCT
w/ F cs are implemented following Eq. (6) in the frequency domain, which perform equivalent
stylization with the original methods.


 Table 1: The SSIM scores, the Gram loss and the time cost (seconds) for different UST methods.
 Method         AdaIN    WCT      LinearWCT   OptimalWCT   AvatarNet   SANet    Self-Contained   Ours
 SSIM            0.307   0.234     0.378        0.250        0.329     0.310       0.276         0.403
 SSIM (w/ PR)    0.307   0.251     0.427        0.263          -          -           -          0.438
 Time           0.0218   0.3167    0.0038       0.6247       3.027     0.0052      0.0513        0.098
 Time (w/ PR)   0.0226   0.3293    0.0045       0.6321         -          -           -          0.112

inference stage, we apply our method to feature maps in each layer of the decoder. We choose MS-
COCO dataset (Lin et al., 2014) and WikiArt dataset (Nichol, 2016) as our content dataset and style
dataset, respectively. Our decoder is also trained on the content dataset, whose training images are
first resized into 512×512 and randomly cropped into a size of 256×256. We run all the experiments
on a single NVIDIA Tesla V100.

4.1      P ERFORMANCE COMPARISON

Qualitative comparison In Figure 1, we show some visualization results of the qualitative com-
parison between the proposed methods and the state-of-the-art UST methods (i.e., AdaIN (Huang


                                                 7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


  (I)


          (a) Content image     (b) Style image   (c) Stylized image   (d) Amplitude of (b)   (e) Amplitude of (a)
                                                                         and phase of (c)       and phase of (c)


  (II)


          (a) Content image     (b) Style image   (c) Stylized image     (d) Phase of (b)       (e) Phase of (a)
                                                                       and amplitude of (c)   and amplitude of (c)



                   Figure 2: Synthesized results with replaced Fourier amplitude or phase.

& Belongie, 2017), WCT (Li et al., 2017a), LinearWCT (Li et al., 2019), OptimalWCT (Lu et al.,
2019), SANet(Park & Lee, 2019), AvatarNet(Sheng et al., 2018) and Self-Contained (Chen et al.,
2020)). We observe that AdaIN roughly preserves the structure of images, but often produces unap-
pealing patterns on the edges (e.g., 2nd , 3rd , and 5th columns). WCT and OptimalWCT can produce
intensive but distorted artistic style and yield images less similar with content images in structure
(e.g., 2nd , 4th , and 5th columns). LinearWCT roughly preserves the spatial structure of content
images, but the stylization is less intensive (e.g., 1st , 2nd , and 4th columns). Comparatively, the
proposed method performs well in the contrast and intensity of stylized results (e.g., the misty sky
and the red lips). The proposed method also well preserves the spatial structure of content images,
including the details (e.g. the contours of architectures and hair) and the overview (e.g. the light and
shadow of cloudy sky and the human face) of images.
Quantitative comparison In addition to the comparison on visual effect, we conduct a quantita-
tive comparison. Moreover, we implement PR on each method and present corresponding quantita-
tive scores. The Structural Similarity Index (SSIM) between the stylized images and corresponding
content images is adopted as the metric for evaluating structure preservation. In Table 1, our method
achieves the highest SSIM score and PR improves SSIM scores of all methods except for AdaIN,
since AdaIN does not change the Fourier phase of feature maps during stylization. The improved
SSIM validates our interpretations on structure preservation behaviors between alogrithms. Regard-
ing the computing time, while our method needs to utilize Fourier transform, it still has a competitive
time cost compared with other methods. It is noteworthy that our method has less additional compu-
tational cost if PR is adopted, since it has already performed style transfer in the frequency domain.

4.2      E QUIVALENCE , INTERPRETATIONS AND MANIPULATIONS

Validation of equivalence For AdaIN and WCT, we implement them in the frequency domain
based on Eq. (6), shown from the 3rd to the 6th row in Figure 1. It can be observed that these two
implemented UST algorithms in the frequency domain produce the same visual effect with original
algorithms. This observation validates the proposed equivalence.
Interpretations on amplitude and phase To validate the roles of amplitude and phase, we re-
place the Fourier amplitude or phase of stylized feature maps in each layer during the stylization
and present the results in Figure 2. It can be observed that feature maps with the same Fourier phase
produce images with highly similar spatial arrangements. This observation matches up with our
interpretations on phase, provided by its connection with the content loss in Eq. (7). On the other
hand, feature maps with same Fourier amplitude produces images with highly similar contrast and
intensities in colors. This observation aligns with our interpretations on amplitude, supported by its
connection with Gram matrices in Eq. (25).
Stylization manipulations First, we empirically display the effect of PR in Section 3.3 for image
stylization, whose results are shown in Figure 3. It can be observed that for results without PR, the


                                                        8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


    Content                                                      Content


                     Style    Ours w/o PR    Ours w/ PR                    Style         Ours w/o PR   Ours w/ PR


                     Figure 3: Results on the efficacy of phase replacement (abbr. PR).


       (a) Content               (b) Style                (c) Linear               (d) Ours


Figure 4: Comparison between (c) linear combination and (d) frequency combination. It is worth
noting that the proposed method helps the background remain stylized (e.g., the sky more sketch-
stylized than (c)) while renders the details more realistic (e.g., the buildings and the sailboat more
realistic than (c)). Note that the proposed method achieves this performance without any spatial
masks to identify where to stylize. The hyper-parameter σ for results in (d) is set to 0.99.

details (e.g., edges of the eyes and the nose) and the overview (e.g., the sky and the sea) become
messier and more distorted, yielding unappealing distortions. The reason might be that PR can
preserve the phase of both high frequencies and low frequencies, which are responsible for the
spatial arrangement of the details and overview of images, respectively.
Second, to demonstrate the manipulations of frequency combination (FC) in Section 3.3, we present
an example in Figure 4. We choose the weighting function α in Eq. (12) and adjust the hyper-
parameter σ for stylization controls. In Figure 4, with different value of σ, FC can have the details
less stylized (e.g., the colorful buildings in the 4th column) while keeping the background moder-
ately stylized (e.g., the sky with sketch style in the 4th column). Furthermore, FC can be customized
for various purposes and the linear combination in Eq. (10) can be viewed as an instance of FC
by setting the weighting function α(u, v) as a simple scalar. Therefore, the controllability of FC is
better than that of linear combination.


5    C ONCLUSION

In this paper, we apply Fourier analysis to a unified framework of UST algorithms. We present
the equivalent form of the framework and reveal the connections between the concepts of Fourier
transform with those of style transfer. We give interpretations on the different performances between
UST methods in structure preservation. We also present two operations for structure preservation
and desired stylization. Extensive experiments are conducted to demonstrate (1) the equivalence
between the framework and its proposed form, (2) the interpretability prompted by Fourier analysis
upon style transfer and (3) the controllability through manipulations on frequency components.


                                                          9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


R EFERENCES


Prashanth Chandran, Gaspard Zoss, Paulo Gotardo, Markus Gross, and Derek Bradley. Adaptive
  convolutions for structure-aware style transfer. In Proceedings of the Conference on Computer
  Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 7972–7981, June 2021.
Haibo Chen, lei zhao, Zhizhong Wang, Huiming Zhang, Zhiwen Zuo, Wei Xing Ailin Li, and
  Dongming Lu. Artistic style transfer with internal-external learning and contrastive learning.
  In M. Ranzato, A. Beygelzimer, Y. Dauphin, P.S. Liang, and J. Wortman Vaughan (eds.), Ad-
  vances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 34, pp. 26561–26573. Curran Asso-
  ciates, Inc., 2021a. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2021/file/
  df5354693177e83e8ba089e94b7b6b55-Paper.pdf.
Haibo Chen, Lei Zhao, Zhizhong Wang, Huiming Zhang, Zhiwen Zuo, Ailin Li, Wei Xing, and
  Dongming Lu. Dualast: Dual style-learning networks for artistic style transfer. In Proceedings of
  the Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 872–881, June 2021b.
Haibo Chen, Lei Zhao, Huiming Zhang, Zhizhong Wang, Zhiwen Zuo, Ailin Li, Wei Xing, and
  Dongming Lu. Diverse image style transfer via invertible cross-space mapping. In Proceedings
  of the International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), pp. 14880–14889, October 2021c.
Hung-Yu Chen, I-Sheng Fang, Chia-Ming Cheng, and Wei-Chen Chiu. Self-contained stylization
  via steganography for reverse and serial style transfer. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Winter
  Conference on Applications of Computer Vision (WACV), March 2020.
Tai-Yin Chiu and Danna Gurari. Photowct 2 : Compact autoencoder for photorealistic style transfer
  resulting from blockwise training and skip connections of high-frequency residuals. pp. 2978–
  2987, 01 2022. doi: 10.1109/WACV51458.2022.00303.
Vincent Dumoulin, Jonathon Shlens, and Manjunath Kudlur. Learned representation for artistic
  style. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2017.
Leon A. Gatys, Alexander S. Ecker, and Matthias Bethge. Image style transfer using convolutional
  neural networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recog-
  nition (CVPR), pp. 2414–2423, 2016. doi: 10.1109/CVPR.2016.265.
Rafael C. Gonzalez and Richard E. Woods.      Digital image processing, pp. 286–
  306.    Prentice Hall, Upper Saddle River, N.J., 2008.    ISBN 9780131687288
  013168728X 9780135052679 013505267X.        URL http://www.amazon.com/
  Digital-Image-Processing-3rd-Edition/dp/013168728X.
Kibeom Hong, Seogkyu Jeon, Huan Yang, Jianlong Fu, and Hyeran Byun. Domain-aware universal
  style transfer. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), pp.
  14609–14617, October 2021.
Xun Huang and Serge Belongie. Arbitrary style transfer in real-time with adaptive instance nor-
  malization. In International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), pp. 1510–1519, 2017. doi:
  10.1109/ICCV.2017.167.
William Frost Jenkins and Mita D. Desai. The discrete frequency fourier transform. IEEE Transac-
 tions on Circuits and Systems, 33:732–734, 1986.
Justin Johnson, Alexandre Alahi, and Li Fei-Fei. European conference on computer vision. In
  Perceptual losses for real-time style transfer and super-resolution, pp. 694–711, 2016.
Chuan Li and Michael Wand. Combining markov random fields and convolutional neural networks
  for image synthesis. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
  Recognition, pp. 2479–2486, 2016.
Xueting Li, Sifei Liu, Jan Kautz, and Ming-Hsuan Yang. Learning linear transformations for fast im-
  age and video style transfer. In Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR),
  pp. 3804–3812, 2019. doi: 10.1109/CVPR.2019.00393.


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Yijun Li, Chen Fang, Jimei Yang, Zhaowen Wang, Xin Lu, and Ming-Hsuan Yang. Universal
  style transfer via feature transforms. In Advances in neural information processing systems, pp.
  386–396, 2017a.
Yijun Li, Chen Fang, Jimei Yang, Zhaowen Wang, Xin Lu, and Ming-Hsuan Yang. Diversified tex-
  ture synthesis with feed-forward networks. In IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
  Recognition (CVPR), 2017b.
Yijun Li, Ming-Yu Liu, Xueting Li, Ming-Hsuan Yang, and Jan Kautz. A closed-form solution to
  photorealistic image stylization. In Proceedings of the European Conference on Computer Vision
  (ECCV), September 2018.
Tsung-Yi Lin, Michael Maire, Serge Belongie, Lubomir Bourdev, Ross Girshick, James Hays, Pietro
  Perona, Deva Ramanan, C. Lawrence Zitnick, and Piotr Dollár. Microsoft coco: Common objects
  in context, 2014. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1405.0312.
Xiao-Chang Liu, Yong-Liang Yang, and Peter Hall. Learning to warp for style transfer. In Proceed-
  ings of the Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 3702–3711,
  June 2021.
Ming Lu, Hao Zhao, Anbang Yao, Yurong Chen, Feng Xu, and Li Zhang. A closed-form solution to
 universal style transfer. In International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), pp. 5951–5960,
 2019.
K . Nichol. Painter by numbers. volume 34, 2016. URL https://www.kaggle.com/c/
  painter-by-numbers.
Dae Young Park and Kwang Hee Lee. Arbitrary style transfer with style-attentional networks. In
  Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 5880–5888, 2019.
Lu Sheng, Ziyi Lin, Jing Shao, and Xiaogang Wang. Avatar-net: Multi-scale zero-shot style transfer
  by feature decoration, 2018. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1805.03857.
Karen Simonyan and Andrew Zisserman. Very deep convolutional networks for large-scale image
  recognition. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2015.
Zhizhong Wang, Lei Zhao, Haibo Chen, Lihong Qiu, Qihang Mo, Sihuan Lin, Wei Xing, and Dong-
  ming Lu. Diversified arbitrary style transfer via deep feature perturbation. In Proceedings of the
  IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 7789–7798, 2020.
Yanchao Yang and Stefano Soatto. Fda: Fourier domain adaptation for semantic segmentation. In
  Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR),
  June 2020.
Jaejun Yoo, Youngjung Uh, Sanghyuk Chun, Byeongkyu Kang, and Jung-Woo Ha. Photorealistic
  style transfer via wavelet transforms. In International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV),
  pp. 9035–9044, 2019. doi: 10.1109/ICCV.2019.00913.


A     A PPENDIX
In Supplementary Materials, we first provide the proofs of the main conclusions in Section 3, then
we introduce the model architectures, experimental details and computing infrastructure, and finally
we show the additional experimental results on our method for the performance comparison and the
validation of interpretability and controllability.

B     P ROOFS
B.1   P ROOFS FOR THE EQUIVALENT FORM OF THE FRAMEWORK IN S ECTION 3.1

Given cthe content image I c and the style image I s , we denote the feature maps of I c as F c ∈
  C×H ×W c                            s     s     C×H s ×W s
R            and the feature maps of I as F ∈ R              , where C is the number of channels,


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


H c (H s ) is the height and W c (W s ) is the width. Universal style transfer (UST) algorithms trans-
form F c into the stylized feature maps F cs and synthesize stylized images. Based on the unified
framework (Lu et al., 2019), each pixel of F cs is calculated as:
                                      cs           c
                                                      − µc + µs ,

                                   Fh,w    = T Fh,w                                               (13)
where T ∈ RC×C is a transformation matrix, (h, w) are indices on the spatial dimensions and
µc , µs ∈ RC are the channel-wise mean for F c and  F s , respectively. We denote the 2-D discrete
                              cs     cs      C×H c ×W c
Fourier transform (DFT) of F as F ∈ C                   , where C is the set of complex numbers.
Based on the Fourier transform and Eq. equation 13, we derive each complex frequency component
  cs
Fu,v  as:
           c     c                                                     c     c
          HX −1 WX −1                                                 HX −1 WX −1
                             cs −j2π(u Hhc +v Wwc )                                                                        h   w
  cs
 Fu,v =                     Fh,w e                  =                                     c
                                                                                     [T (Fh,w − µc ) + µs ]e−j2π(u H c +v W c )
          h=0       w=0                                               h=0      w=0
               c     c                                                                  c     c
              HX −1 WX −1                                                              HX −1 WX −1
                                           h      w                                                             h      w
       =T                      c
                              Fh,w e−j2π(u H c +v W c ) + (µs − T µc )                                e−j2π(u H c +v W c ) ,
                  h=0   w=0                                                             h=0    w=0
          |                        {z                             }    |                        {z                         }
                              the first term                                               the second term
                                                                                                (14)
where (u, v) are indices on the frequency dimensions and j is the imaginary unit. Note that the first
         cs
term of Fu,v equals:
                               c     c
                              HX −1 WX −1
                                                       h    w
                           T               c
                                          Fh,w e−j2π(u H +v W ) = T Fu,v
                                                                     c
                                                                         .                      (15)
                                        h=0      w=0
                               c
Especially, when u = v = 0, T Fu,v equals:
                                                   c     c
                                                  HX −1 WX −1
                                  c                                    c
                               T F0,0 =T                              Fh,w e0+0 = T (H c W c µc ).                             (16)
                                                   h=0       w=0
                        cs
And the second term of Fu,v equals:
                             c     c
                            HX −1 WX −1
                                                                               H c W c (µs − T µc ), if u = v = 0;

                                                         h        w
              s
        (µ − T µ )      c
                                               e−j2π(u H +v W ) =                                                  .           (17)
                                    w=0
                                                                               0,                    else
                            h=0
       cs
Thus, Fu,v can be derived as:
                      T (H c W c µc ) − T (H c W c µc ) + H c W c µs , if u = v = 0;

              cs
            Fu,v =        c
                      T Fu,v ,                                         else
                      c c s                              HcW c   s                                                             (18)
                 =
                      H W µ , if u = v = 0;
                                                    =     H s W s F0,0 , if u = v = 0; ,
                          c                                  c
                      T Fu,v ,      else                 T Fu,v ,          else
where F c and F s are the DFTs of F c and F s , respectively. It is worth noting that F0,0
                                                                                       s
                                                                                           =
PH s −1 PW s −1 s         s s s                         cs      c   c s       c
                                                                            H W c
                                                                                     s
  h=0     w=0 Fh,w = H W µ . Therefore, we have Fu,v = H W µ = H s W s F0,0 when
u = v = 0.

B.2   P ROOFS FOR THE CONNECTION BETWEEN PHASE AND THE CONTENT LOSS IN S ECTION
      3.2

Given matrices X, Y ∈ CH×W and their 2-D DFTs X , Y ∈ CH×W , we have the Parseval’s theorem
in the context of DFT that:
                        H−1
                        XW   −1                H−1 W −1
                            X
                                      ∗      1 X X            ∗
                                Xh,w Yh,w =             Xu,v Yu,v ,                     (19)
                            w=0
                                            HW u=0 v=0
                               h=0
where (∗) represents complex conjugate and u, v are indices on the frequency dimensions. Espe-
cially, when X = Y and X, Y ∈ RH×W , we can have:
                                   H−1
                                   XW  −1                                      H−1 W −1
                                       X                      2         1 X X
                                                  (Xh,w ) =                       |Xu,v |2 .                                   (20)
                                                                       HW u=0 v=0
                                   h=0 w=0


                                                                      12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


We then denote the feature maps of the stylized image and the content image as F cs , F c ∈
RC×H×W , their corresponding DFTs as F cs , F c , Fourier amplitude as |F cs |, |F c | and Fourier
phase as ∠F cs , ∠F c , respectively. Note that for any Fk,u,v
                                                         cs         c
                                                               and Fk,u,v , we have:
                         cs        cs            cs         cs            cs
                        Fk,u,v = |Fk,u,v | cos ∠Fk,u,v + j|Fk,u,v | sin ∠Fk,u,v
                         c         c             c          c             c                              (21)
                        Fk,u,v = |Fk,u,v | cos ∠Fk,u,v + j|Fk,u,v | sin ∠Fk,u,v ,
where k and (u, v) are indices on channels and frequency dimensions, respectively. Note that for
complex numbers M = a + jb and N = c + jd with a, b, c, d ∈ R, we have:
                                    |M − N |2 = (a − c)2 + (b − d)2 .                                    (22)
Based on the Eq. equation 20, Eq. equation 21 and Eq. equation 22, the content loss Lc between
F cs and F c can be represented as:
          C−1
          X H−1
              XW −1                                     C−1 H−1 W −1
                X
                          cs       c
                                            2        1 X X X cs             c
 Lc =                    Fk,h,w − Fk,h,w        =                |Fk,u,v − Fk,u,v |2
                                                    HW
          k=0 h=0 w=0                                    u=0 v=0
                                                        k=0
               C−1
               X H−1
                   XW −1
           1         X              cs            cs        c             c
                                                                                   2
      =                           |Fk,u,v | cos ∠Fk,u,v − |Fk,u,v | cos ∠Fk,u,v
          HW
               k=0 u=0 v=0
                                                         cs            cs        c             c
                                                                                                        2
                                                     + |Fk,u,v | sin ∠Fk,u,v − |Fk,u,v | sin ∠Fk,u,v
               C−1 H−1 W −1
           1 X X X         cs
      =                  |Fk,u,v |2 + |Fk,u,v
                                        c
                                              |2 − 2|Fk,u,v
                                                      cs       c
                                                            ||Fk,u,v         cs
                                                                     | cos ∠Fk,u,v        c
                                                                                   cos ∠Fk,u,v
          HW
             k=0 u=0 v=0
                                                      cs       c             cs          c

                                                 − 2|Fk,u,v ||Fk,u,v | sin ∠Fk,u,v sin ∠Fk,u,v
               C−1 H−1 W −1
           1 X X X   cs 2                   c
                                                  |2 − 2|Fk,u,v
                                                          cs       c             cs        c

      =                       |Fk,u,v | + |Fk,u,v               ||Fk,u,v | cos ∠Fk,u,v − ∠Fk,u,v   .
         HW
               k=0 u=0 v=0
                                                                                                 (23)
It is worth noting that cos(α − β) = cos α cos β + sin α sin β for any α, β ∈ (−π, π].

B.3     P ROOFS FOR THE CONNECTION BETWEEN AMPLITUDE AND G RAM MATRICES IN
        S ECTION 3.2
                                                         ∗
According to Eq. equation 19, when X, Y ∈ RH×W , Yh,w = Yh,w , we have:
                           H−1
                           XW  −1                           H−1 W −1
                               X                        1 X X           ∗
                                       Xh,w Yh,w =                Xu,v Yu,v ,                            (24)
                                                       HW u=0 v=0
                            h=0 w=0


which serves as the basis for our following proofs. Given feature maps F ∈ RC×H×W , their
corresponding DFTs F, Fourier amplitude |F| and Fourier phase ∠F, the pixel of the Gram matrix
F F ⊤ can be derived as:
                              H−1
                              XW  −1                                 H−1 W −1
                                  X                             1 X X
               F F ⊤ c1 ,c2 =                                            Fc ,u,v Fc∗2 ,u,v

                                     Fc1 ,h,w Fc2 ,h,w =
                                                               HW u=0 v=0 1
                               h=0 w=0
                         H−1
                         XW  −1
                     1       X
                =               |Fc1 ,u,v ||Fc2 ,u,v | cos (∠Fc1 ,u,v − ∠Fc2 ,u,v )
                    HW u=0 v=0                                                                           (25)

                                     + j|Fc1 ,u,v ||Fc2 ,u,v | sin (∠Fc1 ,u,v − ∠Fc2 ,u,v )
                         H−1
                         XW  −1
                     1       X
                =                 |Fc1 ,u,v ||Fc2 ,u,v | cos (∠Fc1 ,u,v − ∠Fc2 ,u,v ) ,
                   HW u=0 v=0

where c1 , c2 are indices on the channels. Considering that F F ⊤ c1 ,c2 is a real number, the imagi-


            1
                PH−1 PW −1
nary part HW       u=0    v=0 j|Fc1 ,u,v ||Fc2 ,u,v | sin (∠Fc1 ,u,v − ∠Fc2 ,u,v ) equals zero and is con-
sequently omitted in the final step.


                                                      13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


C     I MPLEMENTATION DETAILS

C.1   M ETHOD SPECIFICATION

The encoder of the proposed method is a part of the VGG-19 network (Simonyan & Zisserman,
2015) (from the layer conv1 1 to the layer conv4 1). The decoder is a generative network to perform
the stylization and transform the stylized feature maps into images. The decoder performs both
whitening and coloring transform (WCT) (Li et al., 2017a) and the proposed phase replacement
operation in the frequency domain only for the inference stage. The detailed network architecture is
described as follows:

       • The encoder:
            – 1 × 1 Conv, 3
            – 1 × 1 Reflection Padding, 3 × 3 Conv, 64 ReLU
            – 1 × 1 Reflection Padding, 3 × 3 Conv, 64 ReLU
            – 2 × 2 Max pool, stride 2; 1 × 1 Reflection Padding, 3 × 3 Conv, 128 ReLU
            – 1 × 1 Reflection Padding, 3 × 3 Conv, 128 ReLU
            – 2 × 2 Max pool, stride 2; 1 × 1 Reflection Padding, 3 × 3 Conv, 256 ReLU
            – 1 × 1 Reflection Padding, 3 × 3 Conv, 256 ReLU
            – 1 × 1 Reflection Padding, 3 × 3 Conv, 256 ReLU
            – 1 × 1 Reflection Padding, 3 × 3 Conv, 256 ReLU
            – 2 × 2 Max pool, stride 2; 1 × 1 Reflection Padding, 3 × 3 Conv, 512 ReLU
       • The decoder:
            – Universal style transfer module; Phase replacement
            – 1 × 1 Reflection Padding, 3 × 3 Conv, 256 ReLU
            – 2x nearest-neighbor upsample; 1 × 1 Reflection Padding, 3 × 3 Conv, 256 ReLU
            – 1 × 1 Reflection Padding, 3 × 3 Conv, 256 ReLU
            – 1 × 1 Reflection Padding, 3 × 3 Conv, 256 ReLU
            – Universal style transfer module; Phase replacement
            – 1 × 1 Reflection Padding, 3 × 3 Conv, 128 ReLU
            – 2x nearest-neighbor upsample; 1 × 1 Reflection Padding, 3 × 3 Conv, 128 ReLU
            – Universal style transfer module; Phase replacement
            – 1 × 1 Reflection Padding, 3 × 3 Conv, 64 ReLU
            – 2x nearest-neighbor upsample; 1 × 1 Reflection Padding, 3 × 3 Conv, 64 ReLU
            – Universal style transfer module; Phase replacement
            – 1 × 1 Reflection Padding, 3 × 3 Conv, 3

C.2   E XPERIMENTAL DETAILS

The encoder of the proposed method is pre-trained by the ImageNet dataset (?). The decoder of the
proposed method is trained for image reconstruction by minimizing the L2 reconstruction loss. The
corresponding training dataset is MS-COCO dataset (Lin et al., 2014), whose images are first resized
into 512×512 and randomly cropped into a size of 256×256 for training. During the learning stage,
the batch size is 64 and the number of training steps is 140,000. The initial learning rate is 1 × 10−4 ,
and is decayed with a factor 0.5 for every 20,000 steps. For the stylization, we choose MS-COCO
dataset (Lin et al., 2014) and WikiArt dataset (Nichol, 2016) as our content dataset and style dataset,
respectively. For the quantitative comparison, we randomly select 15 content images and 25 style
images to synthesize 375 stylized images for each method.

C.3   C OMPUTING INFRASTRUCTURE

Experiments are conducted on a server with Intel Xeon Silver 4214 CPUs and a single NVIDIA
Tesla V100 GPU. The code is developed based on the PyTorch framework (?) with version 1.8.1.


                                                   14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


     Table 2: The SSIM scores for different methods on the architectures of AdaIN and WCT.
                          Method \Architecture AdaIN WCT
                              AdaIN                     0.307      0.315
                              WCT                       0.274      0.234
                              WCT w/ PR                 0.280      0.251


D    I NVOLVED EXISTING ASSETS
Existing assets involved in this work include: 1) the codes and models weights of AdaIN (Huang
& Belongie, 2017), WCT (Li et al., 2017a), LinearWCT (Li et al., 2019), Avatar-Net (Sheng et al.,
2018), OptimalWCT (Lu et al., 2019), SANet (Park & Lee, 2019), and Self-Contained (Chen et al.,
2020), and 2) the images of MS-COCO dataset (Lin et al., 2014) and WikiArt dataset (Nichol, 2016).
Their URLs and licenses are as follows:

       • AdaIN: https://github.com/naoto0804/pytorch-AdaIN. MIT License.
       • WCT: https://github.com/irasin/Pytorch WCT. Unable to find its license.
       • LinearWCT: https://github.com/sunshineatnoon/LinearStyleTransfer. BSD 2-Clause Li-
         cense.
       • Avatar-Net: https://github.com/LucasSheng/avatar-net. Unable to find its license.
       • OptimalWCT: https://github.com/boomb0om/PyTorch-OptimalStyleTransfer. Unable to
         find its license.
       • MS-COCO dataset: https://cocodataset.org/#download. Unable to find its license.
       • WikiArt dataset: https://www.kaggle.com/c/painter-by-numbers. Unable to find its license.
       • SANet: https://github.com/GlebSBrykin/SANET
       • Self-Contained: https://github.com/IShengFang/Self-Contained Stylization

E    A DDITIONAL EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
In this section, we present more experimental results in this work, including (1) more performance
comparison against the state-of-the-art style transfer methods in Figure 6, (2) more validation on the
interpretations of Fourier phase and amplitude in Figure 7 and Figure 8, and (3) more experiments
on the efficacy of proposed manipulations in Table 2, Figure 9 and Figure 10.
Note that the structure preservation abilities of different methods are not only related with their styl-
ization transformations on feature maps, but also related with their architectures and model weights.
To better understand the differences between AdaIN and WCT, we implement different methods
on their architectures and present corresponding quantitative scores. As shown in Table 2, WCT is
improved by phase replacement (PR) while AdaIN achieves the highest SSIM scores. The reason
might be that WCT has more influence on the Fourier amplitude of feature maps compared with
AdaIN. According to Eq. equation 23, when the Fourier phase is well preserved by AdaIN and PR,
the content loss only depends on the differences of Fourier amplitude, which means that changing
Fourier amplitude is likely to harm the SSIM score. Since WCT has lower SSIM scores compared
with AdaIN, it is more likely to influence more on the Fourier amplitude. This also explains why
WCT can produce much more intensive and expressive stylization, considering the connection be-
tween Fourier amplitude and the intensities of stylized images.

R EFERENCES


Prashanth Chandran, Gaspard Zoss, Paulo Gotardo, Markus Gross, and Derek Bradley. Adaptive
  convolutions for structure-aware style transfer. In Proceedings of the Conference on Computer
  Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 7972–7981, June 2021.


                                                   15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


          Content


             Style


           AdaIN


            WCT



          Optimal
            WCT



           Linear
            WCT



           Avatar
             Net


           SANet


    Self-Contained


             Ours



Figure 5: Qualitative comparison on the state-of-the-art UST algorithms. Compared with the pro-
posed method, AvatarNet and SANet sometimes generates less intensive colors (e.g., in 2nd and 4th
columns) and produce unexpected style pattern (e.g., eyes in the 5th column), while Self-Contained
sometimes introduces unexpected color (e.g., in the 4th column)


Haibo Chen, lei zhao, Zhizhong Wang, Huiming Zhang, Zhiwen Zuo, Wei Xing Ailin Li, and
  Dongming Lu. Artistic style transfer with internal-external learning and contrastive learning.
  In M. Ranzato, A. Beygelzimer, Y. Dauphin, P.S. Liang, and J. Wortman Vaughan (eds.), Ad-
  vances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 34, pp. 26561–26573. Curran Asso-
  ciates, Inc., 2021a. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2021/file/
  df5354693177e83e8ba089e94b7b6b55-Paper.pdf.

Haibo Chen, Lei Zhao, Zhizhong Wang, Huiming Zhang, Zhiwen Zuo, Ailin Li, Wei Xing, and
  Dongming Lu. Dualast: Dual style-learning networks for artistic style transfer. In Proceedings of
  the Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 872–881, June 2021b.

Haibo Chen, Lei Zhao, Huiming Zhang, Zhizhong Wang, Zhiwen Zuo, Ailin Li, Wei Xing, and
  Dongming Lu. Diverse image style transfer via invertible cross-space mapping. In Proceedings
  of the International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), pp. 14880–14889, October 2021c.


                                                16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                     Optimal     Linear      Avatar
   Content      Style       AdaIN        WCT          WCT        WCT          Net         Ours


Figure 6: Qualitative comparison on the state-of-the-art UST algorithms. On one hand, compared
with AdaIN and LinearWCT, the proposed method produces more intensive colors (e.g., 3rd , 4th ,
6th and 9th rows). On the other hand, the proposed method does better in the structure preservation
of images than the rest of methods (e.g., 1st , 2nd , 5th , 7th and 8th rows).


Hung-Yu Chen, I-Sheng Fang, Chia-Ming Cheng, and Wei-Chen Chiu. Self-contained stylization
  via steganography for reverse and serial style transfer. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Winter
  Conference on Applications of Computer Vision (WACV), March 2020.
Tai-Yin Chiu and Danna Gurari. Photowct 2 : Compact autoencoder for photorealistic style transfer
  resulting from blockwise training and skip connections of high-frequency residuals. pp. 2978–


                                                17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


   (a) Content image    (b) Style image    (c) Stylized image      (d) Amplitude of (b)   (e) Amplitude of (a)
                                                                     and phase of (c)       and phase of (c)


Figure 7: Additional synthesized results with the same Fourier phase and replaced Fourier ampli-
tude. We replace the Fourier amplitude of stylized feature maps in each layer and use the proposed
method to synthesize stylized images. Note that feature maps with the same phase produce images
with highly similar spatial arrangements (e.g., the triangular structure of the architecture and the
human face), even in some details (e.g., the light on the human cheek). Therefore, Fourier phase is
validated to play an important role on the spatial arrangements of images.

   (a) Content image    (b) Style image    (c) Stylized image        (d) Phase of (b)       (e) Phase of (a)
                                                                   and amplitude of (c)   and amplitude of (c)


Figure 8: Additional synthesized results with the same Fourier amplitude and replaced Fourier
phase. We replace the Fourier phase of stylized feature maps in each layer and use the proposed
method (without phase replacement) to synthesize stylized images. Note that feature maps with the
same amplitude produce images with highly similar contrast and intensities, (e.g., the same differ-
ences between the brightest pixels and the darkest pixels of (c), (d) and (e)). Therefore, we validate
the connection between Fourier amplitude and the intensities of synthesized images.


  2987, 01 2022. doi: 10.1109/WACV51458.2022.00303.
Vincent Dumoulin, Jonathon Shlens, and Manjunath Kudlur. Learned representation for artistic
  style. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2017.
Leon A. Gatys, Alexander S. Ecker, and Matthias Bethge. Image style transfer using convolutional
  neural networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recog-
  nition (CVPR), pp. 2414–2423, 2016. doi: 10.1109/CVPR.2016.265.
Rafael C. Gonzalez and Richard E. Woods.                         Digital image processing, pp. 286–
  306.    Prentice Hall, Upper Saddle River,                    N.J., 2008.    ISBN 9780131687288


                                                  18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                         WCT                   OptimalWCT                 Ours
    Content      Style       WCT         w/ PR    OptimalWCT      w/ PR        Ours       w/ PR


Figure 9: Results on the efficacy of phase replacement (abbr. PR). We implement PR on different
methods and show the visual difference. It can be observed that PR improves the visual effect of all
methods in the spatial arrangement of not only the details (e.g., it improves the unpleasant human
eyes and vague contours of architectures ), but also the overview (e.g., it improves the uneven light
and shade) of images.

  013168728X 9780135052679 013505267X. URL http://www.amazon.com/
  Digital-Image-Processing-3rd-Edition/dp/013168728X.
Kibeom Hong, Seogkyu Jeon, Huan Yang, Jianlong Fu, and Hyeran Byun. Domain-aware universal
  style transfer. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), pp.
  14609–14617, October 2021.
Xun Huang and Serge Belongie. Arbitrary style transfer in real-time with adaptive instance nor-
  malization. In International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), pp. 1510–1519, 2017. doi:
  10.1109/ICCV.2017.167.
William Frost Jenkins and Mita D. Desai. The discrete frequency fourier transform. IEEE Transac-
 tions on Circuits and Systems, 33:732–734, 1986.
Justin Johnson, Alexandre Alahi, and Li Fei-Fei. European conference on computer vision. In
  Perceptual losses for real-time style transfer and super-resolution, pp. 694–711, 2016.
Chuan Li and Michael Wand. Combining markov random fields and convolutional neural networks
  for image synthesis. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
  Recognition, pp. 2479–2486, 2016.
Xueting Li, Sifei Liu, Jan Kautz, and Ming-Hsuan Yang. Learning linear transformations for fast im-
  age and video style transfer. In Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR),
  pp. 3804–3812, 2019. doi: 10.1109/CVPR.2019.00393.
Yijun Li, Chen Fang, Jimei Yang, Zhaowen Wang, Xin Lu, and Ming-Hsuan Yang. Universal
  style transfer via feature transforms. In Advances in neural information processing systems, pp.
  386–396, 2017a.
Yijun Li, Chen Fang, Jimei Yang, Zhaowen Wang, Xin Lu, and Ming-Hsuan Yang. Diversified tex-
  ture synthesis with feed-forward networks. In IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
  Recognition (CVPR), 2017b.
Yijun Li, Ming-Yu Liu, Xueting Li, Ming-Hsuan Yang, and Jan Kautz. A closed-form solution to
  photorealistic image stylization. In Proceedings of the European Conference on Computer Vision
  (ECCV), September 2018.
Tsung-Yi Lin, Michael Maire, Serge Belongie, Lubomir Bourdev, Ross Girshick, James Hays, Pietro
  Perona, Deva Ramanan, C. Lawrence Zitnick, and Piotr Dollár. Microsoft coco: Common objects
  in context, 2014. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1405.0312.


                                                 19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


   (a)


   (b)


   (a)


   (b)


   (a)


   (b)


Figure 10: Comparison between (a) linear combination and (b) frequency combination. Images
in the first column are stylized images and images in the last column are content images. The
proposed frequency method can maintain the low frequencies of stylized images and focus on the
high frequencies of content images. On one hand, the proposed method can fix distorted details by
introducing the high frequencies of content images, since these distortion are caused by the high
frequencies of stylized images (e.g., the difference between the first column and the second column
of (b)). On the other hand, the proposed method can enhance the details while keeping the overview
stylized (e.g., the difference between the fourth column of (a) and (b)). Note that the proposed
method achieves this performance without any spatial masks to identify where to stylize.


Xiao-Chang Liu, Yong-Liang Yang, and Peter Hall. Learning to warp for style transfer. In Proceed-
  ings of the Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 3702–3711,
  June 2021.

Ming Lu, Hao Zhao, Anbang Yao, Yurong Chen, Feng Xu, and Li Zhang. A closed-form solution to
 universal style transfer. In International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), pp. 5951–5960,


                                                20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


  2019.
K . Nichol. Painter by numbers. volume 34, 2016. URL https://www.kaggle.com/c/
  painter-by-numbers.
Dae Young Park and Kwang Hee Lee. Arbitrary style transfer with style-attentional networks. In
  Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 5880–5888, 2019.
Lu Sheng, Ziyi Lin, Jing Shao, and Xiaogang Wang. Avatar-net: Multi-scale zero-shot style transfer
  by feature decoration, 2018. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1805.03857.
Karen Simonyan and Andrew Zisserman. Very deep convolutional networks for large-scale image
  recognition. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2015.
Zhizhong Wang, Lei Zhao, Haibo Chen, Lihong Qiu, Qihang Mo, Sihuan Lin, Wei Xing, and Dong-
  ming Lu. Diversified arbitrary style transfer via deep feature perturbation. In Proceedings of the
  IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 7789–7798, 2020.
Yanchao Yang and Stefano Soatto. Fda: Fourier domain adaptation for semantic segmentation. In
  Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR),
  June 2020.
Jaejun Yoo, Youngjung Uh, Sanghyuk Chun, Byeongkyu Kang, and Jung-Woo Ha. Photorealistic
  style transfer via wavelet transforms. In International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV),
  pp. 9035–9044, 2019. doi: 10.1109/ICCV.2019.00913.


                                                21
