Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


S TATISTICAL I NFERENCE FOR F ISHER M ARKET E QUI -
LIBRIUM

 Luofeng Liao, Yuan Gao, Christian Kroer
 Department of Industrial Engineering and Operations Research
 Columbia University
 {ll3530,yg2541,christian.kroer}@columbia



                                            A BSTRACT

         Statistical inference under market equilibrium effects has attracted increasing at-
         tention recently. In this paper we focus on the specific case of linear Fisher mar-
         kets. They have been widely use in fair resource allocation of food/blood do-
         nations and budget management in large-scale Internet ad auctions. In resource
         allocation, it is crucial to quantify the variability of the resource received by the
         agents (such as blood banks and food banks) in addition to fairness and efficiency
         properties of the systems. For ad auction markets, it is important to establish sta-
         tistical properties of the platform’s revenues in addition to their expected values.
         To this end, we propose a statistical framework based on the concept of infinite-
         dimensional Fisher markets. In our framework, we observe a market formed by
         a finite number of items sampled from an underlying distribution (the “observed
         market”) and aim to infer several important equilibrium quantities of the under-
         lying long-run market. These equilibrium quantities include individual utilities,
         social welfare, and pacing multipliers. Through the lens of sample average ap-
         proximation (SAA), we derive a collection of statistical results and show that the
         observed market provides useful statistical information of the long-run market. In
         other words, the equilibrium quantities of the observed market converge to the
         true ones of the long-run market with strong statistical guarantees. These include
         consistency, finite sample bounds, asymptotics, and confidence. As an extension
         we discuss revenue inference in quasilinear Fisher markets.



1   I NTRODUCTION

In a Fisher market there is a set of n buyers that are interested in buying goods from a distinct
seller. A market equilibrium (ME) is then a set of prices for the goods, along with a corresponding
allocation, such that demand equals supply.
One important application of market equilibrium (ME) is fair allocation using the competitive equi-
librium from equal incomes (CEEI) mechanism (Varian, 1974). In CEEI, each individual is given
an endowment of faux currency and reports her valuations for items; then, a market equilibrium
is computed, and the items are allocated accordingly. The resulting allocation has many desirable
properties such as Pareto optimality, envy-freeness and proportionality. For example, Fisher market
equilibrium has been used for fair work allocation, impressions allocation in certain recommender
systems, course seat allocation and scarce computing resources allocation; see Appendix A for an
extensive overview.
Despite numerous algorithmic results available for computing Fisher market equilibria, to the best
of our knowledge, no statistical results were available for quantifying the randomness of market
equilibrium. Given that CEEI is a fair and efficient mechanism, such statistical results are useful
for quantifying variability in CEEI-based resource allocation. For example, for systems that assign
blood donation to hospitals and blood banks (McElfresh et al., 2020), or donated food to charities in
different neighborhoods (Aleksandrov et al., 2015; Sinclair et al., 2022), it is crucial to quantify the
variability of the amount of resources (blood or food donation) received by the participants (hospitals
or charities) of these systems as well as the variability of fairness and efficiency metrics of interest


                                                   1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                 Buyers            Items                                              Buyers             Items



             &            !" ($)           $
                                                                                               !" ($)      $
                                                                                  &


                                                  1.   strong consistency
                                                  2.   finite-sample bound
                                                  3.   asymptotic normality
         •        Social welfare                                              •        Social welfare
         •        Utility
                                                  4.   confidence interval
                                                                              •        Utility
         •        Pacing Multiplier                                           •        Pacing Multiplier
         •        Revenue (quasilinear markets)                               •        Revenue (quasilinear markets)


Figure 1: Our contributions. Left panel: a Fisher market with a finite number of items. Right panel: a Fisher
market with a continuum of items. Middle arrow: this paper provides various forms of statistical guarantees to
characterize the convergence of observed finite Fisher market (left) to the long-run market (right) when the
items are drawn from a distribution corresponding to the supply function in the long-run market.

in the long run. Making statistical statements about these metrics is crucial for both evaluating and
improving these systems.
In addition to fair resource allocation, statistical results for Fisher markets can also be used in rev-
enue inference in Internet ad auction markets. While much of the existing literature uses expected
revenue as performance metrics, statistical inference on revenue is challenging due to the complex
interaction among bidders under coupled supply constraints and common price signals. As shown
by Conitzer et al. (2022a), in budget management through repeated first-price auctions with pacing,
the optimal pacing multipliers correspond to the “prices-per-utility” of buyers in a quasilinear Fisher
market at equilibrium. Given the close connection between various solution concepts in Fisher mar-
ket models and first-price auctions, a statistical framework enables us to quantify the variability in
long-run revenue of an advertising platform. Furthermore, a statistical framework would also help
answer other statistical questions such as the study of counterfactuals and theoretical guarantees for
A/B testing in Internet ad auction markets.
For a detailed survey on related work in the areas of statistical inference, applications of Fisher
market models, and equilibrium computation algorithms, see Appendix A.
Our contributions are as follows.
A statistical Fisher market model. We formulate a statistical estimation problem for Fisher mar-
kets based on the continuous-item model of Gao and Kroer (2022). We show that when a finite
set of goods are sampled from the continuous model, the observed ME is a good approximation
of the long-run market. In particular, we develop consistency results, finite-sample bounds, central
limit theorems, and asymptotically valid confidence interval for various quantities of interests, such
as individual utility, Nash social welfare, pacing multipliers, and revenue (for quasilinear Fisher
markets).
Technical challenges. In developing central limit theorems for pacing multipliers and utilities in
Fisher markets (Theorem 5), we note that the dual objective is potentially not twice differentiable.
This is a required condition, which is common in the sample average approximation or M-estimation
literature. We discover three types of market where such differentiability is guaranteed. Moreover,
the sample function is not differentiable, which requires us to verify a set of stochastic differentia-
bility conditions in the proofs for central limit theorems. Finally, we achieve a fast statistical rate of
the empirical pacing multiplier to the population pacing multiplier measured in the dual objective
by exploiting the local strong convexity of the sample function.
Notation.
!     "        For a sequence of events An we define the "         set limit
                                                                         ! by lim inf n→∞ An =
  n≥1    j≥n Aj    = {At eventually} and lim supn→∞ An = n≥1 j≥n Aj = {At i.o.}. Let
[n] = {1, . . . , n}. We use 1t to denote the vector of ones of length t and ej to denote the vec-
tor with one in the j-th entry and zeros in the others. For a sequence of random variables {Xn }, we
say Xn = Op (1) if for any ! > there exists a finite M! and a finite N! such that P(|Xn | > M! ) < !
for all n ≥ N! . We say Xn = Op (an ) if Xn /an = Op (1). We use subscript for indexing buyers


                                                             2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


and superscript for items. If a function f is twice continuously differentiable at a point x, we say f
is C 2 at x.

2     P ROBLEM S ETUP
2.1   T HE E STIMANDS

Following Gao and Kroer (2022), we consider a Fisher market with n buyers (individuals), each
having a budget bi > 0 and a (possibly continuous) set of items Θ. We let Lp (and Lp+ , resp.) denote
the set of (nonnegative, resp.) Lp functions on Θ w.r.t the integrating measure µ for any p ∈ [1, ∞]
(including p = ∞). For example, one could take Θ = [0, 1] and µ = the Lebesgue measure on
[0, 1]. The item supplies are given by a function s ∈ L∞     + , i.e., item θ ∈ Θ has supply s(θ). The
valuation for buyer i is a function vi ∈ L+ , i.e., buyer i has valuation vi (θ) for item θ ∈ Θ. For
                                               1

buyer i, an allocation of items xi ∈ L∞ + gives a utility of
                                                       #
                             ui (xi ) := $vi , xi % :=   vi (θ)xi (θ) dµ(θ),
                                                             Θ

where the angle brackets are based on the notation of applying a bounded linear functional xi to a
vector vi in the Banach space L1 and the integral is the usual Lebesgue integral. We will use x ∈
(L∞+ ) to denote the aggregate allocation of items to all buyers, i.e., the concatenation of all buyers’
      n

allocations. The prices of items are modeled as p$ ∈ L1+ . The price of item θ ∈$ Θ is p(θ). Without
loss of generality, we assume a unit total supply Θ s dµ = 1. We let S(A) := A s(θ) dµ(θ) be the
probability measure induced by the supply s.
Imagine there is a central policymaker that sets the prices p(·) of items Θ. Upon receiving the price
signal, the buyer i maximizes his utility $vi , xi % subject to the budget constraint $p, xi % ≤ bi . He
would demand a bundle of items coming from his demand set
                           Di (p) := arg max{$vi , xi % : xi ∈ L∞
                                                                + , $p, xi % ≤ bi }.
                                            xi

Of course, due to the supply constraint, if prices are too low, there will be a shortage in supply. On
the other hand, if prices are too high, a surplus occurs. Market equilibrium is the case when items
are sold out exactly.
Definition 1 (The long-run market equilibrium). The market equilibrium (ME) M E (b, v, s) is an
allocation-utility-price tuple (x∗ , u∗ , p∗ )%
                                              ∈ (L∞+ ) × R+ × L+%
                                                      n    n      1
                                                                    such that the following holds. (i)
Supply feasibility and market clearance: i xi ≤ s and $p , s − i x∗i % = 0. (ii) Buyer optimality:
                                                 ∗           ∗

x∗i ∈ Di (p∗ ) and u∗ = $vi , xi % for all i.

Linear Fisher market equilibrium can be characterized by convex programs. We state the following
result from Gao and Kroer (2022) which establishes existence and uniqueness of market equilibrium,
and more importantly the convex program formulation of the equilibrium. We define the Eisenberg-
Gale (EG) convex programs which as we will see are dual to each other.
                  &             'n                                               n
                                                                                 '         +
                                                 (       )           *
          max       NSW(u) :=      b i log(u i ) ( u i ≤   v i , x i   ∀i ∈ [n],   x i ≤ s   , (P-EG)
          ∞
      x∈L+ (Θ),u≥0
                                      i=1                                               i=1
                            &           # ,                      -          n
                                                                            '                 +
                     min H(β) :=                 max βi vi (θ) S(dθ) −            bi log βi       .         (P-DEG)
                      β>0                    Θ   i∈[n]
                                                                            i=1

Concretely, the optimal primal variables in Eq. (P-EG) corresponds to the set of equilibrium al-
locations x∗ and the unique equilibrium utilities u∗ , and the unique optimal dual variable β ∗ of
Eq. (P-DEG) relates to the equilibrium through
         u∗i = bi /βi∗ ,    p∗ (θ) = max βi∗ vi (θ) ,        x∗i (θ) > 0 only if i ∈ arg max βi∗ vi (θ) .
                                        i                                                     i

We call β the pacing multiplier. Note equilibrium allocations might not be unique but equilibrium
          ∗

utilities and prices are unique. Given the above equivalence result, we use (x∗ , u∗ ) to denote both
the equilibrium
             $    and the%optimal variables. Another feature of linear Fisher market is full budget
                           n
extraction: p∗ dS = i=1 bi ; we discuss quasilinear model in Appendix F.


                                                         3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


We formally state the first-order conditions of infinite-dimensional EG programs and its relation
to first-price auctions in Fact 1 in appendix. Also, we remark that there are two ways to specify
the valuation component in this model: the functional form of vi (·), or the distribution of values
v : Θ → Rn+ when view as a random vector. More on this in Appendix E.
We are interested in estimating the following quantities of the long-run market equilibrium. (1) In-
dividual utilities at equilibrium, u∗i . (2) Pacing multipliers βi∗ = bi /u∗i . Pacing multiplier has a
two-fold interpretation. Second, through the equation p∗ (θ) = maxi βi∗ vi (θ), β can also be inter-
preted as the pacing policy1 employed by the buyers in first-price auctions. In our context, buyer i
produces a bid for item θ by multiplying the value by βi , then the item price is determined via a first-
price auction. This connection is made precise in Conitzer et al. (2022a) from a game-theoretic point
of view. The pacing multiplier β serves as the bridge between Fisher market equilibrium and first
price pacing equilibria in auction games (Conitzer et al., 2022a) and has important usage in budget
management in online auctions. (3) The (logarithm of) Nash social welfare (NSW) at equilibrium
NSW∗ := NSW(u∗ ). NSW measures total utility of the buyers and, when used as an optimization
objective, is able to promote fairness better than the social welfare, that is, the sum of buyer utilities
(Caragiannis et al., 2019). Intuitively, NSW incentivizes more balancing of buyer utilities. Revenue
inference for quasilinear model is discussed in Appendix F2 .
Mapping model to concrete applications. It is well-known that Fisher market is a useful mecha-
nism for fair and efficient resource allocation. More recently, it is also shown to be intimately related
to first-price auctions (Conitzer et al., 2022a). When modeling ad auction platforms, buyers’ individ-
ual utilities reflect, for example, the values generated to advertisers, measured in terms of click rates,
conversion rates, or other revenue metrics. A confidence interval on this quantity can be provided by
the ad platform to the advertisers to better inform advertisers’ decision-making. Pacing multiplier,
as the ratio between the bid and the value of items, reflects the advertisers’ bidding strategy. A con-
fidence interval on this quantity could help the ad platform predict its clients bidding behavior and
suggest budget management strategy to clients. Finally, Nash social welfare measures the efficiency
and fairness of the whole ad platform. We can also use Fisher market to model resource allocation
systems in internet companies. For example, in a job recommendation platform, we can model it as
a market where we distribute viewer’s attention to job post creators. In this context, social welfare
measures generally the efficiency of the job recommendation system. Individual utilities track how
satisfied the job post creators are with the extent to which their job posts are being recommended.

2.2    T HE DATA

Assume we are able to observe a market formed by a finite number of items. We let γ =
{θ1 , . . . , θ.t } ⊂ Θt be a set   / of items sampled i.i.d. from the supply distribution S. We let
vi (γ) = vi (θ1 ), . . . , vi (θt ) denote the valuation for agent i of items in the set γ. For agent i,
let xi = (x1i , . . . , xti ) ∈ Rt denote the fraction of items given to agent i. With this notation, the total
utility of agent i is $xi , vi (γ)%. Similar to the long-run market, we assume the observed market is at
equilibrium, which we now define.
Definition 2 (Observed Market Equilibrium). The market equilibrium M E γ (b, v, s) given the item
set γ and the supply vector s ∈ Rt+ is an allocation-utitlity-price tuple (xγ , uγ , pγ )%
                                                                                         ∈ (Rt+ )n ×
                                                                                           n
R+ × R+ such%that the following holds. (i) Supply feasibility and market clearance: i=1 xγi ≤ s
  n      t
                n    γ                               γ                    γ
and $p , 1t − i=1 xi % = 0. (ii) Buyer optimality: xi ∈ Di (p ) and ui = $vi (γ), xi % for all i,
       γ                                                         γ

where (overloading notations)
                          Di (p) := arg max{$vi (γ), xi % : xi ≥ 0, $p, xi % ≤ bi }
                                         xi

is the demand set given the prices and the buyer’s budget.
   1
      In the online budget management literature, pacing means buyers produce bids for items via multiplying
his value by a constant.                                               !           "
    2
       In a linear Fisher market the budgets are extracted fully, i.e., p∗ dS =       i bi in the long-run market
      "t              "
and τ =1 pγ,τ =          i bi in the observed market (see Appendix E), and therefore there is nothing to infer
about revenue in this case. However, in the quasilinear utility model where buyer’s utility function is ui (x) =
!x − p, vi #, buyers have the incentive to retain money and therefore one needs to study the statistical properties
of revenues.


                                                        4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Assume we have access to (xγ , uγ , pγ ) along with the budget vector b, where (xγ , uγ , pγ ) ∈
M E γ (b, v, 1t 1t ) is the market equilibrium (we explain the scaling of 1/t in Appendix E). Note
the budget vector b and value functions v = {vi (·)}i are the same as those in the long-run ME. We
emphasize two high-lights in this model of observation.
No convex program solving. The quantities observed are natural estimators of their counterparts
in the long-run market, and so we do not need to perform iterative updates or solve optimization
problems. One interpretation of this is that the actual computation is done when equilibrium is
reached via the utility maximizing property of buyers; the work of computation has thus implicitly
been delegated to the buyers.
For finite-dimensional Fisher market, it is well-known that the observed market equilibrium
M E γ (b, v, 1t 1t ) can be captured by the following sample EG programs.

                              &                                n
                                                               '                     +
                                         (     )          *
                       max        NSW(u) ( ui ≤ vi (γ), xi ∀i,   xτi ≤ 1 1t ∀τ
                                                                             t           ,           (S-EG)
                    x≥0,u≥0
                                                                  i=1
                                 &             t                     n           +
                                           1'                       '
                             min Ht (β) :=        max βi vi (θτ ) −     bi log βi .                 (S-DEG)
                             β>0           t τ =1 i∈[n]             i=1


We list the KKT conditions in Appendix E. Completely parallel to the long-run market, opti-
mal solutions to Eq. (S-EG) correspond to the equilibrium allocations and utilities, and the opti-
mal variable β γ to Eq. (S-DEG) relates to equilibrium prices and utilities through uγi = bi /βiγ ,
pγ,τ = maxi βiγ vi (θτ ) and xγ,τ
                              i   > 0 only if i ∈ arg maxi βiγ vi (θτ ). By the equivalence between
market equilibrium and EG programs, we use  %nu and x γ to denote the equilibrium and the opti-
                                                  γ         γ

mal variables. Let NSW    γ :=        γ
                                NSW(u ) =       i=1 bi log ui . All budgets in the observed market is
                %t           %n
extracted, i.e., τ =1 pγ,τ = i=1 bi .


2.3   D UAL P ROGRAMS : B RIDGING DATA AND THE E STIMANDS

Given the convex program characterization, a natural idea is to study the concentration behavior of
observed market equilibria through these convex programs. We focus on the dual programs Eqs. (S-
DEG) and (P-DEG) because they are defined in a fixed dimension, and that the constraint set is also
fixed.
Define
  %n the sample function F = f + Ψ, where f (β, θ) = maxi {vi (θ)βi }, and Ψ(β) =
− i=1 bi log βi ; the function f is the source of non-smoothness, while Ψ provides local strong
convexity. Our approach is studying concentration of the convex programs in the sense that as t
grows

                                      t
                                   1'
                 min Ht (β) =             F (β, θτ ) “ =⇒ ”    min H(β) = E[F (β, θ)] .
                 β>0               t τ =1                      β>0



  The local strong convexity of the dual objective motivates us to do the analysis work in the neighbor-
  hood of the optimal solution β ∗ . In particular, the function x -→ − log x is not strongly convex on
  the positive reals, but it is on any compact subset. By working on a compact subset, we can exploit
  strong convexity of the dual objective
                                      $     and obtain better
                                                            %n theoretical$results. It is known (Fact 1) that
  βi ≤ βi∗ ≤ β̄ where βi = bi / vi dS and β̄ = i=1 bi / mini vi dS. Define the compact set
 ¯C := 0n 1β /2, 2β̄ 2¯ ⊂ Rn , which must be a neighborhood of β ∗ . Moreover, for large-enough t
            i=1   i
  we further have¯ β γ ∈ C with high probability (c.f. Lemma 1).
                                                                                        $
  Blanket assumptions. Recall the total supply in the long-run    $      market is one: s dµ = 1. Assume
  the total item set produce
                     %n        one unit of utility in total, i.e., vi s dµ = 1. Suppose budges of all buyers
  sum to one, i.e., i=1 bi = 1. Let b := mini bi . Note the previous budget normalization implies
                                          ¯
  b ≤ 1/n. Finally, for easy of exposition,       we assume the values are bounded supΘ vi (θ) < v̄, for
¯all i. By the normalization of values and budgets, we know β = b and β̄ = 1.
                                                                       i    i
                                                                     ¯

                                                     5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


3   C ONSISTENCY AND F INITE -S AMPLE B OUNDS

In this section we introduce several natural empirical estimators based on the observed market equi-
librium, and show that they satisfy both consistency and high-probability bounds. Below we state
the consistency results; the formal version can be found in Appendix B.
Theorem 1 (Consistency, informal). The Nash social welfare, pacing multiplier and approximate
equilibria in the observed market are strongly consistent estimators of their counterparts in the
long-run market.

High Probability Bounds Next, we refine the consistency results and provide finite sample guar-
antees. We start by focusing on Nash social welfare and the set of approximate market equilibria.
The convergence of utilities and pacing multiplier will then be derived from the latter result.
Theorem 2. For any failure probability 0 < η < 1, let t .3
                                                         ≥ 2v̄ 2 log(4n/η). Then
                                                                              3 with probablity
                                                                                        /
greater than 1 − η, it holds |NSW − NSW | ≤ O(1)v̄ n log((n + v̄)t) + log(1/η) t−1/2
                                  γ         ∗

where O(1) hides only constants. Proof in Appendix I.
                                                                      √
Theorem 2 establishes a convergence rate |NSWγ − NSW∗ | = Õp (v̄ nt−1/2 ). The proof proceeds
by first establishing a pointwise concentration inequality and then applies a discretization argument.
Theorem 3 (Concentration of Approximate Market Equilibrium). Let ! > 0 be a tolerance pa-
rameter
 .      and α ∈ (0, 1) be/ a failure probability. Then for any 0 ≤ δ ≤ !/2, to ensure
P C ∩ B γ (δ) ⊂ C ∩ B ∗ (!) ≥ 1 − 2α it suffices to set
                                      &      +4       ,           -         5
                                2       1 1             16(2n+v̄)
                  t ≥ O(1)v̄ min         ,      n log      !−δ
                                                                          1
                                                                    + log α ,                  (1)
                                       b! !2
                                       ¯
                 0n
where the set C = i=1 [βi /2, 2β̄], and O(1) hides only absolute constants. Proof in Appendix J.
                       ¯
By construction of C we know β ∗ ∈ C holds, and so C ∩ B ∗ (!) is not empty. By Lemma 1 we
know that for t sufficiently large, β γ ∈ C with high probability, in which case the set C ∩ B γ (δ) is
not empty.
Corollary 1. Let t satisfy Eq. (1). Then with probability ≥ 1 − 2α it holds H(β γ ) ≤ H(β ∗ ) + !.

By simply taking δ = 0 in Theorem 3 we obtain the above corollary. More importantly, it establishes
the fast statistical rate H(β γ ) − H(β ∗ ) = Õp (t−1 ) for t sufficiently large, where we use Õp to
ignore logarithmic factors. In words, when measured in the population dual objective where we take
expectation
         √ w.r.t. the item supply, β converges toγ β with the fast rate 1/t. This is in contrast to the
                                     γ               ∗

usual 1/
      √ t rate obtained in Theorem 2, where β is measured in the sample dual objective. There
the 1/ t rate is the best obtainable.
By the strong-convexity of dual objective, the containment result can be translated to high-
probability convergence of the pacing multipliers and the utility vector.
                                                                                           6
Corollary 2. Let t satisfy Eq. (1). Then with probability ≥ 1 − 2α it holds 0β γ − β ∗ 02 ≤ 8!
                                                                                             b and
  γ     ∗      4
                 3                                                                           ¯
0u − u 02 ≤ b 8!/b.
               ¯       ¯
We compare the above corollary with Theorem 9 from Gao and Kroer (2022) which establishes the
convergence rate of the stochastic approximation estimator based on dual averaging algorithm (Xiao,
2010). In particular, they show that the average of the iterates, denoted βDA , enjoys a convergence
                               . 2 /
rate of 0βDA − β ∗ 022 = Õp v̄b2 1t , where t is the number of sampled items. The rate achieved
                                 ¯     . 2 1/
in Corollary 2 is 0β γ − β ∗ 022 = Õp nv̄
                                        b2 t for t sufficiently large. We see that our rate is worse
                                        ¯
off by a factor of n. And yet our estimates    are produced by the strategic behavior of the agents
without any extra computation at all. Moreover, in the computation of the dual averaging estimator
the knowledge of values vi (θ) is required, while again β γ can be just observed naturally.


                                                  6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


4     A SYMPTOTICS AND I NFERENCE
4.1   A SYMPTOTICS AND A NALYTICAL P ROPERTIES OF THE D UAL O BJECTIVE

In this section we derive asymptotic normality results for Nash social welfare, utilities and pacing
multipliers. As we will see, a central limit theorem (CLT) for Nash social welfare holds under
basically no additional assumptions. However, the CLTs of pacing multipliers and utilities will
require twice continuous differentiability of the population dual objective H, with a nonsingular
Hessian matrix. We present CLT results under such a premise, and then provide three sufficient
conditions under which H is C 2 at the optimum.
Theorem 4 (Asymptotic Normality of Nash Social Welfare). It holds that
                              √                     d
                                t(NSWγ − NSW∗ ) → N (0, σNSW  2
                                                                  ),                             (2)
                $                 . $           / 2  $
where σNSW
         2
              = Θ (p∗ )2 dS(θ) − Θ p∗ dS(θ) = Θ (p∗ )2 dS(θ) − 1. Proof in Appendix K.

To present asymptotics for β and u we need a bit more notation. Let Θi (β) := {θ ∈ Θ : vi (θ)βi ≥
vk (θ)βk , ∀k 1= i}, i.e., the potential winning set of buyer i when the pacing multiplier are β. Let
Θ∗i := Θi (β ∗ ). We will see later that if the dual objective is sufficiently smooth at β ∗ , then the
winning sets, Θ∗i , i ∈ [n], will be disjoint (up to a measure-zero set). Define the variance of winning
values for buyer i as follows
                                   #                    4#                 52
                            Ω2i =       vi2 (θ) dS(θ) −       vi (θ) dS(θ) .
                                  Θ∗
                                   i                      Θ∗
                                                           i

Theorem 5 (Asymptotic Normality of Individual Behavior). Assume H is C 2 at β ∗ with non-
                                               √             d  .      /  √            d
singular
   .     Hessian
         /         matrix H = ∇2 H(β ∗ ). Then t(β γ − β ∗ ) → N 0, Σβ and t(uγ − u∗ ) →
N 0, Σu , where Σβ = H Diag(Ωi )H
                               −1       2  −1
                                              and Σu = Diag(−bi /(βi ) )H Diag(Ωi )H
                                                                    ∗ 2  −1      2     −1

Diag(−bi /(βi∗ )2 ). Proof in Appendix K.
In Theorem 5 we require a strong regularity condition: twice differentiability of H, which seems
hard to interpret at first sight. Next we derive a set of simpler sufficient conditions for the twice dif-
ferentiability of the dual objective. Intuitively, the expectation operator will smooth out the kinks in
the piecewise linear function f (·, θ); even if f is non-smooth, it is reasonable to hope the expectation
counterpart f¯ is smooth, facilitating statistical analysis.
First we introduce notation for characterizing smoothness of f¯. Define the gap between the highest
and the second-highest bid under pacing multiplier β by
                           !(β, θ) := max{βi vi (θ)} − secondmax{βi vi (θ)} ,                          (3)
here secondmax is the second-highest entry; e.g., secondmax([1, 1, 2]) = 1. When there is a
tie for an item θ, we have !(β, θ) = 0. When there is no tie for an item θ, the gap !(β, θ)
is strictly positive. Let G(β, θ) ∈ ∂f (β, θ) be an element in the subgradient set. The gap
function characterizes smoothness of f : f (·, θ) is differentiable at β ⇔ !(β, θ) is strictly posi-
tive, in which case G(β, θ) = ∇β f (β, θ) = ei(β,θ) vi(β,θ) with ei being the i-th unit vector and
i(β, θ) = arg maxi βi vi (θ). When f (·, θ) is differentiable at β a.s., the potential winning sets
{Θi (β)}i are disjoint (up to a measure-zero set).
Theorem 6 (First-order differentiability). The dual objective H is differentiable at a point β if and
only if
                           !(β, θ)−1 < ∞, for S-almost every θ .                       (NO-TIE)
                          ¯
When Eq. (NO-TIE) holds, ∇f (β) = E[G(β, θ)]. Proof and further technical remarks in Appendix L.
Given the neat characterization of differentiability of dual objective via the gap function !(β, θ), it is
then natural to explore higher-order smoothness, which was needed for some asymptotic normality
results. We provide three classes of markets whose dual objective H enjoys twice differentiability.
Theorem 7 (Second-order differentiability, Informal). If any one of the following holds, then H
is C 2 at β ∗ . (i) A stronger form of Eq. (NO-TIE) holds, e.g., E[!(β, !)−1 ] or ess supθ {!(β, θ)−1 }
is finite in a neighborhood of β ∗ . (ii) The distribution of v = (v1 , . . . , vn ) : Θ → Rn+ is smooth
enough. (iii) Θ = [0, 1] and the valuations vi (·)’s are linear functions.


                                                    7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


4.2      I NFERENCE

In this section we discuss constructing confidence intervals for Nash social welfare, the pacing
multipliers, and the utilities. We remark that the observed NSW, NSWγ , is a negatively-biased
estimate of the NSW, NSW∗ , of the long-run ME, i.e., E[NSWγ ] − NSW∗ ≤ 0.3 Moreover, it can be
shown that, when the items are i.i.d. E[min Ht ] ≤ E[min Ht+1 ] using Proposition 16 from Shapiro
(2003). Monotonicity tells us that increasing the size of market produces on average less biased
estimates of the long-run NSW.
To construct a confidence interval for Nash social welfare one needs to estimate the asymptotic vari-
                           %        .                         /2    . %              /
ance. We let σ̂NSW
                2     := 1t tτ =1 F (β γ , θτ ) − Ht (β γ ) = 1t tτ =1 (pγ,τ )2 − 1. where pγ,τ is
the price of item θτ in the observed market. We emphasize that in the computation of the variance
estimator σ̂NSW
            2
                 one does not need knowledge of values {vi (θτ )}i,τ . All that is needed is the equi-
librium prices pγ = (pγ,1 , . . . , pγ,t ) of the items. Given the variance estimator, we construct the
confidence interval [NSWγ ± zα/2 σ̂√      NSW
                                            t
                                              ], where zα is the α-th quantile of a standard normal. The
next theorem establishes validity of the variance estimator.
                                      p                                                        .
Theorem 8. It holds that σ̂NSW → σNSW      2
                                                 . Given 0 < α < 1, it holds that limt→∞ P NSW∗ ∈
                       √   /
[NSWγ ± zα/2 σ̂NSW / t ] = 1 − α. Proof in Appendix M.
Estimation of the variance matrices for β and u is more complicated. The main difficulty lies
in estimating the inverse Hessian matrix. Due to the non-smoothness of the sample function, we
cannot exchange the twice differential operator and expectation, and thus the plug-in estimator, i.e.,
the sample average Hessian, is a biased estimator for the Hessian of the population function in
general. In Appendix D we provide a brief discussion of variance estimation under the following
two simplified scenarios. First, in the case where E[!(β, θ)−1 ] < ∞ holds in a neighborhood of β ∗ ,
which we recall is a stronger form Eq. (NO-TIE), we prove that a plug-in type variance estimator is
valid. Second, if we have knowledge of {vi (θτ )}i,τ , then we give a numerical difference estimator
for the Hessian which is consistent.

5       G UIDE TO P RACTITIONERS
We close our theoretical development with practical instructions on how to construct confidence
interval with results presented so far. Revenue inference is only well-defined in the context of
quasilinear market, which we explore in Appendix F.
Inference %on NSW. Recall bi is the budget of agent i and let uγi be the observed utility. Let
              n           γ
              i=1 bi log ui be the NSW in the observed market. This will be a good √estiamte of the
      γ
NSW =
limit NSW and as the number of items grows, it converges quickly at a rate of 1/ t. To construct
                                                                   %t
a CI we need to estimate the asymptotic variance. Let σ̂NSW
                                                         2
                                                               = 1t τ =1 (pγ,τ − p̄γ )2 where pγ,τ is
the price of item θτ and p̄γ is the average price. In words, σ̂NSW
                                                               2
                                                                   is the variance
                                                                                √ of prices. Then a
(1 − α) CI for the NSW in the long-run market will be [NSWγ ± zα/2 σ̂NSW / t], where zα is the
(1 − α)-th quantile of a standard normal.
Inference on β ∗ and u∗ : simplified inference with a bid-gap condition.            Suppose in the ad
auction platform one observes that for each item the winning bid is always higher than the swe-
cond bid by some amount, then we could use the following inference procedure. For a precise
statement of the condition see Theorem 10. When such a condition holds, the variance expression
in Theorem 5 simplifies. Let Ω̂i be the variance of item utility that are allocated to buyer i, i.e.,
          %t
Ω̂2i := 1t τ =1 (tuγ,τ
                   i   − uγi )2 , where uγ,τ
                                         i   = xγ,τ
                                                  i vi (θ ) is the utility buyer i obtains from item
                                                         τ

θ . Define the asymptotic variance estimators Σ̂β = Diag({Ω̂2i (βiγ )4 /bi2 }) and Σ̂u = Diag({Ω̂2i }).
 τ

The confidence regions for β ∗ and u∗ are ellipsoids that center around β γ and uγ . Concretely,
                     √ 1/2                                                                √ 1/2
CRβ = β γ + (χn,α / t)Σ̂β B and the confidence region for u∗ is CRu = uγ + (χn,α / t)Σ̂u B,
where χk,α is the (1 − α)-th quantile of a chi-square with degree k and B is the unit ball in Rn .
Inference on β ∗ and u∗ : a robust approach.      Under fairly general setting, which is justified
in Section 4.1, the following inference procedure is valid. Choose a smoothing level ηt , to be
    3
        Note E[NSWγ ] − NSW∗ = E[minβ Ht (β)] − H(β ∗ ) ≤ minβ E[Ht (β)] − H(β ∗ ) = 0.


                                                   8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023



                                     √
chosen roughly of order ηt = ω(1/ t), we construct the following matrix Ĥ whose (i, j)-th entry
is (Ĥ )ij := 4η12 (Ht (β γ + ηt (ei + ej )) − Ht (β γ + ηt (−ei + ej )) − Ht (β γ + ηt (ei − ej )) +
                  t
Ht (β γ + ηt (−ei − ej ))). This will be an estimate of the Hessian matrix of the dual objective.
Here Ht defined in Eq. (S-EG) needs only values of the realized items but not the value functions
vi (·)’s. Let Σ̂β = Ĥ −1 Diag({Ω̂2i }ni=1 )Ĥ −1 and Σ̂u = Diag({bi /(βiγ )2 })Ĥ −1 Diag({Ω̂2i }ni=1 )
Ĥ −1 Diag({bi /(βiγ )2 }) be the estimated covariance matrices. We can then construct confidence
regions CRβ and CRu as above.
Bootstrap. Though not studied in this paper, bootstrap inference is a valuable alternative. In a
bootstrap procedure, one samples the items with replacement and solve the EG programs (S-EG)
or (S-DEG). By repeating this we obtain a sequence of estimates say β 1 , . . . , β B , where B is the
number of bootstrap batches. Then a confidence interval is constructed by the sample quantiles of
the sequence {β k }k∈[B] .



6       E XPERIMENTS

We conduct experiments to validate the theoretical findings, namely, the convergence of NSWγ to
NSW∗ (Theorem 9) and CLT (Eq. (2)). All figures can be found in Appendix O.
Verify convergence of NSW to its infinite-dimensional counterpart in a linear Fisher market.
First, we generate an infinite-dimensional market M1 of n = 50 buyers each having a linear valu-
ation vi (θ) = ai θ + ci on Θ = [0, 1], with randomly generated ai and ci such that vi (θ) ≥ 0 on
[0, 1]. Their budgets bi are also randomly generated. We solve for NSW∗ using the tractable con-
vex conic formulation described in Gao and Kroer (2022, Section 4). Then, following Section 2.2,
for the j-th (j ∈ [k]) sampled market of size t, we randomly sample {θjt,τ }τ ∈[t] uniformly and
independently from [0, 1] and obtain markets with n buyers and t items, with individual valuations
vi (θjt,τ ) = ai θjt,τ + ci , j ∈ [t]. We take t = 100, 200, . . . , 5000 and k = 10. We compute their
equilibrium Nash social welfare, i.e., NSWγ , and their means and standard errors over k repeats
across all t. As can be seen from Fig. 2, NSWγ values quickly approach NSW∗ , which align with
the a.s. convergence of NSWγ in Theorem 9. Moreover, NSWγ values increase as t increase, which
align with the monotonicity observation in the beginning of Section 4.2.
Verify asymptotic normality of NSW in a linear Fisher market. Next, for the same infinite-
dimensional market M1 , we set t = 5000, sample k = 50 markets of t items         √ analogously, and
compute their respective NSWγ values. We plot the enpirical distribution of t(NSWγ − NSW∗ )
and the probability density of N (0, σNSW 2
                                              ), where σNSW
                                                          2
                                                               is defined in Theorem 4.4 Theorem 4
             √                     d
shows that t(NSWγ − NSW∗ ) → N (0, σNSW       2
                                                   ). As can be seen in Fig. 5, the empirical distribu-
tion is close to the limiting normal distribution. A simple Kolmogorov-Smirnov test shows that the
empirical distribution appears normal, that is, the alternative hypothesis of it not being a normal
distribution is not statistically
                              √ significant. This is further corroborated by the Q-Q plot in Fig. 24, as
the plots of the quantiles of t(NSWγ − NSW∗ ) values against theoretical quantiles of N (0, σNSW       )
appear to be a straight line.
Verify NSW convergence in a multidimensional linear Fisher market. Finally, we consider
an infinite-dimensional market M2 with multidimensional linear valuations vi (θ) = a(   i θ + ci ,
ai ∈ R10 . We similarly sample markets of sizes t = 100, 200, ..., 5000 from M2 , where the items
θjt , j ∈ [k] are sampled uniformly and independently from [0, 1]10 . As can be seen from Fig. 2,
NSWγ values increase and converge to a fixed value around −1.995. In this case, the underlying
true value NSW∗ (which should be around −1.995) cannot be captured by a tractable optimization
formulation.


    4              2
     To compute σNSW   , we use the fact that p∗ = maxi βi∗ vi (θ) is a piecewise linear function, since vi are
linear. Following (Gao and Kroer, 2022, Section 4), we can find the breakpoints of the pure equilibrium
                                                                                             !1         alloca-
tion 0 = a0 < a1 < · · · < a50 = 1, and the corresponding interval of each buyer i. Then, 0 (p∗ (θ))2 dS(θ)
amounts to integrals of quadratic functions on intervals.


                                                      9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This research was supported by the Office of Naval Research Young Investigator Program under
grant N00014-22-1-2530, and the National Science Foundation award IIS-2147361.

R EFERENCES
Martin Aleksandrov, Haris Aziz, Serge Gaspers, and Toby Walsh. Online fair division: Analysing a
 food bank problem. arXiv preprint arXiv:1502.07571, 2015.
Amine Allouah, Christian Kroer, Xuan Zhang, Vashist Avadhanula, Anil Dania, Caner Gocmen,
 Sergey Pupyrev, Parikshit Shah, and Nicolas Stier. Robust and fair work allocation, 2022. URL
 https://arxiv.org/abs/2202.05194.
Peter M Aronow and Cyrus Samii. Estimating average causal effects under general interference,
  with application to a social network experiment. The Annals of Applied Statistics, 11(4):1912–
  1947, 2017.
Susan Athey, Dean Eckles, and Guido W Imbens. Exact p-values for network interference. Journal
  of the American Statistical Association, 113(521):230–240, 2018.
Yossi Azar, Niv Buchbinder, and Kamal Jain. How to allocate goods in an online market? Algorith-
  mica, 74(2):589–601, 2016.
Siddhartha Banerjee, Vasilis Gkatzelis, Artur Gorokh, and Billy Jin. Online nash social welfare
  maximization with predictions. In Proceedings of the 2022 Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on
  Discrete Algorithms (SODA), pages 1–19. SIAM, 2022.
Heinz H Bauschke, Patrick L Combettes, et al. Convex analysis and monotone operator theory in
  Hilbert spaces, volume 408. Springer, 2011.
Amir Beck. First-Order Methods in Optimization, volume 25. SIAM, 2017.
Xiaohui Bei, Jugal Garg, and Martin Hoefer. Ascending-price algorithms for unknown markets.
  ACM Transactions on Algorithms (TALG), 15(3):1–33, 2019a.
Xiaohui Bei, Jugal Garg, Martin Hoefer, and Kurt Mehlhorn. Earning and utility limits in fisher
  markets. ACM Transactions on Economics and Computation (TEAC), 7(2):1–35, 2019b.
Dimitri P Bertsekas. Stochastic optimization problems with nondifferentiable cost functionals. Jour-
  nal of Optimization Theory and Applications, 12(2):218–231, 1973.
Benjamin Birnbaum, Nikhil R Devanur, and Lin Xiao. Distributed algorithms via gradient descent
  for fisher markets. In Proceedings of the 12th ACM Conference on Electronic Commerce, pages
  127–136. ACM, 2011.
Christian Borgs, Jennifer Chayes, Nicole Immorlica, Kamal Jain, Omid Etesami, and Mohammad
  Mahdian. Dynamics of bid optimization in online advertisement auctions. In Proceedings of the
  16th international conference on World Wide Web, pages 531–540, 2007.
Eric Budish. The combinatorial assignment problem: Approximate competitive equilibrium from
  equal incomes. Journal of Political Economy, 119(6):1061–1103, 2011.
Eric Budish, Gérard P Cachon, Judd B Kessler, and Abraham Othman. Course match: A large-scale
  implementation of approximate competitive equilibrium from equal incomes for combinatorial
  allocation. Operations Research, 65(2):314–336, 2016.
Ioannis Caragiannis, David Kurokawa, Hervé Moulin, Ariel D Procaccia, Nisarg Shah, and Junxing
  Wang. The unreasonable fairness of maximum Nash welfare. In Proceedings of the 2016 ACM
  Conference on Economics and Computation, pages 305–322. ACM, 2016.
Ioannis Caragiannis, David Kurokawa, Hervé Moulin, Ariel D Procaccia, Nisarg Shah, and Junxing
  Wang. The unreasonable fairness of maximum nash welfare. ACM Transactions on Economics
  and Computation (TEAC), 7(3):1–32, 2019.


                                                10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Sarah H Cen and Devavrat Shah. Regret, stability & fairness in matching markets with bandit
  learners. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pages 8938–8968.
  PMLR, 2022.
Lihua Chen, Yinyu Ye, and Jiawei Zhang. A note on equilibrium pricing as convex optimization. In
  International Workshop on Web and Internet Economics, pages 7–16. Springer, 2007.
Yun Kuen Cheung, Richard Cole, and Nikhil R Devanur. Tatonnement beyond gross substitutes?
  Gradient descent to the rescue. Games and Economic Behavior, 123:295–326, 2020.
Richard Cole and Lisa Fleischer. Fast-converging tatonnement algorithms for one-time and ongoing
  market problems. In Proceedings of the fortieth annual ACM symposium on Theory of computing,
  pages 315–324, 2008.
Richard Cole and Vasilis Gkatzelis. Approximating the Nash social welfare with indivisible items.
  SIAM Journal on Computing, 47(3):1211–1236, 2018.
Richard Cole, Nikhil R Devanur, Vasilis Gkatzelis, Kamal Jain, Tung Mai, Vijay V Vazirani, and
  Sadra Yazdanbod. Convex program duality, fisher markets, and Nash social welfare. In 18th ACM
  Conference on Economics and Computation, EC 2017. Association for Computing Machinery,
  Inc, 2017.
Vincent Conitzer, Christian Kroer, Debmalya Panigrahi, Okke Schrijvers, Nicolas E Stier-Moses,
  Eric Sodomka, and Christopher A Wilkens. Pacing equilibrium in first price auction markets.
  Management Science, 2022a.
Vincent Conitzer, Christian Kroer, Eric Sodomka, and Nicolas E Stier-Moses. Multiplicative pacing
  equilibria in auction markets. Operations Research, 70(2):963–989, 2022b.
Xiaowu Dai and Michael Jordan. Learning in multi-stage decentralized matching markets. In
  M. Ranzato, A. Beygelzimer, Y. Dauphin, P.S. Liang, and J. Wortman Vaughan, editors, Ad-
  vances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 34, pages 12798–12809. Curran As-
  sociates, Inc., 2021. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2021/file/
  6a571fe98a2ba453e84923b447d79cff-Paper.pdf.
Xiaotie Deng, Christos Papadimitriou, and Shmuel Safra. On the complexity of price equilibria.
  Journal of Computer and System Sciences, 67(2):311–324, 2003.
Nikhil R Devanur, Christos H Papadimitriou, Amin Saberi, and Vijay V Vazirani. Competitive
  equilibrium via a primal-dual algorithm for a convex program. Journal of the ACM (JACM), 55
  (5):1–18, 2008.
Nikhil R Devanur, Jugal Garg, Ruta Mehta, Vijay V Vaziranb, and Sadra Yazdanbod. A new class
  of combinatorial markets with covering constraints: Algorithms and applications. In Proceedings
  of the Twenty-Ninth Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms, pages 2311–2325.
  SIAM, 2018.
Edmund Eisenberg. Aggregation of utility functions. Management Science, 7(4):337–350, 1961.
Edmund Eisenberg and David Gale. Consensus of subjective probabilities: The pari-mutuel method.
  The Annals of Mathematical Statistics, 30(1):165–168, 1959.
Yuan Gao and Christian Kroer. First-order methods for large-scale market equilibrium computation.
  In Neural Information Processing Systems 2020, NeurIPS 2020, 2020.
Yuan Gao and Christian Kroer. Infinite-dimensional fisher markets and tractable fair division. Op-
  eration Research, Forthcoming, 2022.
Yuan Gao, Christian Kroer, and Alex Peysakhovich. Online market equilibrium with application to
  fair division. arXiv preprint arXiv:2103.12936, 2021.
Ali Ghodsi, Matei Zaharia, Benjamin Hindman, Andy Konwinski, Scott Shenker, and Ion Stoica.
  Dominant resource fairness: Fair allocation of multiple resource types. In Nsdi, volume 11, pages
  24–24, 2011.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Artur Gorokh, Siddhartha Banerjee, and Krishnamurthy Iyer. The remarkable robustness of the
  repeated fisher market. Available at SSRN 3411444, 2019.
Wenshuo Guo, Kirthevasan Kandasamy, Joseph E Gonzalez, Michael I Jordan, and Ion Stoica. On-
 line learning of competitive equilibria in exchange economies. arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.06616,
 2021.
Nils Lid Hjort and David Pollard. Asymptotics for minimisers of convex processes. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1107.3806, 2011.
Yuchen Hu, Shuangning Li, and Stefan Wager. Average direct and indirect causal effects under
  interference. Biometrika, 2022.
Michael G Hudgens and M Elizabeth Halloran. Toward causal inference with interference. Journal
 of the American Statistical Association, 103(482):832–842, 2008.
Sungjin Im, Janardhan Kulkarni, and Kamesh Munagala. Competitive algorithms from competitive
  equilibria: Non-clairvoyant scheduling under polyhedral constraints. Journal of the ACM (JACM),
  65(1):1–33, 2017.
Meena Jagadeesan, Alexander Wei, Yixin Wang, Michael Jordan, and Jacob Steinhardt. Learning
 equilibria in matching markets from bandit feedback. Advances in Neural Information Processing
 Systems, 34:3323–3335, 2021.
Kamal Jain. A polynomial time algorithm for computing an arrow–debreu market equilibrium for
  linear utilities. SIAM Journal on Computing, 37(1):303–318, 2007.
Ian Kash, Ariel D Procaccia, and Nisarg Shah. No agent left behind: Dynamic fair division of
  multiple resources. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research, 51:579–603, 2014.
Sujin Kim, Raghu Pasupathy, and Shane G. Henderson. A Guide to Sample Average Approximation,
  pages 207–243. Springer New York, New York, NY, 2015. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4939-1384-8 8.
Christian Kroer and Alexander Peysakhovich. Scalable fair division for ’at most one’ preferences.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.10925, 2019.
Christian Kroer and Nicolas E Stier-Moses. Market equilibrium models in large-scale internet mar-
  kets. Innovative Technology at the Interface of Finance and Operations. Springer Series in Supply
  Chain Management. Springer Natures, Forthcoming, 2022.
Christian Kroer, Alexander Peysakhovich, Eric Sodomka, and Nicolas E Stier-Moses. Computing
  large competitive equilibria using abstractions. Operations Research, 2021.
Michael P Leung. Treatment and spillover effects under network interference. Review of Economics
 and Statistics, 102(2):368–380, 2020.
Shuangning Li and Stefan Wager. Random graph asymptotics for treatment effect estimation under
  network interference. The Annals of Statistics, 50(4):2334–2358, 2022.
Luofeng Liao, Yuan Gao, and Christian Kroer. Nonstationary dual averaging and online fair alloca-
  tion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.11614v1, 2022.
Lydia T Liu, Feng Ruan, Horia Mania, and Michael I Jordan. Bandit learning in decentralized
  matching markets. J. Mach. Learn. Res., 22:211–1, 2021.
Zhihan Liu, Miao Lu, Zhaoran Wang, Michael Jordan, and Zhuoran Yang. Welfare maximization in
  competitive equilibrium: Reinforcement learning for markov exchange economy. In International
  Conference on Machine Learning, pages 13870–13911. PMLR, 2022.
Duncan C McElfresh, Christian Kroer, Sergey Pupyrev, Eric Sodomka, Karthik Abinav Sankarara-
  man, Zack Chauvin, Neil Dexter, and John P Dickerson. Matching algorithms for blood donation.
  In Proceedings of the 21st ACM Conference on Economics and Computation, pages 463–464,
  2020.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Yifei Min, Tianhao Wang, Ruitu Xu, Zhaoran Wang, Michael I Jordan, and Zhuoran Yang. Learn
  to match with no regret: Reinforcement learning in markov matching markets. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2203.03684, 2022.
Evan Munro, Stefan Wager, and Kuang Xu. Treatment effects in market equilibrium. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2109.11647, 2021.
Riley Murray, Christian Kroer, Alex Peysakhovich, and Parikshit Shah. Robust market equilibria
  with uncertain preferences. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence,
  volume 34, pages 2192–2199, 2020a.
Riley     Murray,      Christian  Kroer,    Alex     Peysakhovich,     and    Parikshit   Shah.
  https://research.fb.com/blog/2020/09/robust-market-equilibria-how-to-model-uncertain-buyer-
  preferences/, Sep 2020b.
Yurii Nesterov and Vladimir Shikhman. Computation of fisher–gale equilibrium by auction. Journal
  of the Operations Research Society of China, 6(3):349–389, 2018.
Whitney K Newey and Daniel McFadden. Large sample estimation and hypothesis testing. Hand-
 book of econometrics, 4:2111–2245, 1994.
Noam Nisan, Tim Roughgarden, Eva Tardos, and Vijay V Vazirani. Algorithmic game theory.
  Cambridge University Press, 2007.
Abraham Othman, Tuomas Sandholm, and Eric Budish. Finding approximate competitive equilibria:
  efficient and fair course allocation. In AAMAS, volume 10, pages 873–880, 2010.
Abraham Othman, Christos Papadimitriou, and Aviad Rubinstein. The complexity of fairness
  through equilibrium. ACM Transactions on Economics and Computation (TEAC), 4(4):1–19,
  2016.
David C Parkes, Ariel D Procaccia, and Nisarg Shah. Beyond dominant resource fairness: Ex-
  tensions, limitations, and indivisibilities. ACM Transactions on Economics and Computation
  (TEAC), 3(1):1–22, 2015.
Alexander Peysakhovich and Christian Kroer. Fair division without disparate impact. Mechanism
  Design for Social Good, 2019.
R Tyrrell Rockafellar. Convex analysis, volume 18. Princeton university press, 1970.
R Tyrrell Rockafellar and Roger J-B Wets. Variational analysis, volume 317. Springer Science &
  Business Media, 2009.
Roshni Sahoo and Stefan Wager.        Policy learning with competing agents.       arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2204.01884, 2022.
Alexander Shapiro. Asymptotic properties of statistical estimators in stochastic programming. The
  Annals of Statistics, 17(2):841–858, 1989.
Alexander Shapiro. Monte carlo sampling methods. Handbooks in operations research and man-
  agement science, 10:353–425, 2003.
Alexander Shapiro, Darinka Dentcheva, and Andrzej Ruszczynski. Lectures on stochastic program-
  ming: modeling and theory. SIAM, 2021.
Vadim I Shmyrev. An algorithm for finding equilibrium in the linear exchange model with fixed
  budgets. Journal of Applied and Industrial Mathematics, 3(4):505, 2009.
Sean R Sinclair, Siddhartha Banerjee, and Christina Lee Yu. Sequential fair allocation: Achieving
  the optimal envy-efficiency tradeoff curve. In Abstracts of the 2022 SIGMETRICS/Performance
  Joint International Conference on Measurement and Modeling of Computer Systems, 2022.
Aad W Van der Vaart. Asymptotic statistics, volume 3. Cambridge university press, 2000.
Hal R Varian. Equity, envy, and efficiency. Journal of Economic Theory, 9(1):63–91, 1974.


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Vijay V. Vazirani. Combinatorial Algorithms for Market Equilibria, pages 103–134. Cambridge
  University Press, 2007. doi: 10.1017/CBO9780511800481.007.
Stefan Wager and Kuang Xu. Experimenting in equilibrium. Management Science, 67(11):6694–
  6715, November 2021. doi: 10.1287/mnsc.2020.3844. URL https://doi.org/10.1287/
  mnsc.2020.3844.
Jinde Wang. Distribution sensitivity analysis for stochastic programs with complete recourse. Math-
   ematical Programming, 31(3):286–297, 1985.
Fang Wu and Li Zhang. Proportional response dynamics leads to market equilibrium. In Proceedings
  of the thirty-ninth annual ACM symposium on Theory of computing, pages 354–363, 2007.
Lin Xiao. Dual averaging methods for regularized stochastic learning and online optimization.
  Journal of Machine Learning Research, 11:2543–2596, 2010.
Yinyu Ye. A path to the arrow–debreu competitive market equilibrium. Mathematical Programming,
  111(1):315–348, 2008.
Li Zhang. Proportional response dynamics in the fisher farket. Theoretical Computer Science, 412
  (24):2691–2698, 2011.


                                                14
