Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


ACHIEVING C OMMUNICATION -E FFICIENT P OLICY
E VALUATION FOR M ULTI -AGENT R EINFORCEMENT
L EARNING : L OCAL TD-S TEPS OR BATCHING ?
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                           A BSTRACT

         In many consensus-based actor-critic multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL)
         strategies, one of the key components is the MARL policy evaluation (PE) prob-
         lem, where a set of N agents work cooperatively to evaluate the value function
         of the global states under a given policy only through communicating with their
         neighbors. In MARL-PE, a critical challenge is how to lower the communica-
         tion complexity, which is defined as the rounds of communication between neigh-
         boring nodes in order to converge to some ϵ-stationary point. To lower com-
         munication complexity in MARL-PE, there exist two “natural” ideas: i) using
         batching to reduce the variance of TD (temporal difference) errors, which in turn
         improves the convergence rate of MARL-PE; and ii) performing multiple local
         TD update steps between each consecutive rounds of communication, so as to
         reduce the communication frequency. While the effectiveness of the batching ap-
         proach has been verified and relatively well-understood, the validity of the local
         TD-steps approach remains unclear due to the potential “agent-drift” phenomenon
         resulted from various heterogeneity factors across agents. This leads to an inter-
         esting open question in MARL-PE: Does the local TD-steps approach really work
         and how does it perform in comparison to the batching approach? In this pa-
         per, we take the first attempt to answer this fundamental question. Our theoretical
         analysis and experimental results confirm that allowing multiple local TD steps
         is indeed a valid approach in lowering the communication complexity of MARL-
         PE compared to vanilla consensus-based MARL-PE algorithms. Specifically, the
         local TD
                p steps between two consecutive communication rounds can be as large
         as O( 1/ϵ log (1/ϵ)) in order to converge to an ϵ-stationary point of MARL-
         PE. Theoretically, we show that in order to reach the optimal
                                                                    p sample complexity
         up to a log factor, the communication complexity is O( 1/ϵ log (1/ϵ)), which
         is worse than TD learning with batching, whose communication complexity is
         O(log(1/ϵ)). However, the experimental results show that the allowing multiple
         steps can be as good as the batch approach.


1   I NTRODUCTION
1) Background and Motivation: With the recent success of reinforcement learning (RL) (Sutton
& Barto, 2018) techniques in the dynamic decision making process where the underlying model
is unkown, MARL, a natural extension of RL to multi-agent systems, has also found increasing
applications. Compared to traditional RL, the richness of multi-agent systems has given rise to far
more diverse problem settings in MARL, including cooperative, competitive, and mixed MARL (see
(Zhang et al., 2021a) for an excellent survey). In this paper, we are interested in cooperative MARL,
which has found a wide range of applications in the field of networked large-scale systems, such as
power networks (Chen et al., 2022; Riedmiller et al., 2000), autonomous driving (Yu et al., 2019;
Shalev-Shwartz et al., 2016) and so on. A defining feature of cooperative MARL is that all agents
in the system collaborate to learn a joint policy to maximize long-term system-wide total reward
through communicating with each other. However, due to the decentralized nature (i.e., lack of a
centralized infrastructure) of cooperative MARL, the collaboration between the agents can only rely
on some algorithmic designs to induce a “consensus” that can be reached by the agents.


                                                 1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


In many consensus-based actor-critic MARL strategies, one of the key components is the MARL
policy evaluation (PE) problem, where a set of N agents work cooperatively to evaluate the value
function of the global states for a given joint policy. Just as in the PE problem of conventional RL,
temporal difference (TD) learning (Sutton, 1988) has been the prevailing method for MARL-PE
thanks to its simplicity and empirical successes in real-world applications. Simply speaking, the key
idea of TD learning is to learn the value function by using the Bellman equation to bootstrap from
the current estimated value function. However, as mentioned earlier, the decentralized nature of the
MARL-PE problem necessitates communication among agents for TD learning. Hence, a critical
challenge in consensus-based MARL-PE is how to lower the communication complexity, which is
defined as the required rounds of communication between neighboring agents in order to converge
to some ϵ-stationary point of the MARL-PE problem.
To lower communication complexity for solving MARL-PE problems, there exist two “natural”
ideas: i) using batching of trajectory samples to reduce the variance of TD errors, which in turn im-
proves the convergence rate of MARL-PE; and ii) using an “infrequent communication” approach
where we perform multiple local TD update steps between each consecutive rounds of communica-
tion to reduce the communication frequency. While the effectiveness of the “batching” approach has
been verified and relatively well-understood (Hairi et al., 2022; Chen et al., 2021), the validity of the
“local TD-step” approach remains unclear due to the potential “agent-drift” phenomenon resulted
from various heterogeneity factors across agents (more on this soon). This leads to two interesting
open questions: 1) Can the local TD-steps approach really lower the communication complexity for
solving MARL-PE? 2) If the answer to 1) is “yes,” how does the local TD-steps approach perform
in comparison to the batching approach? Answering these two questions from both theory and in
practice constitutes the main goal of this paper.
2) Technical Challenges: Answering the above questions is highly non-trivial due to several tech-
nical challenges in the convergence analysis of the local TD-steps approach. Notably, it is easy
to see that the structure of TD learning in consensus-based cooperative MARL resembles that of
decentralized stochastic gradient descent (DSGD) method in consensus-based decentralized opti-
mization(Nedic & Ozdaglar, 2009; Lian et al., 2017; Pu & Nedić, 2021). Thus, it is tempting to
believe that one can borrow convergence analysis techniques of DSGD and apply them in TD learn-
ing. However, despite such similarities, there also exist significant differences between TD learning
in MARL and DSGD.
• Structural Differences: First, we note that TD learning is not a true gradient-based method, since
   TD error is not a gradient estimator of any static objective function as in DSGD, which is well
   defined in a consensus-based decentralized optimization problem. Also, in decentralized opti-
   mization, the gradient terms are often assumed to be bounded. However, in TD learning, the
   TD-errors can not be assumed to be bounded without further assuming that the value function
   approximation parameters lie in some compact set.
• Markovian Data in TD Learning: In RL/MARL problem, there exists an underlying Markovian
  dynamic process across time steps, where the state distribution may differ at different time steps.
  By contrast, in decentralized optimization, it is often safe to assume that the data at each agent
  are independently distributed. Thus, it is not applicable to directly use convergence analysis tech-
  niques of decentralized optimization in TD learning for MARL-PE. The coupling and dependence
  among samples renders the convergence analysis of TD learning in MARL far more challenging.
• “Agent-Drift” Phenomenon: Due to heterogeneity nature of the rewards across agents, executing
  multiple local TD update steps would inevitably pull the local function approximation parameters
  toward the direction of approximating local value functions rather than the global value function,
  leading to the “agent-drift” phenomenon. Hence, it is unclear whether such local steps help or
  hurt the convergence of TD learning in MARL. Intuitively, if the agent-drift is too large, then the
  low communication-complexity benefit of infrequent communication might be offset by the errors
  in aligning the local model parameters at each agent to the true global value function parameters.
  Because of the agent-drift effect, the number of local TD update steps has to be chosen judiciously
  to mitigate the potentially large divergence of the function approximation parameters between
  each communication round.

3) Main Results and Contribution: The main contribution of this paper is that we overcome the
above challenges in analyzing the communication complexity of the local TD-steps approach for
cooperative MARL-PE. By doing so, we are able to shed light on the feasibility and effect of local


                                                   2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


TD steps in the consensus-based TD learning in the MARL-PE problem. We summarize our main
results in this paper as follows:
• Both theoretically and empirically, we show that allowing multiple local TD steps is indeed a
  valid approach that can significantly lower the communication complexity of MARL-PE com-
  pared to vanilla consensus-based decentralized TD learning algorithms Doan et al. (2021; 2019);
  Zhang et al. (2018). Specifically, we show in theory that to under the condition of achieving
  O(1/ϵ log2 (1/ϵ)) sample complexity (which differs from the state-of-the-art
                                                                       p       sample complexity
  only by a log factor), the local TD-steps approach
                                             p       can allow up to O(  1/ϵ log(1/ϵ)) local steps
  and the communication complexity is O( 1/ϵ log(1/ϵ)).p      Compared to vanilla algorithms, this
  improves the communication complexity by a factor of O( 1/ϵ).
• Moreover, we show in theory that although executing multiple local TD steps improves the com-
  munication complexity significantly, its improvement may not be as good as that of the batch
  approach under the same sample complexity condition Hairi et al. (2022); Chen et al. (2021).
  Specifically, by choosing the batch size to be O(1/ϵ), the communication complexity of the batch-
  ing approach can achieve O(log(1/ϵ)). This indicates that the local TD-steps approach “helps,”
  but may not as much as the batch approach.
• Although the communication complexity bound is relatively worse, the extensive empirical re-
  sults show that the performance of the local TD approach can be comparable to that of batching
  approach both in synthetic and real-world setting.

The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we review the literature to put our work in
comparative perspectives. In Section 3, we present the system model and formulation of the MARL-
PE problem. In Section 4, we introduce the decentralized TD learning algorithm with multiple
local TD steps for MARL-PE. In Section 5, we provide the theoretical convergence analysis for the
decentralized TD learning algorithm with multiple local TD steps. Section 6 presents numerical
results and Section 7 concludes this paper. Due to space limitation, some proof details are relegated
to the supplementary material.

2   R ELATED WORK

In this section, we provide an overview on two lines of research that are related to this work: i)
MARL-PE and ii) single-agent RL policy evaluation.

1) Multi-agent reinforcement learning policy evaluation: To our knowledge, the work in (Zhang
et al., 2018) proposed the first fully decentralized multi-agent actor-critic algorithm using TD learn-
ing in the critic step, which solves the PE problem. However, the convergence results for both its
critic and actor steps are asymptotic. Finite-time analysis of MARL-PE problem using distributed
TD learning algorithm has been first studied in (Doan et al., 2019) under the i.i.d. sampling assump-
tion, later the work in (Doan et al., 2021) generalized the result to Markovian sampling assumption.
In (Lin et al., 2019), a compressed algorithm is proposed where, instead of sending a vector, only a
single entry is sent during communication is proposed. However, their communication complexity
(i.e., the number of communication rounds) remains the same as sample complexity and the con-
vergence is only asymptotic. In (Chen et al., 2018), a lazy communication algorithm is proposed
assuming a central controller, which is different from the fully decentralized setting we consider in
this paper. There exists another class of approaches (Zhang et al., 2021b; Macua et al., 2014; Lee
et al., 2018; Wai et al., 2018; Ren & Haupt, 2019) that solve MARL-PE problem by formulating
it into optimizing projected Bellman error or its variants, where the proposed algorithms require
frequent communication. This class of algorithms do not use the on-policy TD learning approach as
we do in our paper. In (Kim et al., 2019), the paper optimizes communication in order to comply the
bandwidth restriction and minimize the collision between pair-wise channels. However, the work
adopts centralized learning and distributed execution paradigm, where in our paper, the learning
process is fully decentralized.
However, most of the existing distributed TD learning algorithms (Zhang et al., 2018; Doan et al.,
2019; 2021) for MARL perform frequent consensus rounds (i.e., one round of communication per
local TD update) to share the approximation parameters among neighbors. Specifically, in these
algorithms, agents share the parameters to their neighbors in every time step, which causes the


                                                   3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


communication complexity to be the same as the sample complexity. In this paper, we consider
an infrequent communication framework that allows the agents to do multiple local TD learning
steps and share the value function approximation parameters one every K(> 1) rounds. In (Hairi
et al., 2022; Chen et al., 2021), complete actor-critic algorithms have been proposed and batching
approach has been used in the critic step, which corresponds to MARL-PE. In such batch approach,
consensus is performed in every M = ∞/ϵ batch samples, which in turn only requires O(log 1/ϵ)
communication complexity. To investigate the effect of such local steps solely, we do not consider
further modifications of batching as in (Xu et al., 2020; Hairi et al., 2022; Chen et al., 2021).
2) Single-agent reinforcement learning policy evaluation: For single-agent RL, policy evaluation
problems have been extensively studied in terms of asymptotic convergence (Tsitsiklis & Van Roy,
1997; 1999; 2002), finite-time convergence under i.i.d. sampling assumption Lakshminarayanan &
Szepesvari (2018) and under Markovian sampling assumption using different techniques (Srikant
& Ying, 2019; Bhandari et al., 2018). Further, using batched TD learning (Xu et al., 2020) yields
state-of-the-art sample complexity O((1/ϵ) log(1/ϵ)). However, there is no notion of “communi-
cation with other agents” due to the single-agent nature. Thus, results in this area are not directly
comparable to our work.

3     D ISTRIBUTED POLICY EVALUATION IN MULTI - AGENT REINFORCEMENT
      LEARNING

Throughout this paper, ∥ · ∥ denotes the ℓ2 -norm for vectors and the ℓ2 -induced norm for matrices.
∥ · ∥F denotes the Frobenius norm for matrices. (·)T denotes the transpose for a matrix or a vector.

3.1   S YSTEM MODEL

Consider a multi-agent system with N agents, denoted by N = {1, · · · , N }, operating in a net-
worked environment. Let E be the edge set for a given network G = (N , E). To formulate our
MARL problem and facilitate our subsequent discussions, we first define the notion of networked
multi-agent Markov decision process (MDP) as follows.
Definition 1 (Networked Multi-Agent MDP). Let G = (N , E) be a communication network
that connects N agents. A networked multi-agent MDP is defined by following six-tuple
(S, {Ai }i∈N , P, {Ri }i∈N , G, γ), where S is the global state space observed by all agents, Ai is
                                                                                         Ri : S × A
the action set for agent i, P : S × A × S → [0, 1] is a global state transition function,Q
is the local reward function for agent i, and γ ∈ (0, 1) is the discount factor. Let A = i∈N Ai be
the joint action set of all agents.

In this paper, we assume that the global state space S is finite. We also assume that at time step
t ≥ 0, all agents can observe the current global state st . However, each agent can only observe
its own reward rti , i.e., agents do not observe or share rewards with other agents at time t. The
reward function Ri (s, a) is an expectation given s and a, and the instantaneous reward is denoted
by ri (s, a), i.e., Ri (s, a) = E[ri (s, a)].
We consider policies that are stationary. In our MARL system, each agent chooses its action follow-
ing its local policy π i that is conditioned on the current global state s, i.e., π i (ai |s) is the probability
for agent iQto choose an action ai ∈ Ai . Then, the joint policy π : S × A → [0, 1] can be written as
π(a|s) = i∈N π i (ai |s).
The global value function for all s ∈ S is defined as follows:
                                       "∞                                #
                                         X γt X
                            V (s) = E                ri (st , at ) s0 = s .
                                         t=0
                                             N
                                                     i∈N


3.2   T ECHNICAL ASSUMPTIONS

We now state the following assumptions for the MARL system described above.
Assumption 1. For the given policy π, we assume the induced Markov chain {st }t≥0 is irreducible
and aperiodic.


                                                       4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Assumption 2. The instantaneous reward rti is uniformly bounded by a constant rmax > 0 for any
i ∈ N and t ≥ 0.
Assumption 3. Let A be a consensus weight matrix for a given communication network G. There
exists a positive constant η > 0 such that A ∈ RN ×N is doubly stochastic and Aii ≥ η, ∀i ∈ N .
Moreover, Aij ≥ η if i, j are connected, otherwise Aij = 0.
Assumption 4. The global value function is parameterized by linear functions, i.e., V (s; w) =
ϕ(s)T w where ϕ(s) = [ϕ1 (s), · · · , ϕd (s)]T ∈ Rd is the feature associated with the state s ∈ S and
d < |S|. The feature vectors ϕ(s) are uniformly bounded for any s ∈ S. Without loss of generality,
we assume that ∥ϕ(s)∥ ≤ 1. Furthermore, the feature matrix Φ ∈ R|S|×d is full column rank.
Assumption 1 guarantees that there exists a unique stationary distribution over S for the induced
Markov chain by the given policy π. Assumption 2 is common in the RL literature (see, e.g., (Zhang
et al., 2018; Xu et al., 2020; Doan et al., 2019)) and easy to be satisfied in many practical MDP
models with finite state and action spaces. Assumption 3 is standard in the distributed multi-agent
optimization literature (Nedic & Ozdaglar, 2009). This assumption says that non-zero entries of
the weight matrix A needs to be lower bounded by a positive value η. Assumption 4 on features
is standard and has been widely adopted in the literature, e.g., (Tsitsiklis & Van Roy, 1999; Zhang
et al., 2018; Qiu et al., 2021; Srikant & Ying, 2019). The goal of this assumption is to approximate
the value function as follows:
                                      V (s) ≈ V (s; w) = ϕ(s)T w
where ϕ(s) is the feature associated with state s ∈ S. As a result, ∇w V (s; w) = ϕ(s) for all s ∈ S.

4    D ECENTRALIZED TD LEARNING WITH LOCAL STEPS FOR MARL
In this section, we introduce the decentralized TD learning algorithm with local TD steps (i.e., in-
frequent communication), which is illustrated in Algorithm 1. Given a policy π, the goal of the
MARL-PE in the decentralized setting is to collaboratively characterize the value function. Specifi-
cally, each agent i maintains a value function approximation parameter wi locally, which estimates
the global value function as follows:
                                         V (s; wi ) = ϕ(s)T wi .

Our algorithm is designed with two loops. The outer loop is the communication rounds, where
consensus update (Line 11 in Algorithm 1) is performed for L rounds. The inner loop is local TD
update steps, which consists of K steps. Locally, each agent performs local TD learning updates
within each communication round 0 ≤ l ≤ L − 1 as follows:
                                 i         i         i
                                wl,k+1 = wl,k + β · δl,k · ϕ(sl,k ),                         (1)
                                  i
where β > 0 is the step size and δl,k is the local TD error, which is defined as follows
                            i      i                   i              i
                          δl,k := rl,k+1 + γϕ(sl,k+1 )wl,k − ϕ(sl,k )wl,k .
We note that equation 1 is considered one local TD learning step. Within each inner loop, this local
TD update step is done K times.
Due to the privacy of the reward signals in the fully decentralized setting, the agents are unable
to access the rewards of any other agents, let alone the average rewards. Therefore, communi-
cation/sharing of the value function approximation parameters among the neighbors is necessary
(Zhang et al., 2018; Doan et al., 2019; Chen et al., 2021; Hairi et al., 2022). This step is also referred
to as consensus update, which can be typically done as follows:
                                                  X
                                         i                  i
                                       wl+1,0 =        Aij wl,K .                                      (2)
                                                  j∈Ni
In other words, after performing K local TD steps, each agent shares its parameter to the neighbors,
receives the ones from the neighbors, and then updates its own parameter in a weighted aggregation
as shown in equation 2. We note that in our algorithm, the infrequent communication is done by
agents communicating only periodically with the period being K. The decentralized TD learning
with periodic local steps is concluded in Algorithm 1. We also note that when K = 1, our algorithm
reduces to the vanilla distributed TD learning algorithm (Doan et al., 2019; 2021; Zhang et al., 2018).
Hence, the vanilla distributed TD learning can be viewed as a special case of our algorithm.


                                                    5
    Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


    Algorithm 1: Decentralized TD Learning with periodic local steps
    Input : Initial state s0 , π = {π i |i ∈ N }, feature map ϕ, initial parameters {w0,0
                                                                                      i
                                                                                          |i ∈ N }, step
            size β, communication round number L, local step number K
1  for l = 0, · · · , L − 1 do
2      for k = 0, · · · , K − 1 do
 3         sl,0 = sl−1,K (when l = 0 and k = 0 , sl,k = s0 );
 4         for all i ∈ N do
 5              Execute action ail,k ∼ π i (·|sl,k );
                                                          i
 6              Observe the state sl,k+1 and reward rl,k+1      ;
 7              Update δl,k ← rl,k+1 + γϕ(sl,k+1 ) wl,k − ϕ(sl,k )T wl,k
                           i     i                      T i          i
                                                                         ;
 8         end
                               i           i          i
 9         Local TD Step: wl,k+1     ← wl,k    + βδl,k  · ϕ(sl,k );
10     end
                               i
                                       P                      j
11     Consensus Update: wl+1,0      ← j∈Ni A(i, j) · wl,K        ;
12 end
   Output: wL,0


    5   C ONVERGENCE ANALYSIS OF DECENTRALIZED TD LEARNING WITH
        LOCAL STEPS

    In this section, we present the convergence results for Algorithm 1, which further imply both the
    sample and communication complexities of Algorithm 1.
    To characterize the convergence, we define the following quantities:
                                                                   1     X
                 Ψ := E[(γϕ(s′ ) − ϕ(s))ϕT (s)]      and     b := E[ϕ(s)   ri (s, a)].                      (3)
                                                                  N
                                                                                 i∈N
    The expectations in equation 3 are taken over the steady state distribution induced by the policy,
    which is guaranteed to exist due to Assumption 1, stationary action policy a ∼ π(·|s), state transition
    probability s′ ∼ P (·|s, a), and the reward distributions. Furthermore, we define
                                                 w∗ = Ψ−1 b,                                            (4)
    where the invertibility is due to Ψ being negative definite (Tsitsiklis & Van Roy, 1997). Conse-
    quently, we define mixing time τ (β) as follows
                    ∥Ψ − E[(γϕ(sk+1 ) − ϕ(sk ))ϕT (s)|s0 = s]∥ ≤ β         ∀s, ∀k ≥ τ (β)                  (5a)
                            1          X
                        b − E[ϕ(sk )      ri (sk , ak )|s0 = s] ≤ β        ∀s, ∀k ≥ τ (β),                 (5b)
                            N
                                          i∈N
     where the expectation is state distribution at the k-th time step, stationary action policy ak ∼
    π(·|sk ), state transition probability sk+1 ∼ P (·|sk , ak ) and reward distribution. We note that under
    the Assumption 1, by (Levin & Peres, 2017, Theorem 4.9), the Markov chain mixes at a geometric
    rate, which implies τ (β) = O(log β1 ).
    The choice of step size β on the right-hand-side (RHS) of the definition of mixing time in equation 5
    is for simplicity. From (Srikant & Ying, 2019), we know that the error level at the steady state is
    order-wise proportional to the step size up to a log factor (see the second term in the RHS of Eq. (12)
    of Srikant & Ying (2019)), which is due to the geometric mixing time property.
    Before presenting our main theorem, we introduce two useful lemmas. Our analysis is to divide
    the convergence error into two parts, the consensus error, which is defined as the agent’s parameters
    deviation from the average parameter, and convergence error of the average parameter to the solution
    of the ODE in equation 4.
    First, we define the average of the parameters to be w̄l,k = N1 i∈N wl,k  i
                                                                    P
                                                                                 for any communication
    round 0 ≤ l ≤ L − 1 and local step 0 ≤ k ≤ K − 1. Then, we define the consensus error as:
                                             Qil,k := wl,k
                                                       i
                                                           − w̄l,k                                    (6)


                                                       6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


and the matrix form is Ql,k = [Q1l,k , · · · , QN
                                                l,k ] ∈ R
                                                          d×N
                                                              .
We provide an upper bound for the consensus error generated by Algorithm 1 in the following
lemma.
Lemma 1. Suppose that Assumptions 2–4 hold. For the consensus error generated by Algorithm 1,
                     η N −1
if βK ≤ min{ 21 , 4(1−η  N −1 ) }, it holds that


                                                                  κ2 βK
                                    ∥QL,0 ∥ ≤ κ1 ρL ∥Q0,0 ∥ +           ,                            (7)
                                                                  1−ρ
                 2     −(N −1)                               5
where κ1 = 2N (1+η
                 1−η N −1
                          )
                            , κ2 = 4(1 + η −(N −1) )N 2 rmax and ρ := (1 + 4βK)(1 − η N −1 ). By
the condition on βK, we have 0 < ρ < 1.

Lemma 1 shows that even if the parameters are not set to be the same initially, the effect of the initial
consensus error will converge to 0 exponentially fast as the round of communication goes to infinity.
The second term is linear with respect to βK, which resembles the constant term in optimization
using constant step size SGD. This product term will dictates the consensus error and the error level
that the algorithm converges to, see Section A.3 for detail. The proof for the lemma is relegated to
Section C.2.
Next, we provide a lemma that characterizes the convergence of the average parameter w̄l,k . Note
that, here we utilize the Theorem 7 in (Srikant & Ying, 2019), which has the state-of-the-art non-
batch sample complexity for TD learning.
Lemma 2. Suppose Assumptions 1-4 hold. For the parameters generated by Algorithm 1, we have
following result for the average of them
                                                                      rmax 2
          E[∥w̄L,0 − w∗ ∥2 ] ≤ c2 (1 − c1 β)KL−τ (β) (∥w̄0,0 − w∗ ∥ +     ) + c3 βτ (β), (8)
                                                                       3
where c1 , c2 , c3 > 0 are constants that are independent of step size β, local steps K and commu-
nication round L and τ (β) is the mixing time. See the specified expressions of the constants and
discussion in Section C.3.

The average parameter w̄L,0 = N1 i∈N wL,0      i
                                     P
                                                  corresponds to the updates after K × L iterations
(samples). Lemma 2 shows that the average of the parameters converges to solution of the ODE
with the rate given by the RHS of equation 8.
Now, we state the main convergence result of Algorithm 1:
Theorem 1. Suppose that Assumptions 1-4 hold. For the given policy, consider the iteration gener-
                                          η N −1
ated by Algorithm 1. If βK ≤ min{ 21 , 4(1−η  N −1 ) }, it then follows that:


      X N                                                 2
              i           ∗ 2           L          κ2 βK
   E        ∥wL,0 − w ∥ ≤2d κ1 ρ ∥Q0,0 ∥ +
       i=1
                                                    1−ρ
                                                                            rmax 2
                                    + 2N c2 (1 − c1 β)KL−τ (∥w̄0,0 − w∗ ∥ +     ) + c3 βτ , (9)
                                                                              3
                                                                          1        i
                                                                            P
where κ1 , κ2 , c1 , c2 , c3 > 0, 0 < ρ < 1 are constants, and w̄0,0 = N i∈N w0,0      and Q0,0 is
the initialpconsensus error defined in equation   6. Furthermore, by letting β = Θ(ϵ log−1 (1/ϵ)),
                                          p                          PN
K = Θ( 1/ϵ log(1/ϵ)) and L = Θ( 1/ϵ log(1/ϵ)), we have E[ i=1 ∥wL,0           i
                                                                                 − w∗ ∥2 ] = O(ϵ).
Thepsample complexity is KL = O(1/ϵ log2 (1/ϵ)) and the communication complexity is L =
O( 1/ϵ log(1/ϵ)).
                                                                       i
Note that since we use double loops in Algorithm 1, the parameter wL,0    corresponds to the iteration
result after K ×L samples (iterations). We remark that the sample complexity of O((1/ϵ) log2 (1/ϵ))
is the state-of-the-art sample complexity for non-batching single agent RL policy evaluation problem
Srikant & Ying (2019). The sample complexity of our algorithm in distributed multi-agent setting,
which is also a non-batching approach, matches this sample complexity. In addition, compared
with single-agent policy evaluation (Xu et al., 2020), which is a batching method and its multi-agent


                                                      7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


counterpart (Hairi et al., 2022; Chen et al., 2021), this sample complexity only differs by a log factor.
We note that, in (Xu et al., 2020; Hairi et al., 2022; Chen et al., 2021), the algorithms are complete
actor-critic algorithms. Thus, we only compare our results with their critic steps, which solve the
policy evaluation problem.
In our proposed algorithm, betweenpconsecutive communication rounds, the number of local TD
steps for each agent can be K = O( 1/ϵ log(1/ϵ)). This improved the communication complexity
of vanilla
   p                                                                                 a factor of K =
           distributed TD algorithms (Zhang et al., 2018; Doan et al., 2019; 2021) byp
O( 1/ϵ log(1/ϵ)). The communication complexity of our algorithm is L = O( 1/ϵ log(1/ϵ)),
which, interestingly, equals to K order-wise.

6                           E XPERIMENTAL RESULTS
In this section, we conduct numerical experiments to compare our proposed local TD-update algo-
rithm, TD learning with local steps, with vanilla TD learning (Zhang et al., 2018; Doan et al., 2019;
2021) and the batch TD learning (Hairi et al., 2022; Chen et al., 2021) in both synthetic settings as
in (Zhang et al., 2018) and cooperative navigation tasks as in (Lowe et al., 2017). Due to the page
limit, we relegate the experiment setups and rigorous definitions of the performance metrics in the
Appendix A.1 and B.1.

6.1                         C ONVERGENCE PERFORMANCE ON SYNTHETIC SETTING

In the synthetic experiment, we show that the function approximation parameter in the proposed
local TD algorithm converges and the convergence with respect to the number of communication
round for all algorithms. In Figure 1, the y-axis is the normalized convergence error of the left
hand side of equation 9 and the axes are the numbers of communication rounds in Figure 1a,1c
and sample numbers in Figure 1b, 1d. For extensive experimental details, discussions and results
of experiment setup, convergence performance, the impact of local steps and linear convergences,
please see Appendix A.
                   4                                                                           4.5                                                                             5                                                                        5
                                             TD learning with local step                                                TD learning with local step                                                   TD learning with local step                                              TD learning with local step
                  3.5                        Vanilla TD learning                                4                       Vanilla TD learning                                                           Vanilla TD learning                                                      Vanilla TD learning
                                             TD learning with batch                                                     TD learning with batch                                                        TD learning with batch                                                   TD learning with batch
                                                                                               3.5                                                                             4                                                                        4
                   3
                                                                                                3
Objective Error


                                                                             Objective Error


                                                                                                                                                             Objective Error


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Objective Error


                  2.5                                                                                                                                                          3                                                                        3
                                                                                               2.5
                   2
                                                                                                2
                  1.5                                                                                                                                                          2                                                                        2
                                                                                               1.5
                   1
                                                                                                1                                                                              1                                                                        1
                  0.5                                                                          0.5

                   0                                                                            0                                                                              0                                                                        0
                        0    100       200             300             400                           0   2000   4000    6000         8000        10000                             0   50       100             150             200                         0   2000   4000    6000         8000        10000
                               Communication Rounds                                                             Sample Number                                                           Communication Rounds                                                           Sample Number



             (a) K = 50, L = 200                                                        (b) K = 50, L = 200                                                  (c) K = 100, L = 100                                                     (d) K = 100, L = 100

                              Figure 1: Convergence with respect to Communication Rounds and Sample Number

We considered 20 agents over a ring network. In Figure 1a, we provide the convergence results with
respect to the communication rounds for all three algorithms, where the local step K = 50 for local
TD algorithm and the batch size is 50 for batch algorithm. Under such a setting, both local TD algo-
rithm and batch TD algorithm only performs consensus communication every 50 samples. To keep
the comparison fair, we keep the local step number and batch size to be the same for the majority
of the comparisons except Figure 4. We can see that within 200 communication rounds, both batch
algorithm and local TD algorithm converge to a very similar level, yet vanilla TD algorithm doesn’t
converge even after 400 rounds of communication. Between the local TD algorithm and batch al-
gorithm, the batch algorithm converges slightly faster, which means requiring slightly fewer rounds
of communication among the agents. In Figure 1c when local step K = 100 for local TD algo-
rithm and batch size is 100 for batch algorithm, the local TD algorithm requires the least amount of
communication rounds to converge, even compared to batch algorithm. On the other hand, local TD
algorithm performs significantly better compared to vanilla algorithm. Note that in these parameter
settings, our algorithm has the same number of communication rounds as the batched TD algorithm.
In Figures 1b and 1d, we present the corresponding convergence results with respect to sample num-
bers. We can see that vanilla TD eventually converges but requires consensus operation after each
sampling. For more detailed discussion on the convergence with respect to sample numbers, please
see Section A.2 and A.4.


                                                                                                                                                         8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                 30                                                                               30
                                                                                    TD learning with local step                                                          TD learning with local step
                                                                                    Vanilla TD learning                                                                  Vanilla TD learning
                                                                 25                 TD learning with batch                                        25                     TD learning with batch


                                    Mean Squared Bellman Error


                                                                                                                     Mean Squared Bellman Error
                                                                 20                                                                               20

                                                                 15                                                                               15

                                                                 10                                                                               10

                                                                 5                                                                                5

                                                                 00   500             1000                    1500                                00   2000   4000     6000         8000          10000
                                                                      Communication Round                                                                     Sample Number

                                      (b) Bellman Error over Commu-                                                    (c) Bellman Error over Sample
(a) Cooperative Navigation Task       nication Rounds                                                                  Number

       Figure 2: Convergence with respect to Communication Rounds and Sample Number


Figure 1 verifies the theoretical analysis that allowing local steps does help with the communication
rounds compared to vanilla algorithm. In addition, even though the theoretical sample complexity
of local TD algorithm is worse than batch algorithm, in practice, the communication rounds are
comparable between these two approaches. This may be because the sample complexity is derived
from the upper bound of the finite time analysis in Theorem 1 and this upper bound is not only an
order-wise result with respect to some ϵ criteria, the tightness of the upper bounds depends on the
analysis techniques. This may indicate that there is room to improve for the finite time analysis of
the local TD algorithm.


6.2   C ONVERGENCE PERFORMANCE ON COOPERATIVE NAVIGATION TASK

In the cooperative navigation task, the agents (blue circles) are trained to cover the landmarks
(crosses) as illustrated in Figure 2a. Agents observe positions and velocities of all agents and collab-
oratively cover the landmarks while avoiding collisions. The rewards for agents are defined through
the proximity to the nearest landmarks. Unlike the synthetic experiment, the fixed point of the cor-
responding ODE as in equation 4 can’t be calculated, so we use the squared Bellman error as the
performance metric. For extensive simulation results, which include discussions on various net-
work topologies, local steps/batch sizes, different step sizes, and consensus error metrics, please see
Appendix B.
For the results in Figure 2b and 2c, we consider N = 9 agents over an Erdos-Renyi (ER) network
and set local step K to be 20 for local TD algorithm and batch size to be 10 for batch algorithm and
appropriate step sizes for the algorithms. Similar to the synthetic experiment, we can see that all
algorithms converge to a very similar Bellman error. This again verifies the theoretical analysis that
allowing local steps and performing infrequent communications is feasible and can converge. More-
over, in this setting, our local TD algorithm converges much faster in terms of the communication
round. Specifically, local TD algorithm requires much less than 500 rounds of communication to
converge, and both batch algorithm and vanilla algorithm perform similarly and require more than
500 rounds of communication to converge.


7     C ONCLUSION

In this paper, we answer the questions of whether local TD steps can lower the communication
complexity of distributed TD learning and, if so, how is the performance in comparison with batch
TD learning. Our theoretical analysis and experimental results show that the local TD steps can
significantly lower the communication complexity compared to vanilla TD learning.p      In addition,
our theoretical analysis also shows that the local step can be as large as K = O( 1/ϵ log(1/ϵ)) to
converge to ϵ close to the solution of the corresponding ODE. However, in order to achieve the same
(up to a log factor) sample complexity as in batch TD learning, the communication complexity may
also be significantly worse than that of batch TD learning in theory. But experimental results show
a comparable performance of local TD algorithm with batch algorithm in terms of communication
rounds.


                                                                             9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


R EFERENCES
Jalaj Bhandari, Daniel Russo, and Raghav Singal. A finite time analysis of temporal difference
   learning with linear function approximation. In Conference on learning theory, pp. 1691–1692.
   PMLR, 2018.
Tianyi Chen, Kaiqing Zhang, Georgios B Giannakis, and Tamer Basar. Communication-efficient
  distributed reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1812.03239, 2018.
Xin Chen, Guannan Qu, Yujie Tang, Steven Low, and Na Li. Reinforcement learning for selective
  key applications in power systems: Recent advances and future challenges. IEEE Transactions
  on Smart Grid, 2022.
Ziyi Chen, Yi Zhou, Rongrong Chen, and Shaofeng Zou. Sample and communication-efficient
  decentralized actor-critic algorithms with finite-time analysis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2109.03699,
  2021.
Thinh Doan, Siva Maguluri, and Justin Romberg. Finite-time analysis of distributed td (0) with linear
  function approximation on multi-agent reinforcement learning. In International Conference on
  Machine Learning, pp. 1626–1635. PMLR, 2019.
Thinh T Doan, Siva Theja Maguluri, and Justin Romberg. Finite-time performance of distributed
  temporal-difference learning with linear function approximation. SIAM Journal on Mathematics
  of Data Science, 3(1):298–320, 2021.
FNU Hairi, Jia Liu, and Songtao Lu. Finite-time convergence and sample complexity of multi-agent
  actor-critic reinforcement learning with average reward. In International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2022.
Daewoo Kim, Sangwoo Moon, David Hostallero, Wan Ju Kang, Taeyoung Lee, Kyunghwan Son,
  and Yung Yi. Learning to schedule communication in multi-agent reinforcement learning. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1902.01554, 2019.
Chandrashekar Lakshminarayanan and Csaba Szepesvari. Linear stochastic approximation: How
  far does constant step-size and iterate averaging go? In International Conference on Artificial
  Intelligence and Statistics, pp. 1347–1355. PMLR, 2018.
Donghwan Lee, Hyungjin Yoon, and Naira Hovakimyan. Primal-dual algorithm for distributed re-
  inforcement learning: distributed gtd. In 2018 IEEE Conference on Decision and Control (CDC),
  pp. 1967–1972. IEEE, 2018.
David A Levin and Yuval Peres. Markov chains and mixing times, volume 107. American Mathe-
  matical Soc., 2017.
Xiangru Lian, Ce Zhang, Huan Zhang, Cho-Jui Hsieh, Wei Zhang, and Ji Liu. Can decentralized
  algorithms outperform centralized algorithms? a case study for decentralized parallel stochastic
  gradient descent. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 30, 2017.
Yixuan Lin, Kaiqing Zhang, Zhuoran Yang, Zhaoran Wang, Tamer Başar, Romeil Sandhu, and
  Ji Liu. A communication-efficient multi-agent actor-critic algorithm for distributed reinforcement
  learning. In 2019 IEEE 58th Conference on Decision and Control (CDC), pp. 5562–5567. IEEE,
  2019.
Ryan Lowe, Yi I Wu, Aviv Tamar, Jean Harb, OpenAI Pieter Abbeel, and Igor Mordatch. Multi-
  agent actor-critic for mixed cooperative-competitive environments. Advances in neural informa-
  tion processing systems, 30, 2017.
Sergio Valcarcel Macua, Jianshu Chen, Santiago Zazo, and Ali H Sayed. Distributed policy evalu-
  ation under multiple behavior strategies. IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control, 60(5):1260–
  1274, 2014.
Angelia Nedic and Asuman Ozdaglar. Distributed subgradient methods for multi-agent optimiza-
  tion. IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control, 54(1):48–61, 2009.


                                                 10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Shi Pu and Angelia Nedić. Distributed stochastic gradient tracking methods. Mathematical Pro-
  gramming, 187(1):409–457, 2021.
Shuang Qiu, Zhuoran Yang, Jieping Ye, and Zhaoran Wang. On finite-time convergence of actor-
  critic algorithm. IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Information Theory, 2(2):652–664, 2021.
Jineng Ren and Jarvis Haupt. A communication efficient hierarchical distributed optimization algo-
   rithm for multi-agent reinforcement learning. In Real-world sequential decision making workshop
   at international conference on machine learning, 2019.
Martin Riedmiller, Andrew Moore, and Jeff Schneider. Reinforcement learning for cooperating and
 communicating reactive agents in electrical power grids. In Workshop on Balancing Reactivity
 and Social Deliberation in Multi-Agent Systems, pp. 137–149. Springer, 2000.
Shai Shalev-Shwartz, Shaked Shammah, and Amnon Shashua. Safe, multi-agent, reinforcement
  learning for autonomous driving. arXiv preprint arXiv:1610.03295, 2016.
Rayadurgam Srikant and Lei Ying. Finite-time error bounds for linear stochastic approximation
  andtd learning. In Conference on Learning Theory, pp. 2803–2830. PMLR, 2019.
Richard S Sutton. Learning to predict by the methods of temporal differences. Machine learning, 3
  (1):9–44, 1988.
Richard S Sutton and Andrew G Barto. Reinforcement learning: An introduction. MIT press, 2018.
J.N. Tsitsiklis and B. Van Roy. An analysis of temporal-difference learning with function approxi-
   mation. IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control, 42(5):674–690, 1997. doi: 10.1109/9.580874.
John N Tsitsiklis and Benjamin Van Roy. Average cost temporal-difference learning. Automatica,
  35(11):1799–1808, 1999.
John N Tsitsiklis and Benjamin Van Roy. On average versus discounted reward temporal-difference
  learning. Machine Learning, 49(2):179–191, 2002.
Hoi-To Wai, Zhuoran Yang, Zhaoran Wang, and Mingyi Hong. Multi-agent reinforcement learn-
  ing via double averaging primal-dual optimization. Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 31, 2018.
Tengyu Xu, Zhe Wang, and Yingbin Liang. Improving sample complexity bounds for (natural)
  actor-critic algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.12956, 2020.
Chao Yu, Xin Wang, Xin Xu, Minjie Zhang, Hongwei Ge, Jiankang Ren, Liang Sun, Bingcai Chen,
  and Guozhen Tan. Distributed multiagent coordinated learning for autonomous driving in high-
  ways based on dynamic coordination graphs. IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation
  Systems, 21(2):735–748, 2019.
Kaiqing Zhang, Zhuoran Yang, Han Liu, Tong Zhang, and Tamer Basar. Fully decentralized multi-
  agent reinforcement learning with networked agents. In International Conference on Machine
  Learning, pp. 5872–5881. PMLR, 2018.
Kaiqing Zhang, Zhuoran Yang, and Tamer Başar. Multi-agent reinforcement learning: A selective
  overview of theories and algorithms. Handbook of Reinforcement Learning and Control, pp.
  321–384, 2021a.
Xin Zhang, Zhuqing Liu, Jia Liu, Zhengyuan Zhu, and Songtao Lu. Taming communication and
  sample complexities in decentralized policy evaluation for cooperative multi-agent reinforcement
  learning. Virtual Event, December 2021b.


A    A PPENDIX
In the section, we provide the experiment setup and additional experimental results for the synthetic
setting.


                                                 11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                        5                                                                               4.5
                                                TD learning with local step                                                      TD learning with local step
                                                Vanilla TD learning                                      4                       Vanilla TD learning
                                                TD learning with batch                                                           TD learning with batch
                        4                                                                               3.5

      Objective Error                                                                                    3


                                                                                      Objective Error
                        3
                                                                                                        2.5

                                                                                                         2
                        2
                                                                                                        1.5

                        1                                                                                1

                                                                                                        0.5

                        0                                                                                0
                            0   2000    4000    6000         8000        10000                                0   2000   4000    6000         8000        10000
                                        Sample Number                                                                    Sample Number

                                  (a) K = 50, L = 200                                                              (b) K = 100, L = 100

                                       Figure 3: TD with local steps vs. vanilla TD and batched TD.
A.1                     S YNTHETIC E XPERIMENT S ETUP

We consider the same setting as in Section 6.1 of (Zhang et al., 2018). There are N = 20 agents, each
of which has a binary-valued action space, i.e., Ai = {0, 1} for all i ∈ N . There are |S| = 10 states.
The entries in the transition matrix are uniformly sampled from the interval [0, 1] and normalized
to be stochastic. For each agent i and global state action pair (s, a), the mean reward Ri (s, a) is
sampled uniformly from [0, 4] and the instantaneous rewards {rti } are sampled uniformly within the
set [Ri (s, a) − 0.5, Ri (s, a) + 0.5]. The policy considered in the simulation is π i (·|s) = 0.5 for all
i ∈ N , s ∈ S. The entries of feature matrix Φ are sampled uniformly at random from [0, 1] with
feature dimension d = 5 and ensured to be full rank. In addition, we set each feature vector to be
unit length. The discount factor γ is set to be 0.99. The network topology is chosen as a ring network
with diagonal elements being 0.4 and off-diagonal elements being 0.3. The simulation results are
averaged over 10 trials. We choose the step sizes for our algorithm to be 0.005, vanilla TD to be 0.1,
and batched TD to be 10. We note that these step sizes are chosen to be best for the corresponding
algorithms.
The objective error is defined as the normalized version of convergence term (LHS of the equation 9),
i.e., the empirical sample mean errors divided by the number of agents N and the dimension number
d:
                                                     qP
                                                          N      i      ∗ 2
                                                          i=1 ∥wl,k − w ∥
             Objective Error := sample average of                           for 10 trials.
                                                               dN
We remark that due to the fact that the transition matrix is not dependent on joint action, the steady
state distribution can be computed and so is the value of w∗ , whose definition is in equation 4.

A.2                     C ONVERGENCE P ERFORMANCE

First, we show that the local TD-update algorithm exhibits similar empirical convergence perfor-
mances as the other algorithms.
In Fig. 3, we choose the number of local steps to be K = 50 and communication rounds to be
L = 200 for the local TD-update algorithm. We choose batch size to be 50 and communication
rounds to be 200 for batched TD algorithm in Fig. 3(a). In Fig. 3(b), we increase the number of
local steps to K = 100 and decrease the communication rounds to L = 100 for the local TD-update
algorithm, and we also increase batch size to be 100 and decrease the communication rounds to be
100 for batched TD algorithm. Note that in these parameter settings, our algorithm has the same
number of communication rounds as the batched TD algorithm.
From both Figure 3(a) and (b), we can see that all algorithms converge to similar low objective error
levels. This verifies the theoretical analysis that allowing local steps and performing infrequent
communications is feasible and can converge. Then, we look at the number of samples needed to
reach the low objective error. From Figure 3(a), we see that when local steps are relatively small,
i.e., K = 50, the vanilla TD algorithm requires the most samples, while batched TD requires the


                                                                                 12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


least, and our local TD algorithm with local steps requires somewhere in between. In Figure 3(b),
when we increase the local steps to be K = 100, the number of samples of the local TD-update
algorithm requires is the least compared to the other two algorithms. On the other hand, when the
batch size increases, the number of samples required for batched TD to converge to low objective
error is very similar to that of vanilla TD. However, we note that both our algorithm and batched TD
requires less than 200 rounds of communication to reach that level of objective error in Figure 3(a)
and less than 100 rounds of communication in Figure 3(b). Moreover, these results show that the
local TD-update approach can effectively lower communication complexity of MARL-PE compared
to the vanilla TD method.

                                         4.5
                                                          local TD learning with K=50, L=200
                                          4               local TD learning with K=100, L=100
                                                          local TD learning with K=200, L=50
                                         3.5              Vanilla TD learning
                                                          Batch TD learning with M=50,L=200
                                          3
                       Objective Error


                                                          Batch TD learning with M=100,L=100
                                                          Batch TD learning with M=200,L=50
                                         2.5

                                          2

                                         1.5

                                          1

                                         0.5

                                          0
                                               0   0.5       1            1.5           2
                                                         Sample Number                      104

             Figure 4: Additional TD with local steps vs. vanilla TD and batched TD.


In addition, we compare different pairs of local step K and communication round L of our proposed
algorithm with different pairs of batch size M and communication round L in Figure 4. In general,
local TD learning performs at a comparable level with batch TD algorithm, especially for the case
K = M = 50 and L = 200, red curve for local TD algorithm and blue curve for the batch TD
algorithm respectively. When increasing the local steps for local TD algorithm, it converges faster
but to a higher error level. In comparison, when increasing the batch size for batch TD algorithm,
the convergence is slightly slower but to a smaller error level.



A.3   I MPACTS OF THE NUMBER OF LOCAL STEPS ON CONVERGENCE

Next, we illustrate the effect of the number of local steps on the convergence for our proposed
algorithm. In Figure 5, we vary the number of local steps from K = 40 to K = 250. There are two
interesting observations from this result. First, the number of samples needed to reach a low level
objective error decreases as the number of local steps increases. For example, when K = 100 or
larger, the curves drop much more rapidly in the beginning compared to the curves with smaller local
steps. Second, the level of objective error that the algorithm converges to increases as the number of
local steps increases. For example, when K ≤ 100, the objective error is relatively low and stable,
but as K increases to 200 or 250, the objective error is large and oscillates around a relatively higher
level. This observation is consistent with our theoretical analysis. Recall the second term on the
RHS of equation 7 in Lemma 1 that is proportional to the product of step size β and local step K.
This term says the objective error will converge to neighborhood of zero, for which the size of the
neighborhood depends on βK. As a result, for a larger K-value the objective error will oscillate
with a larger magnitude. This resembles the constant step size term in the convergence of the SGD
method in the distributed optimization problem (Nedic & Ozdaglar, 2009). Also intuitively, the
agent-drift phenomenon will exacerbate with larger local steps, so the results for K ≥ 200 in Figure
5 agree with such intuitions. In summary, empirically, when the step size is fixed, larger local steps
helps the convergence speed, but it will also result in converging to a higher objective error level.


                                                             13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                               4
                                                                                                                                                 K=40
                                                              3.5                                                                                K=50
                                                                                                                                                 K=100
                                                                                                                                                 K=200
                                                               3
                                                                                                                                                 K=250


                                            Objective Error
                                                              2.5

                                                               2

                                                              1.5

                                                               1

                                                              0.5

                                                               0
                                                                    0           2000              4000               6000                 8000      10000
                                                                                                  Sample Number

                                                              Figure 5: Impact of local steps K on convergence.

A.4                     L INEAR C ONVERGENCE WITH RESPECT TO SAMPLE NUMBER


                      101
                                                                    TD learning with local step                                                             TD learning with local step
                                                                    Vanilla TD learning                                                                     Vanilla TD learning
                                                                    TD learning with batch                                                                  TD learning with batch
    Objective Error


                                                                                                              Objective Error


                                                                                                                                100
                           0
                      10


                      10-1
                               0   2000   4000                      6000         8000        10000                                    0   2000     4000     6000         8000        10000
                                          Sample Number                                                                                           Sample Number

                                     (a) K = 50, L = 200                                                                                   (b) K = 100, L = 100

                                                                           Figure 6: Convergence in Log Scales
In Figure 6, we provide the log scaled objective error with respect to sample number for all three
algorithms. All algorithms behave similarly. Specifically, there are two phases in the convergences,
roughly a linear convergence phase at first and oscillation phase at a relatively low objective error
level. At the linear convergence phase, the objective error quickly decreases as the number of sample
increases and reaches a relatively low objective error phase; at the oscillation phase, the objective
error oscillates. This oscillation is likely caused by both the randomness in sample and the consensus
error. For the local TD algorithm, as we increase the local step K from 50 to 100, the only difference
is the oscillation phase, where when K = 100, the objective error is higher due to the effective step
sizes βK becomes larger, as indicated by the second term in Equation equation 7. This constant error
term that is linear with respect to step size is common in the constant step size learning scheme.

B                     C OOPERATIVE NAVIGATION TASK
B.1                     E XPERIMENT S ETUP AND P ERFORMANCE M ETRICS

We consider a cooperative navigation task that is adapted from one of Multi-Agent Environments
(Lowe et al., 2017). There are N = 9 agents in total, and the goal is to cover 9 landmarks collab-
oratively. Each agent can choose from the action space, Ai ={no action, move left, move right,
move down, move up}, in order to reach the goals based on the policy. The policy considered in the
simulation is π i (·|s) = 0.2 for all actions and i ∈ N , s ∈ S, i.e. uniformly random policy. The local
rewards are given by the distance between the agents and goal landmarks. However, if they collide


                                                                                                         14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


with each other, there would be a penalty given. The agents are trained to cover landmarks and reach
the destination while avoid colliding with other agents, and the entire training process is fully decen-
tralized. Figure 2a illustrates the task that agents are going to accomplish. As shown in the figure,
the blue circles are the agents, and the black crosses are the landmarks. Agents should learn to cover
goal landmarks, for example, following the arrows to finish the task. The feature dimension here is
36, i.e. d = 36, which includes all agents’ self velocity, self position, landmark relative positions,
other agent relative positions, and corresponding values are ranged within (−∞, ∞). Discount fac-
tor γ is set to be 0.95. We choose step size β for our algorithm to be 0.05, for vanilla TD algorithm
to be 0.1, and for batch TD algorithm to be 0.1 as well. We note that these step sizes are chosen for
the best performance for the corresponding algorithms.
The performance metrics are mean squared Bellman error (MSBE) and consensus error (CE). The
empirical squared Bellman error is defined as
                        N
                                            1 X                                        2
           SBE wki i=1 , sk , sk+1 :=               ϕ(sk )T wki − r̄k − γϕ(sk+1 )T wki ,
                                            N
                                               i∈N
             1          i
               P
where r̄k = N i∈N rk . Then, mean squared Bellman error is computed by averaging all squared
Bellman error in the history, which is defined as
                                          k
                                       1X                N

                           MSBE :=           SBE wκi i=1 , sκ , sκ+1 .
                                       k κ=1
The consensus error is defined as
                                    N
                                           1 X          2
                             CE wki i=1 :=     wki − wk .
                                           N
                                                       i∈N


            (a) Ring Network            (b) 4-Regular Network           (c) 6-Regular Network


                            (d) ER Network               (e) Complete Network

                                    Figure 7: Network Topology
B.2   N ETWORK T OPOLOGY

We compare all algorithms under five different network typologies. These are ring network, 4-
regular network, 6-regular network, Erdos-Renyi(ER) network with 0.5 connection probability, and
fully connected network. These network topologies are illustrated in Figure 7. For simplicity, the
local aggregation is the average of neighboring nodes for all networks.

B.3   C ONVERGENCE P ERFORMANCE

First, we show that the local TD-update algorithm exhibits similar empirical convergence perfor-
mances as the other algorithms while using less communication rounds among agents. Here we


                                                  15
  Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


  choose the number of local steps to be K = 20 for the local TD-update algorithm, the batch size
  to be 10 for the batched TD algorithm. For all of these algorithms, we set the total sample number
  to be 10000. The comparison among the algorithms is shown in Figure 9-13 over various network
  topologies.
  We can see that all algorithms converge to very similar low squared Bellman error and consensus
  error level based on these figures. This verifies our analysis that allowing local steps and performing
  infrequent communications is feasible and can converge. In this case, vanilla TD algorithm performs
  10000 communication rounds, which is the most, batch TD algorithm performs 1000 communication
  rounds, while local TD-update algorithm only performs 500 communication rounds. Left columns
  of the Figure 9-13 demonstrate the mean squared Bellman error, and right columns demonstrate the
  consensus error. For the mean squared Bellman error, the curve of local TD-update algorithm and
  the curve of vanilla TD algorithm has similar dropping rates, while the curve of batched TD algo-
  rithm drops slower. In terms of error level, all algorithms converge to a comparable mean squared
  Bellman error, which is around 2. On the other hand, the consensus errors in the right column of
  Figure 9-13, of all algorithms are close to 0, although local TD-update algorithm may have a rel-
  atively high error level depending on the network topology. In Figure 8, we present the topology
  effect on our proposed algorithm. It is, in general, as the network becomes more and more connected
  the consensus error fluctuates less. Intuitively, with better connected network, after local consensus
  aggregation, the parameter can be closer to the global average of the network.


                                                                        30
                                                                                                                                           Ring Network
                                                                                                                                           4-Regular Network
                                                                        25                                                                 6-Regular Network
                                           Mean Squared Bellman Error


                                                                                                                                           ER Network
                                                                                                                                           Complete Network
                                                                        20

                                                                        15

                                                                        10

                                                                        5

                                                                        00           2000             4000                          6000      8000            10000
                                                                                                     Sample Number
                                                                             Figure 8: Topology on Local TD Algorithm


                             30                                                                                                   0.15
                                                                               TD learning with local step                                                              TD learning with local step
                                                                               Vanilla TD learning                                                                      Vanilla TD learning
                             25                                                TD learning with batch                                                                   TD learning with batch
Mean Squared Bellman Error


                             20                                                                                                   0.10
                                                                                                                Consensus Error


                             15

                             10                                                                                                   0.05

                             5

                             00                                                                                                   0.000    2000        4000           6000         8000          10000
                                   2000        4000                          6000         8000          10000
                                           Sample Number                                                                                              Sample Number
                                  (a) Mean Squared Bellman Error                                                                                  (b) Consensus Error

                                                Figure 9: Comparison among Algorithms in Ring Network
                                                                                                             16
  Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                             30                                                                           0.15
                                                       TD learning with local step                                                      TD learning with local step
                                                       Vanilla TD learning                                                              Vanilla TD learning
                             25                        TD learning with batch                                                           TD learning with batch
Mean Squared Bellman Error
                             20                                                                           0.10


                                                                                        Consensus Error
                             15

                             10                                                                           0.05

                             5

                             00                                                                           0.000   2000        4000    6000         8000          10000
                                   2000     4000     6000         8000          10000
                                            Sample Number                                                                    Sample Number
                                  (a) Mean Squared Bellman Error                                                         (b) Consensus Error

                                          Figure 10: Comparison among Algorithms in 4-Regular Network


                             30                                                                           0.15
                                                       TD learning with local step                                                      TD learning with local step
                                                       Vanilla TD learning                                                              Vanilla TD learning
                             25                        TD learning with batch                                                           TD learning with batch
Mean Squared Bellman Error


                             20                                                                           0.10
                                                                                        Consensus Error


                             15

                             10                                                                           0.05

                             5

                             00                                                                           0.000   2000        4000    6000         8000          10000
                                   2000     4000     6000         8000          10000
                                            Sample Number                                                                    Sample Number
                                  (a) Mean Squared Bellman Error                                                         (b) Consensus Error

                                          Figure 11: Comparison among Algorithms in 6-Regular Network


                             30                                                                           0.15
                                                       TD learning with local step                                                      TD learning with local step
                                                       Vanilla TD learning                                                              Vanilla TD learning
                             25                        TD learning with batch                                                           TD learning with batch
Mean Squared Bellman Error


                             20                                                                           0.10
                                                                                        Consensus Error


                             15

                             10                                                                           0.05

                             5

                             00                                                                           0.000   2000        4000    6000         8000          10000
                                   2000     4000     6000         8000          10000
                                            Sample Number                                                                    Sample Number
                                  (a) Mean Squared Bellman Error                                                         (b) Consensus Error

                                             Figure 12: Comparison among Algorithms in ER Network
                                                                                     17
  Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                             30                                                                                                       0.15
                                                                                   TD learning with local step                                                                     TD learning with local step
                                                                                   Vanilla TD learning                                                                             Vanilla TD learning
                             25                                                    TD learning with batch                                                                          TD learning with batch
Mean Squared Bellman Error
                             20                                                                                                       0.10


                                                                                                                    Consensus Error
                             15

                             10                                                                                                       0.05

                             5

                             00                                                                                                       0.000         2000          4000           6000         8000          10000
                                      2000         4000                          6000         8000          10000
                                               Sample Number                                                                                                     Sample Number
                                    (a) Mean Squared Bellman Error                                                                                         (b) Consensus Error

                                             Figure 13: Comparison among Algorithms in Complete Network


  In addition, we have compared different pairs of local step and communication round for our pro-
  posed algorithm and different pairs of batch size and communication round for batch TD algorithm
  in Figure 14 for cooperative navigation task. In this setting, all algorithms converge to a similar
  Bellman error level. However, the convergence for local TD algorithm is faster than batch TD al-
  gorithms in all parameter settings. Moreover, with the increase of batch size, batch TD algorithm
  seems to converge slower while with the increase of local step, local TD algorithm convergence
  increases in general but not significantly.


                                                                            30
                                                                                                                                       Vanilla TD Learning
                                                                                                                                       local TD learning with K=5, L=2000
                                                                                                                                       local TD learning with K=10, L=1000
                                                                            25                                                         local TD learning with K=20, L=500
                                               Mean Squared Bellman Error


                                                                                                                                       local TD learning with K=40, L=250
                                                                                                                                       Batch TD learning with M=5,L=2000
                                                                                                                                       Batch TD learning with M=10,L=1000
                                                                            20                                                         Batch TD learning with M=20,L=500
                                                                                                                                       Batch TD learning with M=40,L=250

                                                                            15

                                                                            10

                                                                            5

                                                                            00           2000             4000                          6000            8000             10000
                                                                                                         Sample Number
                                                                                        Figure 14: Additional Comparisons



   B.4                            C ONVERGENCE P ERFORMANCE W ITH R ESPECT TO C OMMUNICATION ROUNDS

  In Figure 15, we provide the convergence results with respect to the communication rounds for
  all algorithms, where the local step K = 20 for local TD-update algorithm and the batch size is
  10 for batch TD algorithm. We can see that within 500 communication rounds, local TD-update
  algorithm converges faster than batched TD algorithm and vanilla TD algorithm to a very similar
  error level. Within 1000 communication rounds, batched TD algorithm and vanilla TD algorithm
  performs similarly. The performance of these algorithms is not affected by the network topology
  being used.


                                                                                                                 18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                   30                                                                                                                         30                                                                                                                                       30
                                                                                               TD learning with local step                                                                                                              TD learning with local step                                                                                   TD learning with local step
                                                                                               Vanilla TD learning                                                                                                                      Vanilla TD learning                                                                                           Vanilla TD learning
                                   25                                                          TD learning with batch                                         25                                                                        TD learning with batch                                         25                                             TD learning with batch


      Mean Squared Bellman Error


                                                                                                                                 Mean Squared Bellman Error


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Mean Squared Bellman Error
                                   20                                                                                                                         20                                                                                                                                       20

                                   15                                                                                                                         15                                                                                                                                       15

                                   10                                                                                                                         10                                                                                                                                       10

                                    5                                                                                                                          5                                                                                                                                        5

                                    00          500                                               1000                   1500                                  00                        500                                              1000                    1500                                  00                        500                   1000                    1500
                                                Communication Round                                                                                                                     Communication Round                                                                                                                       Communication Round

                                          (a) ring network                                                                                                                (b) 4-regular network                                                                                                                   (c) 6-regular network
                                                                                          30                                                                                                                                       30
                                                                                                                                                                     TD learning with local step                                                                                                             TD learning with local step
                                                                                                                                                                     Vanilla TD learning                                                                                                                     Vanilla TD learning
                                                                                          25                                                                         TD learning with batch                                        25                                                                        TD learning with batch
                                                             Mean Squared Bellman Error


                                                                                                                                                                                                      Mean Squared Bellman Error
                                                                                          20                                                                                                                                       20

                                                                                          15                                                                                                                                       15

                                                                                          10                                                                                                                                       10

                                                                                          5                                                                                                                                        5

                                                                                          00                       500                                                 1000                    1500                                00                       500                                                1000                     1500
                                                                                                                  Communication Round                                                                                                                      Communication Round

                                                                                                            (d) ER network                                                                                                                   (e) complete network

                                                             Figure 15: Convergence Respect to Communication Rounds


B.5                            I MPACTS OF THE NUMBER OF LOCAL STEPS ON CONVERGENCE

Next, we illustrate the effect of the number of local steps K on the convergence for our proposed
algorithm. In Figure 16, we vary the number of local steps from K = 10 to K = 200. The right
column is the consensus error of first 2000 samples, which displays a better view. As the number of
local steps increases, the mean squared Bellman error converges to a higher error level, on the other
hand, the consensus error oscillates more. In summary, larger local steps helps with saving more
communication cost while it also result in converging to a higher mean squared Bellman error and a
greater fluctuation of the consensus error. This conclusion also echoes with the synthetic experiment
results in A.3.


                                   30                                                                                                                         0.5                                                                                                                                      0.5
                                                                                                                  K=10                                                                                                                                     K=10                                                                                                           K=10
                                                                                                                  K=20                                                                                                                                     K=20                                                                                                           K=20
                                   25                                                                             K=50                                                                                                                                     K=50                                                                                                           K=50
      Mean Squared Bellman Error


                                                                                                                  K=100                                       0.4                                                                                          K=100                                       0.4                                                                K=100
                                                                                                                  K=200                                                                                                                                    K=200                                                                                                          K=200
                                   20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Consensus Error
                                                                                                                                 Consensus Error


                                                                                                                                                              0.3                                                                                                                                      0.3
                                   15
                                                                                                                                                              0.2                                                                                                                                      0.2
                                   10

                                                                                                                                                              0.1                                                                                                                                      0.1
                                   5

                                   00                                                                                                                         0.00             2000            4000                                 6000           8000           10000                                0.00
                                         2000         4000                                 6000           8000           10000                                                                                                                                                                                              500                1000            1500             2000
                                                  Sample Number                                                                                                                              Sample Number                                                                                                                           Sample Number

          (a) Mean Squared Bellman Error                                                                                                                                    (b) Consensus Error                                                                                                        (c) Zoomed Consensus Error

                                         Figure 16: Comparison among Different Local Steps in 4 Regular Network


B.6                            I MPACTS OF S TEP S IZE ON CONVERGENCE

Here, we illustrate the effect of step size β on the convergence for our proposed algorithm and
batched TD algorithm over a 4-regular network. First of all, we can take a look at batch TD algorithm
displayed on Figure 17-19 over various batch sizes. The brown line shows the performance of our
proposed algorithm to help compare with batch TD algorithm. In general, in terms of mean squared
Bellman error, larger step size β leads to faster convergence speed and larger error level. Smaller
step size β leads to slower convergence speed, but could eventually converge to a smaller error level.
Also, larger step size β results in a greater consensus error. Thus, we set step size β = 0.1 and batch
size to be 10 for batch TD algorithm.


                                                                                                                                                                                                   19
  Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                             40                                                                      0.5
                                                            = 0.01                                                                        = 0.01
                             35                             = 0.05                                                                        = 0.05
                                                            = 0.1                                                                         = 0.1
Mean Squared Bellman Error   30                             = 0.2                                    0.4                                  = 0.2
                                                            = 0.5                                                                         = 0.5


                                                                                   Consensus Error
                             25                            TD with local step                                                            TD with local step
                                                                                                     0.3
                             20

                             15                                                                      0.2

                             10
                                                                                                     0.1
                             5

                             00                                                                      0.00   2000       4000     6000       8000          10000
                                   2000     4000    6000     8000          10000
                                           Sample Number                                                               Sample Number
                                  (a) Mean Squared Bellman Error                                                   (b) Consensus Error

  Figure 17: Comparison among Different step sizes β for TD Learning with Batch Size 5 in 4 Regular
  Network

                             40                                                                      0.5
                                                            = 0.01                                                                        = 0.01
                             35                             = 0.05                                                                        = 0.05
                                                            = 0.1                                                                         = 0.1
Mean Squared Bellman Error


                                                            = 0.2                                    0.4                                  = 0.2
                             30
                                                            = 0.5                                                                         = 0.5
                                                                                   Consensus Error

                             25                            TD with local step                                                            TD with local step
                                                                                                     0.3
                             20

                             15                                                                      0.2

                             10
                                                                                                     0.1
                             5

                             00                                                                      0.00   2000       4000     6000       8000          10000
                                   2000     4000    6000     8000          10000
                                           Sample Number                                                               Sample Number
                                  (a) Mean Squared Bellman Error                                                   (b) Consensus Error

  Figure 18: Comparison among Different step sizes β for TD Learning with Batch Size 10 in 4
  Regular Network

                             40                                                                      0.5
                                                            = 0.01                                                                        = 0.01
                             35                             = 0.05                                                                        = 0.05
                                                            = 0.1                                                                         = 0.1
Mean Squared Bellman Error


                                                            = 0.2                                    0.4                                  = 0.2
                             30
                                                            = 0.5                                                                         = 0.5
                                                                                   Consensus Error


                             25                            TD with local step                                                            TD with local step
                                                                                                     0.3
                             20

                             15                                                                      0.2

                             10
                                                                                                     0.1
                             5

                             00                                                                      0.00   2000       4000     6000       8000          10000
                                   2000     4000    6000     8000          10000
                                           Sample Number                                                               Sample Number
                                  (a) Mean Squared Bellman Error                                                   (b) Consensus Error

  Figure 19: Comparison among Different step size β for TD Learning with Batch Size 20 in 4 Regular
  Network
  As shown in Figure 20-22, similar to batch TD algorithm, larger step size β leads to faster conver-
  gence speed and larger mean squared Bellman and consensus error level in local TD-update algo-
  rithm. However, the error differences among different step sizes β are not that significant compared


                                                                                20
  Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


  to batch TD algorithm. In order to balance among convergence speed, error level, and communica-
  tion cost, we decide to use step size β = 0.05 and local step K = 20. In this way, we could have a
  fast convergence speed, low communication cost, and a relatively low error level.

                             30                                                                    0.35
                                                                    = 0.005                                                                    = 0.005
                                                                    = 0.01                                                                     = 0.01
                             25                                     = 0.05                                                                     = 0.05
Mean Squared Bellman Error


                                                                    = 0.1                          0.28                                        = 0.1
                             20


                                                                                 Consensus Error
                                                                                                   0.21
                             15
                                                                                                   0.14
                             10

                                                                                                   0.07
                             5

                             00                                                                    0.000   2000        4000    6000     8000        10000
                                   2000     4000    6000     8000        10000
                                           Sample Number                                                              Sample Number
                                  (a) Mean Squared Bellman Error                                                  (b) Consensus Error

  Figure 20: Comparison among Different step sizes β for TD Learning with Local Step K = 10 in 4
  Regular Network

                             30                                                                    0.35
                                                                    = 0.005                                                                    = 0.005
                                                                    = 0.01                                                                     = 0.01
                             25                                     = 0.05                                                                     = 0.05
Mean Squared Bellman Error


                                                                    = 0.1                          0.28                                        = 0.1
                             20
                                                                                 Consensus Error


                                                                                                   0.21
                             15
                                                                                                   0.14
                             10

                                                                                                   0.07
                             5

                             00                                                                    0.000   2000        4000    6000     8000        10000
                                   2000     4000    6000     8000        10000
                                           Sample Number                                                              Sample Number
                                  (a) Mean Squared Bellman Error                                                  (b) Consensus Error

  Figure 21: Comparison among Different step sizes β for TD Learning with Local Step K = 20 in 4
  Regular Network

                             30                                                                    0.35
                                                                    = 0.005                                                                    = 0.005
                                                                    = 0.01                                                                     = 0.01
                             25                                     = 0.05                                                                     = 0.05
Mean Squared Bellman Error


                                                                    = 0.1                          0.28                                        = 0.1
                             20
                                                                                 Consensus Error


                                                                                                   0.21
                             15
                                                                                                   0.14
                             10

                                                                                                   0.07
                             5

                             00                                                                    0.000   2000        4000    6000     8000        10000
                                   2000     4000    6000     8000        10000
                                           Sample Number                                                              Sample Number
                                  (a) Mean Squared Bellman Error                                                  (b) Consensus Error

  Figure 22: Comparison among Different step sizes β for TD Learning with Local Step K = 50 in 4
  Regular Network
                                                                              21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


C     P ROOFS OF L EMMAS AND T HEOREM

In this section, we provide the derivation for the consensus error. Then, we prove the Lemma 1,
provide detailed discussion for Lemma 2 and the proof of Theorem 1.

C.1   T HE DERIVATION OF CONSENSUS ERROR
                                                                     i
Within each communication round 0 ≤ l ≤ L − 1, the parameter update wl,k for agent i at local
step k can be written as follows
              i        i       i
             wl,k+1 = wl,k + βδl,k · ϕ(sl,k )
                     = I + βϕ(sl,k )[γϕ(sl,k+1 ) − ϕ(sl,k )]T wl,k
                                                               i       i
                                                                   + βrl,k+1 ϕ(sl,k )
                             i
                     = Bl,k wl,k + cil,k                                                                             (10)

where Bl,k := I + βϕ(sl,k )[γϕ(sl,k+1 ) − ϕ(sl,k )]T and cil,k := βrl,k+1
                                                                    i
                                                                          ϕ(sl,k ). Then, from local
step 0 to K − 1, we have
                                          K−1
                                          Y                      K−1
                                                                 X K−1
                                                                     Y
                                 i                      i
                                wl,K =            Bl,k wl,0 +                  Bl,n cil,k .
                                            k=0                  k=0 n=k+1


After a consensus update, the parameter for agent i will be
                      X               j
              i
            wl+1,0 =       A(i, j) · wl,K
                         j∈Ni
                                              K−1                  K−1
                                                                                                  !
                         X                    Y            j
                                                                   X K−1
                                                                       Y
                     =          A(i, j) ·            Bl,k wl,0 +                     Bl,n cjl,k
                         j∈Ni                 k=0                  k=0 n=k+1

                         X                  K−1
                                            Y                    X                   K−1
                                                                                     X K−1
                                                                                         Y
                                                         j
                     =          A(i, j) ·          Bl,k wl,0 +           A(i, j) ·                    Bl,n cjl,k .
                         j∈Ni               k=0                  j∈Ni                k=0 n=k+1

The equation above shows the parameter update between two consecutive communication rounds.
NowP we consider   the average dynamics of the parameters across all agents. Recall w̄l,k =
 1         i
N        w
     i∈N l,k , then  within each communication round 0 ≤ l ≤ L − 1, using equation 10 we
have
                                         1 X i
                               w̄l,k+1 =          wl,k+1
                                         N
                                            i∈N
                                         1 X             i
                                       =          (Bl,k wl,k + cil,k )
                                         N
                                            i∈N
                                                       1 X i
                                       = Bl,k w̄l,k +         cl,k
                                                       N
                                                                        i∈N
                                                  = Bl,k w̄l,k + c̄l,k                                               (11)
               1        i
                 P
where c̄l,k := N   i∈N cl,k . Hence, the average dynamics from local step 0 to K − 1 will be

                                          K−1
                                          Y                      K−1
                                                                 X K−1
                                                                     Y
                                w̄l,K =           Bl,k w̄l,0 +                 Bl,n c̄l,k .
                                            k=0                  k=0 n=k+1

After a consensus update, we have
                                                    w̄l+1,0 = w̄l,K .                                                (12)
Note that the equation above means that consensus step will not change the average dynamics and
average dynamic will only be updated during local steps.


                                                           22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


For an agent i ∈ N , we consider the consensus error at communication round l and local step k,
where 0 ≤ k ≤ K − 1 and recall Qil,k = wl,k
                                         i
                                            − w̄l,k . Then, we have

                                    Qil,k+1 =wl,k+1
                                              i
                                                    − w̄l,k+1
                                                      i
                                               =Bl,k wl,k + cil,k − Bl,k w̄l,k − c̄l,k
                                                       i
                                               =Bl,k (wl,k − w̄l,k ) + cil,k − c̄l,k
                                               =Bl,k Qil,k + cil,k − c̄l,k .

Then, for the matrix form Ql,k = [Q1l,k , · · · , QN
                                                   l,k ] ∈ R
                                                             d×N
                                                                 , we have
                                                                                 1 T
                                      Ql,k+1 =Bl,k Ql,k + Cl,k (I −                11 )
                                                                                 N
where Cl,k := [c1l,k · · · cN
                            l,k ] and 1 denotes the all-1 column vector. Then, for communication round
l, we have
                                     K−1                     K−1
                                                             X K−1
                                     Y                           Y                           1 T
                            Ql,K =            Bl,k Ql,0 +                  Bl,t̃ Cl,k (I −     11 )
                                                             t=0 t̃>t
                                                                                             N
                                      k=0

After a consensus update, we have
                                              X              j
                      i
                     wl+1,0 − w̄l,k =                A(i, j)wl,K − w̄l,K
                                              j∈Ni
                                              X               j
                                                                                       X
                                          =          A(i, j)(wl,K − w̄l,K ) =                A(i, j)Qjl,K .
                                              j∈Ni                                   j∈Ni

As a result, we have
                     Ql+1,0 = Ql,K AT
                                    K−1                       X K−1
                                                              K−1
                                    Y
                                                        T
                                                                  Y                          1 T T
                                =         Bl,k Ql,0 A +                    Bl,t̃ Cl,t (I −     11 )A .
                                                              t=0 t̃>t
                                                                                             N
                                    k=0

After L communication rounds, we have
             L−1
             Y K−1                              L−1 Y K−1
                                                X L−1−l                         X K−1
                                                                                K−1
                 Y                                      Y                           Y                        1 T
QL,0 =                   Bl,k Q0,0 (AT )L +                            Bl+j,k              Bl,t̃ Cl,t (I −     11 )(AT )L−l
                                                       j=1                      t=0 t̃>t
                                                                                                             N
             l=0 k=0                            l=0           k=0


Note
PK−1that
       QK−1 for the second term when l = L − 1, inside the summation, the summand becomes
                                   1   T  T
  t=0     t̃>t BL−1,t̃ CL−1,t (I − N 11 )A . In other words, the matrix multiplier in front becomes
an identity matrix.

C.2     P ROOF OF L EMMA 1

The norm of the consensus error is following
   ||QL,0 ||
       L−1
       Y K−1                               L−1
                                           X L−1−l
                                               Y K−1                       K−1
                                                                           X K−1
           Y                                       Y                           Y                         1 T
 =||               Bl,k Q0,0 (AT )L +                             Bl+j,k               Bl,t̃ Cl,t (I −     11 )(AT )L−l ||
                                                     j=1                    t=0 t̃>t
                                                                                                         N
       l=0 k=0                                l=0           k=0
       L−1
       Y K−1
           Y
 ≤||               Bl,k Q0,0 (AT )L ||
       l=0 k=0
             L−1
             X L−1−l
                 Y K−1                   K−1
                                         X K−1
                     Y                       Y                           1 T
      + ||                      Bl+j,k                Bl,t̃ Cl,t (I −      11 )(AT )L−l ||.                            (13)
                   j=1                    t=0 t̃>t
                                                                         N
             l=0          k=0



                                                                  23
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Before obtaining bounds on the terms of the consensus error in equation 13, we first provide some
useful bounds on Bl,k and Cl,k . First, we have
                        ||Bl,k || = ||I + βϕ(sl,k )[γϕ(sl,k+1 ) − ϕ(sl,k )]T ||
                                 ≤ 1 + β||ϕ(sl,k )||(γ||ϕ(sl,k+1 )|| + ||ϕ(sl,k )]T ||)
                                 ≤ 1 + β(1 + γ) < 1 + 2β
                                                                               √
where the second inequality is due to Assumption 4. Then, we have ||Ck,l || ≤ β N rmax , where
rmax = supi,s,a ri (s, a) by Assumption 2. This is because
                                                      1                N
                             ||Ck,l || = ||βϕ(sk,l )(rk,l+1 , · · · , rl,k+1 )||
                                                             1                N
                                       ≤ β||ϕ(sk,l )|| · ||(rk,l+1 , · · · , rl,k+1 )||
                                          √
                                       = β N rmax .

Next, inspired by Srikant & Ying (2019), we want to use the following bound
                                            (1 + x)K ≤ 1 + 2xK
for small x. Note that
                                       (1 + x)K |x=0 = 1 + 2xK|x=0
             log 2
and when x ≤ K−1   ,
                 ∂                                                     ∂
                   (1 + x)K = K(1 + x)K−1 ≤ Kex(K−1) ≤ 2K =              (1 + 2xK)
                ∂x                                                    ∂x
where the first inequality is due to the fact log(1 + x) ≤ x for x ≥ 0 and the second inequality is
                     log 2                         1     log 2
due to the fact x ≤ K−1    . Let 2β = x and β ≤ 2K   ≤ 2(K−1)  .
                                             1
For the first term in equation 13, when β ≤ 2K , we have that
                       Y K−1
                       L−1 Y                                Y K−1
                                                            L−1 Y
                  ||             Bl,k Q0,0 (AT )L || ≤ ||              Bl,k || · ||Q0,0 (AT )L ||
                       l=0 k=0                               l=0 k=0
                                                      ≤ κ(1 + 2β)KL (1 − η N −1 )L
                                                      ≤ κ(1 + 4βK)L (1 − η N −1 )L
                                                      = κρL
                                                                                                N −1
                                                                        η
where we define ρ := (1 + 4βK)(1 − η N −1 ). When 0 < βK < min{ 12 , 4(1−η N −1 ) }, we have

0 < ρ < 1. The second inequality comes from the following two results.
First, consider the case where A is a symmetric matrix for simplicity, then we have
                                                          1
                   ||Q0,0 AL                 L
                           1,: || = ||Q0,0 A1,: − Q0,0      1||
                                                          N
                                       X             1
                                  = ||     (AL1,i −     )Qi ||
                                                    N 0,0
                                       i∈N
                                    X              1
                                  ≤      |AL1,i −    | · ||Qi0,0 ||
                                                   N
                                      i∈N

                                          1 + η −(N −1)
                                   ≤N ·2                 (1 − η N −1 )L · max ||Qi0,0 ||
                                            1 − η N −1                    i∈N

                                        1 + η −(N −1)
                                   ≤ 2N                (1 − η N −1 )L · ||Q0,0 ||,
                                          1 − η N −1
where the second inequality is from Nedic & Ozdaglar (2009) (Proposition 1). Hence, ||Q0,0 AL || ≤
        −(N −1)                                                                                        −(N −1)
2N 2 1+η
      1−η N −1
               (1 − η N −1 )L · ||Q0,0 || = κ1 (1 − η N −1 )L ||Q0,0 ||, where κ1 = 2N 2 1+η
                                                                                          1−η N −1
                                                                                                   .


                                                        24
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Second, we have
                                        L−1
                                        Y K−1
                                            Y                   L−1
                                                                Y K−1
                                                                    Y
                                   ||               Bl,k || ≤               ||Bl,k ||
                                        l=0 k=0                 l=0 k=0
                                                                L−1
                                                                Y K−1
                                                                    Y
                                                            ≤               (1 + 2β) = (1 + 2β)KL .
                                                                l=0 k=0

To bound the second term of equation 13, we have
              1                           1
      ||(I − 11T )AL−l || = ||AL−l − 11T || ≤ 2N 2 (1 + η −(N −1) )(1 − η N −1 )L−l−1 .
             N                           N
where the inequality is also from Nedic & Ozdaglar (2009) (Proposition 1). Then, we also have
                                                     K−1
                                                     X K−1
                                                         Y
                                                                 ||Bl,t̃ || · ||Cl,t ||
                                                     t=0 t̃>t
                                                     K−1
                                                     X                      √
                                                 ≤         (1 + 2β)K−1−t · β N rmax
                                                     t=0
                                                           K−1
                                                   √       X
                                                 =β N rmax    (1 + 2β)K−1−t
                                                                   t=0
                                                           √
                                ≤2βK N rmax .
Then, for the multipliers, we have
                             L−1−l
                              Y K−1Y
                        ||                     Bl+j,k || ≤ (1 + 2β)(L−l−1)K ≤ (1 + 4βK)L−l−1 .
                              j=1        k=0
Finally, for the second term in consensus error equation 13, we have
                  L−1
                  X L−1−l
                      Y K−1                            X K−1
                                                       K−1
                          Y                                Y                              1 T
             ||                               Bl+j,k               Bl,t̃ Cl,t (I −          11 )(AT )L−l ||
                             j=1                       t=0 t̃>t
                                                                                          N
                  l=0                   k=0
             L−1          Y K−1
                         L−1−l                                 X K−1
                                                               K−1
             X                 Y                                   Y                               1 T
         ≤          ||                        Bl+j,k || · ||              Bl,t̃ Cl,t || · ||(I −     11 )(AT )L−l ||
                             j=1                               t=0 t̃>t
                                                                                                   N
              l=0                       k=0
             L−1
             X                          √
         ≤          (1 + 4βK)L−l−1 · 2βK N rmax · 2N 2 (1 + η −(N −1) )(1 − η N −1 )L−l−1
              l=0
                         L−1
                         X
         ≤κ2 βK                    ρL−l−1
                             l=0
           κ2 βK
         ≤
           1−ρ
                                                5
where κ2 = 4(1 + η −(N −1) )N 2 rmax .
As a result, we have the results consensus bound of equation 7 in Lemma 1.

C.3   D ETAILS ON L EMMA 2

Recall the average parameter dynamic from equation 11, which is in among consecutive communi-
cation rounds, and equation 12, after a consensus   update. The average parameter is signaled by the
true average of the rewards, i.e. r̄l,k = N1 i∈N rl,k
                                                    i
                                             P
                                                       during both the local TD steps and consensus
steps. Therefore, it behaves like conventional TD update in a single agent setting. By Theorem 7 in
Srikant & Ying (2019), we have following results
                                                                        rmax 2
              E[||w̄L,0 − w∗ ||2 ] ≤ c2 (1 − c1 β)KL−τ (||w̄0 − w∗ || +     ) + c3 βτ.
                                                                         3


                                                                       25
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


where τ is a mixing time. Under Assumption 1, τ = O(log β1 ). To specify the constants c1 , c2 , c3 ,
we introduce the Lyapunov equation. Recall the definition of Ψ in equation 3, which is negative
definite Tsitsiklis & Van Roy (1997). So we have a symmetric matrix U > 0 Srikant & Ying (2019)
such that
                                            ΨT U + U Ψ + I = 0
which is called the Lyapunov equation. For symmetric matrix U , there exist largest and smallest
eigenvalues λmax and λmin respectively. In addition, λmax and λmin are both positive. So, the
constants are
                                   0.9
                             c1 =       ,
                                  λmax
                                       λmax
                             c2 = 2.25      ,
                                       λmin
                                  2λ2 (r2 + 55(1 + rmax )3 )
                             c3 = max max                       .
                                              0.9λmin

C.4   P ROOF OF THE T HEOREM 1

For the mean square error, we have
                           XN
                         E[     i
                              ∥wL,0 − w∗ ∥2 ]
                            i=1
                          XN
                       =E[     i
                             ∥wL,0 − w̄L,0 + w̄L,0 − w∗ ∥2 ]
                            i=1
                              N
                              X                                N
                                                               X
                       ≤2E[           i
                                    ∥wL,0 − w̄L,0 ∥2 ] + 2E[       ∥w̄L,0 − w∗ ∥2 ]
                              i=1                              i=1
                                        2                        ∗ 2
                       ≤2dE[∥QL,0 ∥ ] + 2N E[∥w̄L,0 − w ∥ ]                                     (14)
where
√      the first inequality is due to ∥x + y∥2 ≤ 2∥x∥2 + 2∥y∥2 and the second inequality ∥X∥F ≤
  d∥X∥ for X ∈ Rd×N . Then, the stated result in equation 9 follows from Lemmas 1 and 2, and
equation 14.
This concludes the proof.


                                                   26
