Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


F ED HPO-B ENCH : A B ENCHMARK S UITE FOR F EDER -
ATED H YPERPARAMETER O PTIMIZATION

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT
         Hyperparameter optimization (HPO) is crucial for machine learning algorithms
         to achieve satisfactory performance. Its research progress has been boosted by
         existing HPO benchmarks. Nonetheless, existing efforts in benchmarking all focus
         on HPO for traditional centralized learning while ignoring federated learning (FL),
         a promising paradigm for collaboratively learning models from dispersed data.
         In this paper, we first identify some uniqueness of HPO for FL algorithms from
         various aspects. Due to this uniqueness, existing HPO benchmarks no longer
         satisfy the need to compare HPO methods in the FL setting. To facilitate the
         research of HPO in the FL setting, we propose and implement a benchmark suite
         F ED HPO-B ENCH that incorporates comprehensive FedHPO problems, enables
         flexible customization of the function evaluations, and eases continuing extensions.
         We also conduct extensive experiments based on F ED HPO-B ENCH to provide the
         community with more insights into FedHPO. We open-sourced F ED HPO-B ENCH
         at https://github.com/FedHPO-Bench/FedHPO-Bench-ICLR23


1   I NTRODUCTION
Most machine learning (ML) algorithms expose many design choices, which can drastically impact
the ultimate performance. Hyperparameter optimization (HPO) (Feurer & Hutter, 2019) aims at
making the right choices without human intervention. To this end, HPO methods usually attempt
to solve minλ∈Λ1 ×···×ΛK f (λ), where each Λk corresponds to the candidate choices of a specific
hyperparameter, e.g., taking the learning rate from Λ1 = [0.01, 1.0] and the batch size from Λ2 =
{16, 32, 64}. For each specified λ, f (λ) is the output result (e.g., validation loss) of executing the
considered algorithm configured by λ. A solution λ∗ found for such a problem is expected to make
the considered algorithm lead to superior generalization performance. Research in this line has been
facilitated by HPO benchmarks (Gijsbers et al., 2019; Eggensperger et al., 2021; Pineda-Arango
et al., 2021), which prepare many HPO problems so that different HPO methods can be effortlessly
compared, encouraging fair, reliable, and reproducible empirical studies.
However, existing HPO benchmarks all focus on traditional learning paradigms, where the functions
to be optimized correspond to centralized learning tasks. Federated learning (FL) (McMahan et al.,
2017; Li et al., 2020a), as a privacy-preserving paradigm for collaboratively learning a model from
distributed data, has not been considered. Actually, along with the increasing privacy concerns from
the whole society, FL has been gaining more attention from academia and industry. Meanwhile, HPO
for FL algorithms (denoted by FedHPO from now on) is identified as a critical and promising open
problem in FL (Kairouz et al., 2019).
In this paper, we first elaborate on several differences between FedHPO and traditional HPO (see
Section 2.2), which essentially come from FL’s distributed nature and the heterogeneity among FL’s
participants. These differences make existing HPO benchmarks inappropriate for studying FedHPO
and, in particular, unusable for comparing FedHPO methods. Consequently, several recently proposed
FedHPO methods (Zhou et al., 2021; Dai et al., 2020; Khodak et al., 2021; Zhang et al., 2021; Guo
et al., 2022) are evaluated on respective problems and have not been uniformly implemented in one
FL framework and well benchmarked.
Motivated by FedHPO’s uniqueness and the successes of existing HPO benchmarks, we propose and
implement F ED HPO-B ENCH, a dedicated benchmark suite, to facilitate the research and application
of FedHPO. F ED HPO-B ENCH is featured by satisfying the desiderata as follows:


                                                  1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Comprehensiveness. FL tasks are diverse in terms of domain, model architecture, heterogeneity
among participants, etc. The objective functions of their corresponding FedHPO problems are thus
likely to be diverse. Hence, F ED HPO-B ENCH provides a comprehensive collection of FedHPO
problems for drawing an unbiased conclusion from comparisons of HPO methods.
Flexibility. Users may have different levels of privacy and fairness concerns, which may correspond
to different multi-objective optimization problems. Meanwhile, the execution time for function
evaluation depends on the system condition. Thus, F ED HPO-B ENCH allows users to flexibly tailor
the FedHPO problems to their privacy protection needs, fairness demands, and system conditions.
Extensibility. As a developing field, new FedHPO problems and novel FedHPO methods constantly
emerge, and FL’s best practice continuously evolves. Thus, we build F ED HPO-B ENCH on a popular
FL framework, FederatedScope (FS) (Xie et al., 2022), and make it more of a benchmarking tool that
can effortlessly incorporate novel ingredients.
To our knowledge, F ED HPO-B ENCH is the first FedHPO benchmark. We conduct extensive empirical
studies with it to validate its usability and attain more insights into FedHPO.

2     BACKGROUND AND M OTIVATIONS
We first give a brief introduction to the settings of HPO and its related benchmarks. Then we present
and explain the uniqueness of FedHPO to show the demand for dedicated FedHPO benchmarks. Due
to the space limitation, more discussions about related works are deferred to Appendix B.

2.1   P ROBLEM S ETTINGS AND E XISTING B ENCHMARKS

In the literature (Feurer & Hutter, 2019), HPO is often formulated as solving minλ∈Λ1 ×···×ΛK f (λ),
where each Λk corresponds to candidate choices of a specific hyperparameter, and their Cartesian
product (denoted by ×) constitute the search space. In practice, such Λk is often bounded and can
be continuous (e.g., an interval of real numbers) or discrete (e.g., a set of categories/integers). Each
function evaluation at a specified hyperparameter configuration λ means to execute the corresponding
algorithm accordingly and return the value of considered metric (e.g., validation loss) as the result
f (λ). HPO methods generally solve such a problem with a series of function evaluations. As a full-
fidelity function evaluation is extremely costly, multi-fidelity methods exploit low-fidelity function
evaluation, e.g., training for fewer epochs (Swersky et al., 2014; Domhan et al., 2015) or on a subset
of data (Klein et al., 2017; Petrak, 2000; Swersky et al., 2013), to approximate the exact result. Thus,
it would be convenient to treat f as f (λ, b), λ ∈ Λ1 × · · · × ΛK , b ∈ B1 × · · · × BL , where each Bl
corresponds to the possible choices of a specific fidelity dimension.
HPO benchmarks (Gijsbers et al., 2019; Eggensperger et al., 2021; Pineda-Arango et al., 2021) have
prepared many HPO problems, i.e., various kinds of objective functions, for comparing HPO methods.
To evaluate these functions, HPO benchmarks, e.g., HPOBench (Eggensperger et al., 2021), often
provide three modes: (1) “Raw” means truly executing the corresponding algorithm; (2) “Tabular”
means querying a lookup table, where each entry corresponds to a specific f (λ, b); (3) “Surrogate”
means querying a surrogate model that might be trained on the tabular data.

2.2   U NIQUENESS OF F EDERATED H YPERPARAMETER O PTIMIZATION

Generally, traditional HPO methods are applicable to FedHPO problems1 , where, in each trial, the
value f (λ, b) is evaluated, that is to say, an accordingly configured FL training course is conducted,
as the dashed black box in Figure 1 illustrates. Conceptually, there are N clients, each of which has
its specific data, and a server coordinates them to learn a model θ collaboratively by an FL algorithm
such as FedAvg (McMahan et al., 2017) and FedOpt (Asad et al., 2020). Such FL algorithms are
iterative. In the t-th round, the server broadcasts the global model θ(t) to sampled clients; then, these
clients make local updates and send the updates back; finally, the server aggregates the updates to
produce θ(t+1) . After executing the FL algorithm configured by λ for several such rounds, e.g.,
#round= T according to the specified fidelity b, the performance, e.g., best validation loss ever
achieved during this FL course, is returned as f (λ, b).
   1
     Despite the various scenarios in literature, we restrict our discussion about FedHPO to one of the most
general FL scenarios that have been adopted in existing FedHPO works (Khodak et al., 2021; Zhang et al., 2021).


                                                      2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                 Standard FL training course                      FedHPO method concurrently explores client-side search space during the course
                                            𝜃 !#$ =
                                                                                                 Server                                            𝜋 !#$ =
                 Server              aggr 𝜃$!#$ , 𝜃( !#$ , …                 𝜃 !#$ =
                                                                                !#$                                                  c         c       c     c    c  c
                                                                 aggr … , 𝜃(           , 𝜃"!#$                      aggr … 𝜆( , 𝑓(                  𝜆(   , 𝜆" , 𝑓" 𝜆"
          𝜃!            𝜃!           !#$
                  !#$          𝜃(
                 𝜃$                                                                                   !#$
                  ……                   ……                                                        𝜃(          ,   𝜃 ! , 𝜆(                             (c)
                                                                                                                                           !#$                c
                                                                                                (c)         c                             𝜃"       , 𝑓"     𝜆"
                                                                                           𝑓(          𝜆(                      𝜃 ! , 𝜆"
       Client$            Client (           Client "

      Traditional                                                                        ……                                 ……
     HPO method                                                Client$                    Client (                                                    Client "
                        𝜆, 𝑏 or 𝜆 s , 𝑏
                                                                         c                                               !#$                                     c        c
                                                                    𝜆(        𝜃!       Local update                 𝜃'             Evaluate                 𝑓(       𝜆(
                  𝑓 𝜆, 𝑏 or 𝑓 𝜆, 𝑏 ,
                         𝜆 = 𝜆 s ,𝜆 c ∗


Figure 1: Solving a FedHPO problem by a traditional HPO method solely or as the wrapper of a FedHPO
method: the t-th round of a trial is shown in the dashed black box and dashed blue box, respectively. The faded
clients are not sampled in that round; “aggr” denotes a certain aggregation operation; here FedEx is considered
                                                                                          (c)
as the wrapped FedHPO method, which learns a policy π to determine λ(c)∗ ; each fi (·) is regarded as a
                                       (s)
client-specific approximation of f (λ , ·).


As a distributed ML scenario, the procedure of each FL training round consists of two subroutines—
local updates and aggregation. Thus, λ can be divided into server-side and client-side hyperparameters
according to which subroutine each hyperparameter influences. Denoting it as λ = (λ(s) , λ(c) ),
the original optimization problem can be straightforwardly restated as its bi-level counterpart
minλ(s) f (λ(s) , λ(c)∗ ), s.t., λ(c)∗ = minλ(c) f (λ(s) , λ(c) ). With such a point of view, let’s see how
some FedHPO methods leverage the distributed nature of FL to solve the lower-level sub-problem
efficiently and approximately.
Concurrent exploration. In each FL training course, all sampled clients have executed local updates
configured by client-side hyperparameters for one or more rounds. Given a specific λ(s) , if we regard
clients as replicas of the black-box function f (λ(s) , ·) or, at least, similar such functions whose evalu-
ation results help fitting f (λ(s) , ·), it is natural to try out client-side hyperparameter configurations
client-wisely so that we evaluate f (λ(s) , λ(c) ) for more than one λ(c) s in each FL training course.
We summarize this idea as concurrent exploration, which recently proposed FedHPO methods, such
as FedEx (Khodak et al., 2021) and FTS (Dai et al., 2020), have instantiated. Specifically, FedEx
incorporates concurrent exploration with the weight-sharing trick (Liu et al., 2019) to achieve one-
shot learning (i.e., by one FL training course) of a policy π for determining the optimal lower-level
response λ(c)∗ = minλ(c) f (λ(s) , λ(c) ). Hence, we could solve the bi-level optimization problem by
letting a traditional HPO method, as a wrapper, choose λ(s)2 and replace each standard FL training
course with a FedHPO method, as the dashed blue box in Figure 1 shows.
As FedHPO methods are fused with the training course, existing HPO benchmarks become unusable
for comparing them. Moreover, since this fusion makes the implementations of such FedHPO methods
tightly coupled with that of FL training courses, and no existing FL framework has incorporated such
FedHPO methods, researchers cannot compare them in a unified way. How we incorporate several
recent FedHPO methods into F ED HPO-B ENCH and make it extensible is discussed in Section 3.3,
and whether concurrent exploration is useful is empirically answered in Section 4.2.
Personalization. The non-IIDness among clients’ data is likely to make them have different optimal
configurations (Koskela & Honkela, 2020), where making decisions by the same policy, such as
FedEx, would become unsatisfactory. This phenomenon tends to become severer when federated
hetero-task learning (Yao et al., 2022) is considered. Trivially solving the personalized FedHPO
                                           (c)          (c)         (c)
problem minλ(s) ,λ(c) ,...,λ(c) f (λ(s) , λ1 , . . . , λN ), where λi denotes the client-side hyperparameter
                   1        N
configuration of the i-th client, is intractable, as the search space exponentially increases with N .
To promote studying personalized FedHPO, we provide a personalized FedHPO problem featured
by heterogeneous tasks among the clients and the corresponding tabular benchmark (see H.1 for a
detailed description).
   2
     In practice, the traditional HPO method also determines the FedHPO algorithm’s hyperparameters and a
subset of the original client-side search space to be explored. We omit these to keep brevity.


                                                                                   3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Multi-objective optimization. Despite the model’s performance, researchers are often concerned
about other issues, such as privacy protection and fairness. Regarding privacy, the FL algorithm is
often incorporated with privacy protection techniques such as differential privacy (DP) (Kairouz et al.,
2019), where the DP algorithm also exposes its hyperparameters. Intuitively, a low privacy budget
specified for such algorithms indicates a lower risk of privacy leakage yet a more significant degrada-
tion of the model’s performance. As for fairness, namely, the uniformity of the model’s performances
across the clients, more and more FL algorithms have taken it into account (Li et al., 2021a; Wang
et al., 2021b), which contains some hyperparameter(s) concerning fairness. Therefore, researchers
may be interested in searching for a hyperparameter configuration that guarantees an acceptable
privacy leakage risk (e.g., measured by Rényi-DP (Mironov, 2017)) and fairness measurement (e.g.,
the standard deviation of client-wise performances) while optimizing the model’s performance.
Thus, a FedHPO benchmark is expected to expose a vector-valued objective function instead of
a scalar-valued one, where the entries of a returned vector could be the quantitative measures
corresponding to performance, privacy leakage risk, fairness, etc. Then, researchers are allowed to
study multi-objective HPO (Hernández et al., 2021; Deb et al., 2002; Abdolshah et al., 2019).
Runtime estimation and system-dependent trade-offs. For the research purpose, an FL train-
ing course is usually simulated in a single computer rather than executed in a distributed sys-
tem. As a result, simply recording the consumed time is meaningless for measuring the cost of
a function evaluation in studying FedHPO. Meanwhile, FL’s distributed nature introduces a new
fidelity dimension—client_sample_rate, which determines the fraction of clients sampled in each
round. When considering a client_sample_rate less than that of a full-fidelity function evaluation,
each round of the FL course would take less time because there is less likely to be a straggler.
However, client_sample_rate correlates with another fidelity dimension—#round, where a lower
client_sample_rate often leads to federated aggregation with larger variance, which is believed to need
more rounds for convergence. How we should balance these two fidelity dimensions to achieve more
economical accuracy-efficiency trade-offs strongly depends on the system condition, e.g., choosing
large #round but small client_sample_rate when the straggler issue is severe.
As existing HPO benchmarks focus on centralized learning tasks, they overlook a runtime estimation
functionality for studying FedHPO. In Section 3.2, we present F ED HPO-B ENCH’s system model,
with which we conduct an empirical study to show the effect of balancing client_sample_rate and
#round in Appendix G.
Due to the uniqueness mentioned above, existing HPO benchmarks are inappropriate for studying
FedHPO. FedHPO calls for dedicated benchmarks that incorporate objective functions corresponding
to FL algorithms and respecting realistic FL settings.


3   O UR P ROPOSED B ENCHMARK S UITE : F ED HPO-B ENCH

We present an overview of F ED HPO-B ENCH in Figure 2. Conceptually, F ED HPO-B ENCH en-
capsulates function evaluation and provides a unified interface for HPO methods to interplay with
it. Following the design of HPOBench (Eggensperger et al., 2021), function evaluations can be
conducted in either of the three modes: raw, tabular, or surrogate. For the raw mode, we chose to
build F ED HPO-B ENCH upon the well-known FL platform FederatedScope (FS) (Xie et al., 2022),
which has provided its docker images so that we can containerize F ED HPO-B ENCH effortlessly by
executing each FL algorithm in an FS docker container. To generate the lookup table for tabular
mode, we truly execute the corresponding FL algorithms with the grids of search space as their
configurations. These lookup tables are adopted as training data for the surrogate models, which are
expected to approximate the objective functions (more details about this approximation are discussed
in Appendix H.4.2). It’s important to note that the distributed nature of FL makes it very expensive
to run an FL course, so, in FedHPO, the tabular and surrogate modes are much in demand to meet
the efficiency requirement. For the convenience of users, we keep F ED HPO-B ENCH’s interface
basically the same as HPOBench’s. Meanwhile, we expose extra arguments for users to customize the
instantiation of a benchmark. We defer the discussion of the relationship between F ED HPO-B ENCH
and HPOBench to Appendix B.1.
In this section, we elaborate on three highlights of F ED HPO-B ENCH. In addition to the off-the-shelf
FL-related components that FS already provides, we contribute new datasets, models, and algorithms


                                                   4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


               Interface design and code example                             Function evaluation            Off-line preprocess
                                                                                 Raw mode
                                     FedHPO-Bench                                  Container                             System
                                                                                                                        statistics
                                 Tabular Surrogate      Raw
                        System                                                     Execute
                        model                                                FedAlgo. or FedHPO
       HPO                           BaseInterface
                                                        Fed
      method
                                                        HPO                                                         Collect
                                     FederatedScope
                                                                                 Surrogate mode
                           Dataset       Model        FedAlgo.



   from fedhpob.benchmarks import TabularBenchmark                                                            Training data

   benchmark = TabularBenchmark('cnn', 'femnist', 'avg')

   # get hyperparameters space
                                                                                  Tabular mode
   config_space = benchmark.get_configuration_space()
                                                                                                          Performance
   # get fidelity space                                                ...               ...               e.g., loss
   fidelity_space = benchmark.get_fidelity_space()
                                                                                                                         Container
   # get results
   res = benchmark(config_space.sample_configuration(),
                                                                 1e-3 ... 2        81    ... 0.6   0.09                   Execute
                   fidelity_space.sample_configuration(),                                                                 FedAlgo.
                   fairness_reg_func=np.var,                     1e-2 ... 4        3     ... 0.4   0.11
                   fairness_reg_coef=1.0,
                   seed=1)                                       ...   ... ...     ...   ... ...   ...



                                             Figure 2: Overview of F ED HPO-B ENCH.


to FS to prepare a comprehensive collection of FedHPO problems (see Section 3.1). Moreover, users
are allowed to flexibly tailor these problems to their specific cases (see Section 3.2). Also, FS’s
event-driven framework allows us to easily extend F ED HPO-B ENCH by incorporating more FedHPO
problems and methods, which is valuable for this nascent research direction (see Section 3.3).

3.1      C OMPREHENSIVENESS

There is no universally best HPO method (Gijsbers et al., 2019). Therefore, for the purpose of
fairly comparing HPO methods, it is necessary to compare them on a variety of HPO problems that
correspond to diverse objective functions and thus can comprehensively assess their performances.
To satisfy this need, we leverage FS to prepare various FL tasks, where their considered datasets and
model architectures are quite different. Specifically, the data can be images, sentences, graphs, or
tabular data. Some datasets are provided by existing FL benchmarks, which are readily distributed
and thus conform to the FL setting. Some are centralized initially, which we partition by FS’s splitters
to construct their FL version with various kinds of Non-IIDness among clients. All these datasets are
publicly available and can be downloaded and preprocessed by our prepared scripts. More details of
these datasets can be found in Appendix D. Then the corresponding suitable neural network model
is applied to handle each dataset, involving fully-connected networks, convolutional networks, the
latest attention-based model, etc. It is worth noticing that our prepared FL tasks cover both cross-silo
and cross-device scenarios. In cross-device scenario, there are a lot more clients and a much lower
client_sample_rate than in cross-silo scenario.
For each such FL task, we basically employ two FL algorithms, FedAvg and FedOpt, to learn the
model, respectively. Then the FedHPO problem is defined as optimizing the design choices of the
FL algorithm on each specific FL task. So, without further explanation, we use the triple <dataset,
model, algorithm> to index a particular benchmark in the remainder of this paper. We summarize our
currently provided FedHPO problems in Table 1, and more details can be found in Appendix H. For
each problem, #round and client_sample_rate are adopted as the fidelity dimensions.
We study the empirical cumulative distribution function (ECDF) for each model type in the cross-silo
benchmarks. Specifically, in creating the lookup table for tabular mode, we have conducted function
evaluations for the hyperparameter configurations located on a very dense grid over the search space,
resulting in a finite set {(λ, f (λ))} for each benchmark. Then we normalize the performances
(i.e., f (λ)) and show their ECDF in Figure 3, where these curves exhibit different shapes. For
example, the amounts of top-tier configurations for GNN on PubMed are remarkably less than on
other graph datasets, which might imply a less smoothed landscape and difficulty in seeking the
optimal configuration. As the varying shapes of ECDF curves have been regarded as an indicator
of the diversity of benchmarks (Eggensperger et al., 2021), we can conclude from Figure 3 that
F ED HPO-B ENCH enables evaluating HPO methods comprehensively.


                                                                 5
  Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


 Table 1: Summary of benchmarks in current F ED HPO-B ENCH: MF refers to matrix factorization. Rec. and
 Algo. are short for recommendation and algorithm, respectively. #Cont. and #Disc. denote the number of
 hyperparameter dimensions corresponding to continuous and discrete candidate choices, respectively. The unit
 of the budget is either day (d) or second (s).

                Scenario                    Model                       #Dataset                    Domain                        #Client                        #Algo.             #Cont.                           #Disc.            Budget
                                            CNN                            2                          CV                            200                            2                  4                                2                 20d
                                            BERT                           2                         NLP                             5                             2                  4                                2                 20d
              Cross-Silo                    GNN                            3                         Graph                           5                             2                  4                                1                  1d
                                            GNN                            1                        Hetero                           5                             1                  1                                1                  1d
                                             LR                            7                        Tabular                          5                             2                  3                                1               21,600s
                                            MLP                            7                        Tabular                          5                             2                  4                                3               43,200s
                                             MF                            1                         Rec.                         480,189                          2                  3                                1                   -
            Cross-Device
                                             LR                            1                         NLP                          ∼3300                            2                  3                                1                  1d

        1.0                                              1.0                                                1.0                                              1.0                                                 1.0
        0.8                                              0.8                                                0.8                                              0.8                                                 0.8
P(X <= x)


                                                 P(X <= x)


        0.6                                              0.6                                        P(X <= x)
                                                                                                            0.6


                                                                                                                                                     P(X <= x)


                                                                                                                                                                                                         P(X <= x)
                                                                                                                                                             0.6                        credit-g                 0.6                        credit-g
                                                                                                                                                                                        vehicle                                             vehicle
        0.4                                              0.4                                                0.4                                              0.4                        kc1                      0.4                        kc1
                                                                                                                                                                                        blood-transf..                                      blood-transf..
        0.2                                              0.2                                                0.2                           Cora               0.2                        Australian               0.2                        Australian
                                      FEMNIST                                               CoLA                                          CiteSeer                                      car                                                 car
        0.0                           CIFAR10            0.0                                SST2            0.0                           PubMed                                        segment                                             segment
                                                                                                                                                             0.0                                                 0.0
              0.0   0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8        1.0                 0.0   0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8          1.0                 0.0   0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8        1.0                 0.0   0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8           1.0                 0.0   0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8           1.0
                       Normalized regret                                Normalized regret                                  Normalized regret                                Normalized regret                                   Normalized regret

                    (a) CNN                                          (b) BERT                                           (c) GNN                                           (d) LR                                             (e) MLP
  Figure 3: Empirical Cumulative Distribution Functions: The normalized regret is calculated for all evaluated
  configurations of the respective model on the respective FL task with FedAvg.

  3.2               F LEXIBILITY

 We allow users to instantiate each benchmark with arguments other than the <dataset, model, algo-
 rithm> triple. So, both the underlying objective function and the amount of time it takes to calculate
 its value can be customized according to the cases specified by the users.
  Objective function. F ED HPO-B ENCH provides the basic interface to support multi-objective
  optimization concerning arbitrary specified performance metrics and privacy and fairness-related
  metrics. For privacy protection, we employ a representative FL+DP algorithm NbAFL (Wei et al.,
  2020) provided by FS, where users can specify any valid value for the privacy budget. As for fairness,
  FS has provided many personalized FL algorithms and fairness-aware aggregations, and F ED HPO-
  B ENCH can record client-wise performances. In designing the interface of F ED HPO-B ENCH, we
  allow users to specify their preferred measurements of privacy leakage risk and fairness. Then the
  execution of an FL algorithm can be regarded as evaluating a vector-valued function rather than a
  scalar-valued one. By default, F ED HPO-B ENCH transforms the vector result into a scalar one by
  treating privacy and fairness-related values as soft constraints to penalize.
 System model. In addition to customizing the objective function, it is also very helpful to customize
 the execution time of function evaluation because the execution time of the same FL course can
 vary a lot when deployed in environments with different system conditions. Many existing HPO
 benchmarks record the execution time of the training courses, which cannot be adapted regarding
 users’ system conditions. Despite a recorded execution time, we provide a system model to estimate
 the time consumed by evaluating f (λ, b) in realistic scenarios, which is configurable so that users
 with different system conditions can calibrate the model to their cases (Mohr et al., 2021). Based
 on the analysis of such a system model and a basic instance (Wang et al., 2021a), we propose and
 implement our system model, where the execution time T (f, λ, b) for each round in evaluating f (λ, b)
 is the summation of time consumed by computation and communication. Roughly, the time for
 communication is the summation of the time for downloading and uploading transferred information
 and the latency for establishing connections. The time for computation is the summation of the
 time for the server’s aggregation step and that for the straggler client’s local updates. Our system
 model exposes several adjustable parameters, for which we provide default choices based on the
 records collected from creating the tabular benchmarks. Meanwhile, users are allowed to specify
 these parameters according to their scenarios or other system statistic providers, e.g., estimating the
 latency of stragglers by sampling from FedScale (Lai et al., 2022). We defer the details about our
 system model to Appendix E.


                                                                                                                              6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


3.3   E XTENSIBILITY

As FedHPO is springing up, we must reduce the effort of introducing more FedHPO problems and
novel FedHPO methods to F ED HPO-B ENCH.
Recall that a FedHPO problem is characterized by the <dataset, model, algorithm> triple. With FS,
we can apply the off-the-shelf data splitters to transform an arbitrary centralized dataset into an FL
dataset, reuse any open-sourced model implementation by registering it in FS, and develop a novel
FL algorithm via plugging in the hook function that expresses its unique step(s).
Traditional HPO methods are decoupled from the procedure of function evaluation, with a concep-
tually standard interface for interaction (see Figure 1 and Figure 2). Thus, any new method in this
line can readily interplay with F ED HPO-B ENCH. However, FedHPO methods, such as FTS and
FedEx, are fused with the FL training course to make concurrent exploration, as the dashed blue box
in Figure 1 and the red color “FedHPO” module in Figure 2 shows. Thus, we need to implement such
methods in FS if we want to benchmark them on F ED HPO-B ENCH.
At a high level, such FedHPO methods essentially aim to learn a policy π collaboratively, along with
the original FL course. As FS is featured by its event-driven programming paradigm, a standard
FL course is modularized into event-handler pairs that express all the subroutines. Benefiting from
this event-driven paradigm, all we need to develop are augmenting the messages exchanged by FL
participants (i.e., re-defining events) and plugging those policy learning-related operations into the
event handlers. As a result, we have implemented FTS, FedEx, and a personalized FedEx in FS,
where their differences mainly lie in just the definition and implementation of those plug-in operations.
We defer more implementation details to Appendix F.

4     E XPERIMENTS

We conduct extensive empirical studies with our proposed F ED HPO-B ENCH. Basically, we ex-
emplify the use of F ED HPO-B ENCH in comparing HPO methods, which, in the meantime, can
somewhat validate the correctness of F ED HPO-B ENCH. Moreover, we aim to gain more insights
into FedHPO, answering two research questions: (RQ1) How do traditional HPO methods behave in
solving FedHPO problems? (RQ2) Do recently proposed FedHPO methods that exploit “concurrent
exploration” (see Section 2.2) significantly improve traditional methods? We conduct empirical
studies in Section 4.1 and Section 4.2 to answer RQ1 and RQ2, respectively. All scripts concerning
the studies here have been committed to F ED HPO-B ENCH so that the community can quickly
reproduce our established benchmarks.

4.1   S TUDIES ABOUT A PPLYING T RADITIONAL HPO M ETHODS IN THE FL S ETTING

To answer RQ1, we largely follow the experiment conducted in HPOBench (Eggensperger et al.,
2021) but focus on the FedHPO problems F ED HPO-B ENCH provided.
Protocol. We employ up to ten optimizers (i.e., HPO methods) from widely adopted libraries (see
Table 6 for more details). For black-box optimizers (BBO), we consider random search (RS), the
evolutionary search approach of differential evolution (DE (Storn & Price, 1997; Awad et al., 2020)),
and bayesian optimization with: a GP model (BOGP ), a random forest model (BORF (Hutter et al.,
2011b)), and a kernel density estimator (BOKDE (Falkner et al., 2018b)), respectively. For multi-
fidelity optimizers (MF), we consider Hyperband (HB (Li et al., 2017)), its model-based extensions
with KDE-based model (BOHB (Falkner et al., 2018a)), and differential evolution (DEHB (Awad
et al., 2021)), and Optuna’s implementations of TPE with median stopping (TPEMD ) and TPE with
Hyperband (TPEHB ) (Akiba et al., 2019). We apply these optimizers to solve the cross-silo FedHPO
problems summarized in Table 1, where the time budget is relaxed for these traditional HPO methods
to satisfy multiple full-fidelity function evaluations rather than a one-shot setting. For the sake of
efficiency, we conduct this experiment with the tabular mode of F ED HPO-B ENCH, and consider
#round as the fidelity dimension for HPO methods to control (while keeping client_sample_rate=1.0).
To compare the optimizers uniformly and fairly, we repeat each setting five times in the same runtime
environment but with different random seeds. The best-seen validation loss is monitored for each
optimizer (for multi-fidelity optimizers, higher fidelity results are preferred over lower ones). We
sort the optimizers by their best-seen results and compare their mean ranks on all the considered


                                                   7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


FedHPO problems. Following HPOBench, we use sign tests to judge (1) whether advanced methods
outperform their baselines and (2) whether multi-fidelity methods outperform their single-fidelity
counterparts. We refer our readers to Appendix C for more details.
         5                                           5                                             10
                                                                                                    9
         4                                           4                                              8
                                                                                                    7
 Mean rank


                                             Mean rank


                                                                                           Mean rank
         3                                           3                                              6
                                                                                                    5
                                                                                                    4
         2                                           2                                              3
                                                                                                    2
         11e-4    1e-3 1e-2 1e-1         1           11e-4    1e-3 1e-2 1e-1           1            11e-4     1e-3 1e-2 1e-1        1
                   Fraction of budget                          Fraction of budget                              Fraction of budget
                     (a) BBO                                     (b) MF                                          (c) All


                         Figure 4: Mean rank over time on all FedHPO problems (with FedAvg).

Results and Analysis. We show the overall results in Figure 4, and we defer detailed results to
Appendix I. Overall, their eventual mean ranks do not deviate remarkably. For BBO, the performances
of optimizers are close at the beginning but become more distinguishable along with their exploration.
Ultimately, BOGP has successfully sought better configurations than other optimizers. In contrast
to BBO, MF optimizers perform pretty differently in the early stage, which might be rooted in the
vast variance of low-fidelity function evaluations. Eventually, HB and BOHB become superior to
others while achieving a very close mean rank. We consider optimizers’ final performances on all the
considered FedHPO problems, where, for each pair of optimizers, one may win, tie, or lose against
the other. Then we can conduct sign tests to compare pairs of optimizers, where results are presented
in Table 2 and Table 3. (1) Comparing these advanced optimizers with their baselines, only BOGP ,
BORF , and DE win on more than half of the problems but have no significant improvement, which
is inconsistent with the non-FL setting. It is worth noting that a similar phenomenon can also be
observed for HPO problems in general (Pushak & Hoos, 2022). (2) Meanwhile, no MF optimizers
show any advantage in exploiting experience, which differs from non-FL cases. We presume the
reason lies in the distribution of configurations’ performances (see Figure 3). From Table 3, we draw
part of the answer to RQ1 as that MF optimizers always outperform their corresponding single-fidelity
version, which is consistent with the non-FL settings.
             Table 2: P-value of a sign test for the hypothesis—these advanced methods surpass the baselines.

                                                          BOGP              BORF        BOKDE                  DE
                         p-value agains RS                0.0637           0.2161       0.1649               0.7561
                            win-tie-loss                 13 / 0 / 7       12 / 0/ 8    7 / 0 / 13           11 / 0 / 9
                                                          BOHB             DEHB         TPEMD                TPEHB
                        p-value against HB                0.4523           0.9854       0.2942               0.2454
                           win-tie-loss                  7 / 0 / 13       9 / 0 / 11   9 / 0 / 11           9 / 0 / 11

        Table 3: P-value of a sign test for the hypothesis—MF methods surpass corresponding BBO methods.

                                             HB vs. RS           DEHB vs. DE            BOHB vs. BOKDE
                            p-value           0.1139                0.2942                  0.0106
                          win-tie-loss       13 / 0 / 7            13 / 0 / 7              16 / 0 / 4


4.2          S TUDIES ABOUT C ONCURRENT E XPLORATION

To answer RQ2, we select the superior optimizers from Section 4.1 to compare with FedEx (Khodak
et al., 2021). As mentioned in Section 2.2, FL allows HPO methods to take advantage of concurrent


                                                                      8
 Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


 exploration, which somewhat compensates for the number of function evaluations. We are interested
 in methods designed regarding these characteristics of FedHPO and design this experiment to see
 how much concurrent exploration contributes.
 Protocol. We consider the FedHPO problem <FEMNIST, CNN, FedAvg), i.e., FedAvg is applied
 to learn a 2-layer CNN on FEMNIST. As a full-fidelity function evaluation consumes 500 rounds
 on this dataset, we specify RS, BOGP , BORF , BOKDE , HB, and BOHB to limit their total budget to
 2,500 (i.e., 5 times budget of a full-fidelity evaluation) in terms of #round. Precisely, each BBO
 method consists of 50 trials, each of which runs for 50 rounds. For MF optimizers, we set the η of
 Successive Halving Algorithm (SHA) (Jamieson & Talwalkar, 2016) to 3, the minimal budget to 9
 rounds, and the max budget to 81 rounds. Then we adopt these optimizers and FedEx wrapped by
 them (X+FedEx) to optimize the design choices of FedAvg, respectively. The wrapper is responsible
 for determining the arms for each execution of FedEx. We consider validation loss the metric of
 interest, and function evaluations are conducted in the raw mode. We repeat each method three times
 and report the averaged best-seen value at the end of each trial. Meanwhile, for each considered
 method, we entirely run the FL course with the optimal configuration it seeks. Their averaged test
 accuracies are compared.


     4.0                                          RS
                                                  BO_GP
     3.5                                          BO_RF           Methods      W/O FedEx        W/ FedEx
     3.0                                          BO_KDE
                                                  HB              RS           79.93 ± 2.45     82.03 ± 2.08
     2.5
Loss


                                                  BOHB
                                                  RS+FedEx        BOGP         82.18 ± 0.94     83.20 ± 1.24
     2.0                                          BO_GP+FedEx     BORF         81.86 ± 1.10     82.20 ± 0.54
     1.5                                          BO_RF+FedEx
                                                  BO_KDE+FedEx    BOKDE        81.34 ± 1.75     82.11 ± 0.46
     1.0                                          HB+FedEx
                                                  BOHB+FedEx
                                                                  HB           80.26 ± 2.02     82.47 ± 0.04
     0.5       1e-2       1e-1     1
                                                                  BOHB         79.59 ± 2.09     84.02 ± 0.50
                Fraction of budget                               Table 5: Compare the searched configura-
                                                                 tions: Mean test accuracy (%) ± standard de-
     Figure 5: Mean validation cross-entropy loss over time.     viation. Underline indicates improvements.


 Results and Analysis. We present the results in Figure 5 and Table 5. For FedAvg, the best-seen
 mean validation losses of all wrapped FedEx decrease slower than their corresponding wrapper.
 However, their searched configurations’ generalization performances are significantly better than
 their wrappers, which strongly confirms the effectiveness of concurrent exploration. Thus, we have a
 clear answer to RQ2: concurrent exploration methods significantly improve traditional methods.



 5     C ONCLUSION AND F UTURE W ORK

 In this paper, we first identify the uniqueness of FedHPO, which we ascribe to the distributed nature
 of FL and its heterogeneous clients. This uniqueness prevents FedHPO research from leveraging
 existing HPO benchmarks, which has led to inconsistent comparisons between some recently proposed
 methods. Hence, we suggest and implement a comprehensive, flexible, and extensible benchmark
 suite, F ED HPO-B ENCH. We further conduct extensive HPO experiments on F ED HPO-B ENCH,
 validating its correctness and applicability to comparing traditional and FedHPO methods. We have
 open-sourced F ED HPO-B ENCH with an Apache-2.0 license and will actively maintain it in the future
 (Maintenance of F ED HPO-B ENCH is discussed in Appendix A). We believe F ED HPO-B ENCH can
 serve as the stepping stone to developing reproducible FedHPO works.
 In our next step, tasks other than federated supervised learning will be incorporated. At the same time,
 we aim to extend F ED HPO-B ENCH to include different FL settings, e.g., HPO for vertical FL (Zhou
 et al., 2021). Another issue the current version has not touched on is the risk of privacy leakage
 caused by HPO methods (Koskela & Honkela, 2020), which we should provide related metrics and
 testbeds in the future.


                                                        9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


R EFERENCES
Majid Abdolshah, Alistair Shilton, Santu Rana, S. Gupta, and Svetha Venkatesh. Multi-objective
 bayesian optimisation with preferences over objectives. ArXiv, abs/1902.04228, 2019.
Steven Adriaensen, André Biedenkapp, Gresa Shala, Noor H. Awad, Theresa Eimer, Marius Thomas
  Lindauer, and Frank Hutter. Automated dynamic algorithm configuration. ArXiv, abs/2205.13881,
  2022.
Takuya Akiba, Shotaro Sano, Toshihiko Yanase, Takeru Ohta, and Masanori Koyama. Optuna:
  A next-generation hyperparameter optimization framework. In Proceedings of the 25th ACM
  SIGKDD international conference on knowledge discovery & data mining, pp. 2623–2631, 2019.
Muhammad Asad, Ahmed Moustafa, and Takayuki Ito. Fedopt: Towards communication efficiency
 and privacy preservation in federated learning. Applied Sciences, 10, 2020.
N. Awad, N. Mallik, and F. Hutter. Differential evolution for neural architecture search. In Proceedings
  of the 1st workshop on neural architecture search(@ICLR’20), 2020.
Noor Awad, Neeratyoy Mallik, and Frank Hutter. Dehb: Evolutionary hyberband for scalable, robust
  and efficient hyperparameter optimization. In Proceedings of the Thirtieth International Joint
  Conference on Artificial Intelligence, IJCAI-21, pp. 2147–2153, 2021.
James Bennett and Stan Lanning. The netflix prize. 2007.
James Bergstra and Yoshua Bengio. Random search for hyper-parameter optimization. J. Mach.
  Learn. Res., pp. 281–305, 2012.
André Biedenkapp, H. Furkan Bozkurt, Theresa Eimer, Frank Hutter, and Marius Thomas Lindauer.
  Dynamic algorithm configuration: Foundation of a new meta-algorithmic framework. In European
 Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 2020.
Bernd Bischl, Giuseppe Casalicchio, Matthias Feurer, Frank Hutter, Michel Lang, Rafael G Man-
  tovani, Jan N van Rijn, and Joaquin Vanschoren. Openml benchmarking suites. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1708.03731, 2017.
Sebastian Caldas, Sai Meher Karthik Duddu, Peter Wu, Tian Li, Jakub Konečnỳ, H Brendan McMa-
  han, Virginia Smith, and Ameet Talwalkar. Leaf: A benchmark for federated settings. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1812.01097, 2018.
Zhongxiang Dai, Bryan Kian Hsiang Low, and Patrick Jaillet. Federated bayesian optimization via
  thompson sampling. In NeurIPS, 2020.
Kalyanmoy Deb, Samir Agrawal, Amrit Pratap, and T. Meyarivan. A fast and elitist multiobjective
  genetic algorithm: Nsga-ii. IEEE Trans. Evol. Comput., 6:182–197, 2002.
Tobias Domhan, Jost Tobias Springenberg, and Frank Hutter. Speeding up automatic hyperparameter
  optimization of deep neural networks by extrapolation of learning curves. In Twenty-fourth
  international joint conference on artificial intelligence, 2015.
Xuanyi Dong and Yi Yang. NAS-Bench-201: Extending the scope of reproducible neural architecture
  search. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2020.
Xuanyi Dong, Lu Liu, Katarzyna Musial, and Bogdan Gabrys. NATS-Bench: Benchmarking nas
  algorithms for architecture topology and size. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine
 Intelligence (TPAMI), 2021.
Katharina Eggensperger, Philipp Müller, Neeratyoy Mallik, Matthias Feurer, Rene Sass, Aaron
  Klein, Noor Awad, Marius Lindauer, and Frank Hutter. HPOBench: A collection of reproducible
  multi-fidelity benchmark problems for HPO. In Thirty-fifth Conference on Neural Information
  Processing Systems Datasets and Benchmarks Track (Round 2), 2021.
Stefan Falkner, Aaron Klein, and Frank Hutter. Bohb: Robust and efficient hyperparameter optimiza-
  tion at scale. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 1437–1446, 2018a.


                                                  10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Stefan Falkner, Aaron Klein, and Frank Hutter. Bohb: Robust and efficient hyperparameter optimiza-
  tion at scale. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2018b.
Matthias Feurer and Frank Hutter. Hyperparameter optimization. In Automated machine learning,
 pp. 3–33. 2019.
P. Gijsbers, E. LeDell, S. Poirier, J. Thomas, B. Bischl, and J. Vanschoren. An open source automl
   benchmark. arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.00909 [cs.LG], 2019.
Ronald L. Graham, Donald E. Knuth, and Oren Patashnik. Concrete Mathematics: A Foundation for
  Computer Science. Addison-Wesley, 1989.
Pengfei Guo, Dong Yang, Ali Hatamizadeh, An Xu, Ziyue Xu, Wenqi Li, Can Zhao, Daguang Xu,
  Stephanie A. Harmon, Evrim B Turkbey, Baris I Turkbey, Bradford J. Wood, F. Patella, Elvira
  Stellato, Gianpaolo Carrafiello, Vishal M. Patel, and Holger R. Roth. Auto-fedrl: Federated hyper-
  parameter optimization for multi-institutional medical image segmentation. ArXiv, abs/2203.06338,
  2022.
Nikolaus Hansen, Anne Auger, Olaf Mersmann, Tea Tusar, and Dimo Brockhoff. Coco: a platform
  for comparing continuous optimizers in a black-box setting. Optimization Methods and Software,
  pp. 114 – 144, 2021.
Florian Hase, Matteo Aldeghi, Riley J. Hickman, Loïc M. Roch, Melodie Christensen, Elena Liles, Ja-
  son E. Hein, and Alán Aspuru-Guzik. Olympus: a benchmarking framework for noisy optimization
  and experiment planning. Machine Learning: Science and Technology, 2021.
Alejandro Morales Hernández, Inneke Van Nieuwenhuyse, and Sebastian Rojas-Gonzalez. A sur-
  vey on multi-objective hyperparameter optimization algorithms for machine learning. ArXiv,
  abs/2111.13755, 2021.
Stephan Holly, Thomas Hiessl, Safoura Rezapour Lakani, Daniel Schall, Clemens Heitzinger, and
  Jana Kemnitz. Evaluation of hyperparameter-optimization approaches in an industrial federated
  learning system. ArXiv, abs/2110.08202, 2021.
Dzmitry Huba, John Nguyen, Kshitiz Malik, Ruiyu Zhu, Mike Rabbat, Ashkan Yousefpour, Carole-
  Jean Wu, Hongyuan Zhan, Pavel Ustinov, Harish Srinivas, et al. Papaya: Practical, private, and
  scalable federated learning. Proceedings of Machine Learning and Systems, 2022.
Frank Hutter, Holger H Hoos, and Kevin Leyton-Brown. Sequential model-based optimization
  for general algorithm configuration. In International conference on learning and intelligent
  optimization, pp. 507–523. Springer, 2011a.
Frank Hutter, Holger H Hoos, and Kevin Leyton-Brown. Sequential model-based optimization
  for general algorithm configuration. In International conference on learning and intelligent
  optimization, 2011b.
Frank Hutter, Holger Hoos, and Kevin Leyton-Brown. Parallel algorithm configuration. pp. 55–70,
  2012.
Frank Hutter, Manuel López-Ibáñez, Chris Fawcett, Marius Thomas Lindauer, Holger H. Hoos, Kevin
  Leyton-Brown, and Thomas Stützle. Aclib: A benchmark library for algorithm configuration. In
  LION, 2014.
Kevin Jamieson and Ameet Talwalkar. Non-stochastic best arm identification and hyperparameter
  optimization. In Proceedings of the 19th International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and
  Statistics, pp. 240–248, 2016.
D. R. Jones. A taxonomy of global optimization methods based on response surfaces. Journal of
  Global Optimization, 21:345–383, 2001.
Peter Kairouz, H Brendan McMahan, Brendan Avent, Aurélien Bellet, Mehdi Bennis, Arjun Nitin
  Bhagoji, Kallista Bonawitz, Zachary Charles, Graham Cormode, Rachel Cummings, et al. Ad-
  vances and open problems in federated learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1912.04977, 2019.


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Mikhail Khodak, Renbo Tu, Tian Li, Liam Li, Nina Balcan, Virginia Smith, and Ameet Talwalkar.
 Federated hyperparameter tuning: Challenges, baselines, and connections to weight-sharing. In
 A. Beygelzimer, Y. Dauphin, P. Liang, and J. Wortman Vaughan (eds.), Advances in Neural
 Information Processing Systems, 2021.

Aaron Klein, Stefan Falkner, Simon Bartels, Philipp Hennig, and Frank Hutter. Fast bayesian
  optimization of machine learning hyperparameters on large datasets. In Artificial intelligence and
  statistics, pp. 528–536, 2017.

Antti Koskela and Antti Honkela. Learning rate adaptation for differentially private learning. In
 Proceedings of the Twenty Third International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics,
  pp. 2465–2475, 2020.

Alex Krizhevsky, Geoffrey Hinton, et al. Learning multiple layers of features from tiny images. 2009.

Fan Lai, Yinwei Dai, Sanjay S. Singapuram, Jiachen Liu, Xiangfeng Zhu, Harsha V. Madhyastha,
  and Mosharaf Chowdhury. FedScale: Benchmarking model and system performance of federated
  learning at scale. In International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2022.

Lisha Li, Kevin Jamieson, Giulia DeSalvo, Afshin Rostamizadeh, and Ameet Talwalkar. Hyperband:
  A novel bandit-based approach to hyperparameter optimization. The Journal of Machine Learning
  Research, pp. 6765–6816, 2017.

Tian Li, Anit Kumar Sahu, Ameet Talwalkar, and Virginia Smith. Federated learning: Challenges,
  methods, and future directions. IEEE Signal Processing Magazine, pp. 50–60, 2020a.

Tian Li, Anit Kumar Sahu, Manzil Zaheer, Maziar Sanjabi, Ameet Talwalkar, and Virginia Smith.
  Federated optimization in heterogeneous networks. Proceedings of Machine Learning and Systems,
  pp. 429–450, 2020b.

Tian Li, Shengyuan Hu, Ahmad Beirami, and Virginia Smith. Ditto: Fair and robust federated
  learning through personalization. In ICML, pp. 6357–6368, 2021a.

Xiaoxiao Li, Meirui JIANG, Xiaofei Zhang, Michael Kamp, and Qi Dou. FedBN: Federated learning
  on non-IID features via local batch normalization. In International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2021b.

Zitao Li, Bolin Ding, Ce Zhang, Ninghui Li, and Jingren Zhou. Federated matrix factorization with
  privacy guarantee. Proc. VLDB Endow., 15:900–913, 2021c.

Marius Lindauer, Katharina Eggensperger, Matthias Feurer, André Biedenkapp, Difan Deng, Carolin
 Benjamins, Tim Ruhkopf, René Sass, and Frank Hutter. Smac3: A versatile bayesian optimization
 package for hyperparameter optimization. J. Mach. Learn. Res., pp. 54–1, 2022.

Hanxiao Liu, Karen Simonyan, and Yiming Yang. DARTS: Differentiable architecture search. In
  International Conference on Learning Representations, 2019.

Brendan McMahan, Eider Moore, Daniel Ramage, Seth Hampson, and Blaise Aguera y Arcas.
  Communication-Efficient Learning of Deep Networks from Decentralized Data. In Proceedings of
  the 20th International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pp. 1273–1282, 2017.

Ilya Mironov. Rényi differential privacy. In 2017 IEEE 30th Computer Security Foundations
   Symposium (CSF), pp. 263–275, 2017.

Felix Mohr, Marcel Wever, Alexander Tornede, and Eyke Hüllermeier. Predicting machine learning
  pipeline runtimes in the context of automated machine learning. IEEE Transactions on Pattern
  Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 43:3055–3066, 2021.

Hesham Mostafa. Robust federated learning through representation matching and adaptive hyper-
  parameters, 2020.


                                                12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Fabian Pedregosa, Gaël Varoquaux, Alexandre Gramfort, Vincent Michel, Bertrand Thirion, Olivier
  Grisel, Mathieu Blondel, Peter Prettenhofer, Ron Weiss, Vincent Dubourg, Jake Vanderplas,
  Alexandre Passos, David Cournapeau, Matthieu Brucher, Matthieu Perrot, and Édouard Duchesnay.
  Scikit-learn: Machine learning in python. Journal of Machine Learning Research, pp. 2825–2830,
  2011.
Johann Petrak. Fast subsampling performance estimates for classification algorithm selection. In
  Proceedings of the ECML-00 Workshop on Meta-Learning: Building Automatic Advice Strategies
  for Model Selection and Method Combination, pp. 3–14, 2000.
Florian Pfisterer, Lennart Schneider, Julia Moosbauer, Martin Binder, and Bernd Bischl. Yahpo
  gym-an efficient multi-objective multi-fidelity benchmark for hyperparameter optimization. In
  First Conference on Automated Machine Learning (Main Track), 2022.
Sebastian Pineda-Arango, Hadi S. Jomaa, Martin Wistuba, and Josif Grabocka. HPO-B: A large-scale
  reproducible benchmark for black-box HPO based on openml. Neural Information Processing
  Systems (NeurIPS) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks, 2021.
Yasha Pushak and Holger H. Hoos. Automl loss landscapes. ACM Transactions on Evolutionary
  Learning and Optimization, 2022.
Prithviraj Sen, Galileo Namata, Mustafa Bilgic, Lise Getoor, Brian Galligher, and Tina Eliassi-Rad.
  Collective classification in network data. AI magazine, pp. 93–93, 2008.
Bobak Shahriari, Kevin Swersky, Ziyu Wang, Ryan P. Adams, and Nando de Freitas. Taking the
  human out of the loop: A review of bayesian optimization. Proceedings of the IEEE, pp. 148–175,
  2016.
Rainer Storn and Kenneth Price. Differential evolution–a simple and efficient heuristic for global
  optimization over continuous spaces. Journal of global optimization, pp. 341–359, 1997.
Kevin Swersky, Jasper Snoek, and Ryan P Adams. Multi-task bayesian optimization. Advances in
  neural information processing systems, 2013.
Kevin Swersky, Jasper Snoek, and Ryan Prescott Adams. Freeze-thaw bayesian optimization. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1406.3896, 2014.
R. Turner and D. Eriksson. Bayesmark: Benchmark framework to easily compare bayesian optimiza-
  tion methods on real machine learning tasks, 2019.
Alex Wang, Amanpreet Singh, Julian Michael, Felix Hill, Omer Levy, and Samuel R Bowman. Glue:
  A multi-task benchmark and analysis platform for natural language understanding. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1804.07461, 2018.
Jianyu Wang, Zachary Charles, Zheng Xu, Gauri Joshi, H Brendan McMahan, Maruan Al-Shedivat,
   Galen Andrew, Salman Avestimehr, Katharine Daly, Deepesh Data, et al. A field guide to federated
   optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.06917, 2021a.
Zhen Wang, Weirui Kuang, Yuexiang Xie, Liuyi Yao, Yaliang Li, Bolin Ding, and Jingren Zhou.
  Federatedscope-gnn: Towards a unified, comprehensive and efficient package for federated graph
  learning. In Proceedings of the 28th ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery and
  Data Mining, pp. 4110–4120, 2022.
Zheng Wang, Xiaoliang Fan, Jianzhong Qi, Chenglu Wen, Cheng Wang, and Rongshan Yu. Federated
  learning with fair averaging. In Proceedings of the Thirtieth International Joint Conference on
  Artificial Intelligence, IJCAI-21, pp. 1615–1623, 2021b.
Kang Wei, Jun Li, Ming Ding, Chuan Ma, Howard H. Yang, Farhad Farokhi, Shi Jin, Tony Q. S. Quek,
  and H. Vincent Poor. Federated learning with differential privacy: Algorithms and performance
  analysis. Trans. Info. For. Sec., pp. 3454–3469, 2020.
Yuexiang Xie, Zhen Wang, Daoyuan Chen, Dawei Gao, Liuyi Yao, Weirui Kuang, Yaliang Li, Bolin
  Ding, and Jingren Zhou. Federatedscope: A flexible federated learning platform for heterogeneity.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.05011, 2022.


                                                13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Zhilin Yang, William Cohen, and Ruslan Salakhudinov. Revisiting semi-supervised learning with
  graph embeddings. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 40–48, 2016.
Liuyi Yao, Dawei Gao, Zhen Wang, Yuexiang Xie, Weirui Kuang, Daoyuan Chen, Hao-
  hui Wang, Chenhe Dong, Bolin Ding, and Yaliang Li. Federated hetero-task learning.
  https://arxiv.org/abs/2206.03436, 2022.
Huanle Zhang, Mi Zhang, Xin Liu, Prasant Mohapatra, and Michael DeLucia. Automatic tuning of
  federated learning hyper-parameters from system perspective. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.03061,
  2021.
Yi Zhou, Parikshit Ram, Theodoros Salonidis, Nathalie Baracaldo, Horst Samulowitz, and Heiko
  Ludwig. Flora: Single-shot hyper-parameter optimization for federated learning. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2112.08524, 2021.


                                              14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A    M AINTENANCE OF F ED HPO-B ENCH
In this section, we present our plan for maintaining F ED HPO-B ENCH following Eggensperger et al.
(2021).

       • Who is maintaining the benchmarking library? F ED HPO-B ENCH is developed and
         maintained by FedHPO-Bench team (to be de-anonymized later).
       • How can the maintainer of the dataset be contacted (e.g., email address)? Users can
         reach out to the maintainer via creating issues on the Github repository with F ED HPO-
         B ENCH label.
       • Is there an erratum? No.
       • Will the benchmarking library be updated? Yes, as we discussed in Section 5, we will
         add more FedHPO problems and introduce more FL tasks to the existing benchmark. We
         will track updates and Github release on the README. In addition, we will fix potential
         issues regularly.
       • Will older versions of the benchmarking library continue to be sup-
         ported/hosted/maintained? All older versions are available and maintained by
         the Github release, but limited support will be provided for older versions. Containers will
         be versioned and available via AliyunOSS.
       • If others want to extend/augment/build on/contribute to the dataset, is there a
         mechanism for them to do so? Any contribution is welcome, and all commits to
         FEDHPO-BENCH must follow the guidance and regulations at https://github.com/
         FedHPO-Bench/FedHPO-Bench-ICLR23/blob/main/README.md.

B    R ELATED W ORK
Hyperparameter Optimization (HPO). Generally, HPO is an optimization problem where the
objective function is non-analytic, non-convex, and even non-differentiable. Therefore, most HPO
methods solve such an optimization problem in a trial-and-error manner, with different strategies for
balancing exploitation and exploration. Model-free methods such as random search (RS) (Bergstra
& Bengio, 2012) and grid search query a set of initially determined hyperparameter configurations
without any exploitation. Model-based methods such as Bayesian Optimization (BO) (Shahriari et al.,
2016) employ a surrogate model to approximate the objective function. Methods in this line (Hutter
et al., 2011a; Lindauer et al., 2022; Hutter et al., 2011b; Falkner et al., 2018b) mainly differ from each
other in their surrogate model and how they determine the next query. There are also Evolutionary
Algorithms (EAs) that iteratively maintain a population. We consider differential EAs (Storn & Price,
1997; Awad et al., 2020) in our experiments.
As training a deep neural network on a large-scale dataset is very costly, the full-fidelity function
evaluations made by BO methods are often unaffordable in practice. Naturally, researchers consider
trading off the precision of a function evaluation for its efficiency by, e.g., training fewer epochs
and training on a subset of the data. Hyperband (Li et al., 2017) is a representative multi-fidelity
method that calls the Successive Halving Algorithm (SHA) (Jamieson & Talwalkar, 2016) again and
again with a different number of initial candidates. However, in each execution of SHA, the initial
candidates are randomly sampled without any exploitation. To exploit the experience of previous
SHA executions, researchers combine BO methods with Hyperband (Falkner et al., 2018a; Awad
et al., 2021).
Benchmarking HPO. AutoML-related optimization benchmarks have been proved helpful for
promoting fair comparisons of related methods and reproducible research works. There have been
many successful examples (Hutter et al., 2014; Hansen et al., 2021; Hase et al., 2021; Turner &
Eriksson, 2019; Dong & Yang, 2020; Dong et al., 2021; Gijsbers et al., 2019). Noticeably, HPO-
B (Pineda-Arango et al., 2021) is highlighted by its support for benchmarking transfer-HPO methods,
and HPOBench (Eggensperger et al., 2021) fills the gap of missing multi-fidelity HPO benchmarks.
However, existing HPO benchmarks mainly focus on centralized ML, yet FL, as a promising learning
paradigm, has been ignored. In this paper, we identify the uniqueness of FedHPO (see Section 2.2)
and implement F ED HPO-B ENCH to satisfy the demand for a FedHPO benchmark suite.


                                                   15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Federated Learning (FL). In this paper, we restrict our discussion of FL to the “standard” scenario
introduced in Section 2.2, where FedAvg (McMahan et al., 2017) is widely adopted. Fancy FL
optimization algorithms, including FedProx (Li et al., 2020b) and FedOpt (Asad et al., 2020), are
mainly designed to improve the convergence rate and/or better handle the non-IIDness among
clients (Wang et al., 2021a). Despite these synchronous optimization algorithms, asynchronous
ones (Huba et al., 2022; Xie et al., 2022) are proposed to keep a high concurrency utility.
Sometimes, learning one global model is insufficient to handle the non-IIDness, which calls for
personalized FL (Kairouz et al., 2019; Wang et al., 2021a). Many popular pFL algorithms, such as
FedBN (Li et al., 2021b) and Ditto (Li et al., 2021a), have been incorporated into FS (Xie et al.,
2022), with their unique hyperparameters exposed. Thus, we can further extend F ED HPO-B ENCH
by considering FedHPO tasks of optimizing the hyperparameters of such algorithms.
FedHPO. When we consider HPO in the FL setting, as mentioned in Section 2.2, there is some
uniqueness that brings in challenges while, at the same time, it can be leveraged by deliberately
designed FedHPO methods. For example, in contrast to traditional HPO methods that query one
configuration in each trial, FedEx (Khodak et al., 2021) maintains one policy for determining the client-
side hyperparameters and independently samples each client’s configuration in each communication
round. Different configurations may be evaluated with the same model parameters, which is in analogy
to the weight-sharing idea in neural architecture search (NAS) (Liu et al., 2019), as summarized
by the authors of FedEx. However, due to the non-IIDness among clients, clients’ HPO objective
functions tend to be different, where determining their configurations by only one policy might be
unsatisfactory. Regarding this issue, FTS (Dai et al., 2020) can be treated as a personalized FedHPO
method, where each client maintains its own policy. During the learning procedure, the clients
benefit each other by sharing the policies in a privacy-preserving manner and conducting Thompson
sampling.
It is worth mentioning that parallel algorithms have been utilized in HPO (Jones, 2001; Hutter et al.,
2012). However, in FedHPO, the clients actually do not correspond to the same black-box function
due to the heterogeneity among them. Essentially, FedHPO methods instantiate the concurrent
exploration idea with extra assumptions. Besides, vanilla parallel HPO methods may leak privacy in
the aggregation step, which has been carefully taken into account by FTS.
Dynamic algorithm configuration methods (Biedenkapp et al., 2020; Adriaensen et al., 2022) employ
reinforcement learning to learn policies for online adjustments of algorithm parameters, since different
parameter values can be optimal at different stages. In contrast to DAC methods, the policy π learned
in FedEx is responsible for determining the optimal lower-level response of the bi-level optimization
problem discussed in Section 2.2, which can be regarded as a multi-armed bandit problem rather
than a Markov decision process. In other words, combined with the concurrent exploration strategy,
FedEx tries out one arm at a client in each round, where the underlying reward function is assumed to
be unchanged across the clients and the whole training course.
As an emerging research topic, existing works relating to FedHPO include Fed-Tuning (Zhang et al.,
2021) concerning about system-related performance, learning rate adaptation (Koskela & Honkela,
2020), FLoRA for Gradient Boosted Decision Trees (GBDT), online adaptation scheme-based
method (Mostafa, 2020), Auto-FedRL (Guo et al., 2022) for RL-based hyperparameter adaptation,
and an insightful comparison between local and global HPO (Holly et al., 2021). These methods can
also be easily incorporated into FS, enabling F ED HPO-B ENCH to benchmark them.


B.1   R ELATION TO HPOB ENCH

HPOBench (Eggensperger et al., 2021) is a collection of multi-fidelity HPO benchmarks, highlighted
by their efficiency, reproducibility, and flexibility. These benchmarks can be accessed in either tabular,
surrogate, or raw mode. On the one hand, the tabular and surrogate modes enable function evaluation
without truly executing the corresponding ML algorithm and thus are efficient. On the other hand, the
raw mode means execution in a docker container, which ensures reproducibility. HPOBench provides
twelve families of benchmarks that correspond to different data domains, model types, fidelity spaces,
etc., and thus flexible usages to validate HPO methods. This collection of HPO benchmarks can
promote fair comparisons of related works and reproducible research work, so HPOBench has gained
more and more attention from the community.


                                                   16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


As pointed out in Section 2.2 that evaluating the objective function that corresponds to an FL algorithm
is extremely expensive, F ED HPO-B ENCH also prepares tabular and surrogate modes for users to
avoid truly executing FL courses. Meanwhile, we provide the raw mode to truly execute an FL course
in the docker container of FederatedScope (FS) (Xie et al., 2022).
Sharing the same modes, a question naturally arises—is it possible to reuse HPOBench’s interface
for F ED HPO-B ENCH? We answer this question by discussing their commonality and the unique
ingredients of F ED HPO-B ENCH:
Commonality. As the code snippet in Figure 2 shows, the instantiation of a benchmark class, the
“ConfigSpace” package based specification of search space, and the protocol for the interaction
between an HPO method and a benchmark object are roughly consistent with HPOBench.
Uniqueness. In addition to a collection of benchmarks, F ED HPO-B ENCH is flexible in terms of
enabling users to tailor one benchmark to their scenarios (see Section 3.2). To this end, users are
allowed to instantiate a specific benchmark object with extra optional arguments:

       • Privacy budget with which function evaluation corresponds to the execution of NbAFL (Wei
         et al., 2020) instead of vanilla FedAvg. Taking the tabular mode, for example, this means
         looking up a privacy budget-specific table.
       • The type of fairness metric and its strength with which F ED HPO-B ENCH will consider
         a vector-valued objective function (i.e., client-wise results) rather than a scalar-valued
         objective function. Besides, the return value of calling the function evaluation will be the
         mean performance regularized by the specified fairness regularizer.
       • The parameter(s) for our system model with which the execution time is estimated regarding
         the user’s system condition. Without using a system model, F ED HPO-B ENCH can provide
         the recorded execution time in the creation of this benchmark.

Currently, we implement the interfaces of F ED HPO-B ENCH by ourselves, where the style of
our interfaces is kept similar to HPOBench for the convenience of users who are familiar with
HPOBench. We also provide several examples (https://github.com/FedHPO-Bench/
FedHPO-Bench-ICLR23/tree/main/demo) to access our tabular, surrogate, and raw bench-
marks by implementing HPOBench’s abstract base class. As a first step, we are going to contribute
more such subclasses to the repository of HPOBench so that users can access our benchmarks via
HPOBench’s interfaces, where flexible customization cannot be provided temporarily. In our next
step, we plan to extend the interfaces of HPOBench such that the benchmarks of F ED HPO-B ENCH
can be accessed with our proposed flexible customization.


C    HPO M ETHODS

As shown in Table 6, we provide an overview of the optimizers (i.e., HPO methods) we use in this
paper.

                    Table 6: Overview of the optimizers from widely adopted libraries.

     Name                                                     Model     Packages         version
     RS (Bergstra & Bengio, 2012)                             -         HPBandster       0.7.4
     BOGP (Hutter et al., 2011a; Lindauer et al., 2022)       GP        SMAC3            1.3.3
     BORF (Hutter et al., 2011b)                              RF        SMAC3            1.3.3
     BOKDE (Falkner et al., 2018b)                            KDE       HPBandster       0.7.4
     DE (Storn & Price, 1997; Awad et al., 2020)              -         DEHB             git commit
     HB (Li et al., 2017)                                     -         HPBandster       0.7.4
     BOHB (Falkner et al., 2018a)                             KDE       HPBandster       0.7.4
     DEHB (Awad et al., 2021)                                 -         DEHB             git commit
     TPEMD (Akiba et al., 2019)                               TPE       Optuna           2.10.0
     TPEHB (Akiba et al., 2019)                               TPE       Optuna           2.10.0



                                                   17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


C.1       B LACK - BOX O PTIMIZERS

RS (Random search) is a priori-free HPO method, i.e., each step of the search does not exploit
the already explored configuration. The random search outperforms the grid search within a small
fraction of the computation time.
BOGP is a Bayesian optimization with a Gaussian process model. BOGP uses a Matérn kernel for
continuous hyperparameters, and a hamming kernel for categorical hyperparameters. In addition, the
acquisition function is expected improvement (EI).
BORF is a Bayesian optimization with a random forest model. We set the hyperparameters of the
random forest as follows: the number of trees is 10, the max depth of each tree is 20, and we use the
default setting of the minimal samples split, which is 3.
BOKDE is a Bayesian optimization with kernel density estimators (KDE), which is used in
BOHB (Falkner et al., 2018a). It models objective function as Pr(x | ygood ) and Pr(x | ybad ).
We set the hyperparameters for BOKDE as follows: the number of samples to optimize EI is 64, and
1/3 of purely random configurations are sampled from the prior without the model; the bandwidth
factor is 3 to encourage diversity, and the minimum bandwidth is 1e-3 to keep diversity.
DE uses the evolutionary search approach of Differential Evolution. We set the mutation strategy to
rand1 and the binomial crossover strategy to bin 3 . In addition, we use the default settings for the
other hyperparameters of DE, where the mutation factor is 0.5, crossover probability is 0.5, and the
population size is 20.


C.2       M ULTI - FIDELITY O PTIMIZERS

HB (Hyperband) is an extension on top of successive halving algorithms for the pure-exploration
nonstochastic infinite-armed bandit problem. Hyperband makes a trade-off between the number of
hyperparameter configurations and the budget allocated to each hyperparameter configuration. We set
η to 3, which means only a fraction of 1/η of hyperparameter configurations goes to the next round.
BOHB combines HB with the guidance and guarantees of convergence of Bayesian optimization with
kernel density estimators. We set the hyperparameter of the BO components and the HB components
of BOHB to be the same as BOKDE and HB described above, respectively.
DEHB combines the advantages of the bandit-based method HB and the evolutionary search approach
of DE. The hyperparameter of DE components and BO components are set to be exactly the same as
DE and HB described above, respectively.
TPEMD is implemented in Optuna and uses Tree-structured Parzen Estimator (TPE) as a sampling
algorithm, where on each trial, TPE fits two Gaussian Mixture models for each hyperparameter.
One is to the set of hyperparameters with the best performance, and the other is to the remaining
hyperparameters. In addition, it uses the median stopping rule as a pruner, which means that it will
prune if the trial’s best intermediate result is worse than the median (MD) of intermediate results of
previous trials at the same step. We use the default settings for both TPE and MD.
TPEHB is similar to TPEMD described above, which uses TPE as a sampling algorithm and HB as
pruner. We set the reduction factor to 3 for HB pruner, and all other settings use the default ones.


D        DATASETS

As shown in Table 7, we provide a detailed description of the datasets we use in current F ED HPO-
B ENCH. For comprehensiveness, we use 16 FL datasets from 5 domains, including CV, NLP, graph,
tabular, and recommendation (Xie et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2022; Eggensperger et al., 2021). Some
of them are inherently real-world FL datasets, while others are simulated FL datasets split by the
splitter modules of FS. Notably, the name of datasets from OpenML is the ID of the corresponding
task.

    3
        Please refer to https://github.com/automl/DEHB/blob/master/README.md for details.


                                                 18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                   Table 7: Statistics of the datasets used in current F ED HPO-B ENCH.

       Name                   #Client    Subsample         #Instance        #Class         Split by
       FMNIST                 3,550          5%            805,263             62           Writer
       CIFAR-10                 5           100%            60,000             10           LDA
       CoLA                     5           100%            10,657              2           LDA
       SST-2                    5           100%            70,042              2           LDA
       Cora                     5           100%            2,708               7         Community
       CiteSeer                 5           100%            4,230               6         Community
       PubMed                   5           100%            19,717              3         Community
       Hetero-task              5           100%            6,760             2~6           Task
       credit-g31               5           100%             1,000              2           LDA
       vehicle53                5           100%              846               4           LDA
       kc13917                  5           100%             2,109              2           LDA
       blood-transf..10101      5           100%              748               2           LDA
       Australian146818         5           100%              690               2           LDA
       car146821                5           100%             1,728              4           LDA
       segment146822            5           100%             2,310              7           LDA
       FedNetflix            480,189        100%         ≈100,000,000           5           User
       Twitter               660,120        0.5%          1,600,498             2           User


FEMNIST is an FL image dataset from LEAF (Caldas et al., 2018), whose task is image classification.
Following (Caldas et al., 2018), we use a subsample of FEMNIST with 200 clients, which is round
5%. And we use the default train/valid/test splits for each client, where the ratio is 60% : 20% : 20%.
CIFAR-10 (Krizhevsky et al., 2009) is from Tiny Images dataset and consists of 60,000 32 × 32
color images, whose task is image classification. We split images into 5 clients by latent dirichlet
allocation (LDA) to produce statistical heterogeneity among these clients. We split the raw training
set to training and validation sets with a ratio 4 : 1, so that ratio of final train/valid/test splits is
66.7%:16.67%:16.67%.
SST-2 is a dataset from GLUE (Wang et al., 2018) benchmark, whose task is binary sentiment
classification for sentences. We also split these sentences into 5 clients by LDA. In addition, we use
the official train/valid/test splits for SST-2.
CoLA is also a dataset from GLUE benchmark, whose task is binary classification for sentences—
whether it is a grammatical English sentence. We exactly follow the experimental setup in SST-2.
Cora & CiteSeer & PubMed (Sen et al., 2008; Yang et al., 2016) are three widely adopted graph
datasets, whose tasks are node classification. Following FS-G (Wang et al., 2022), a community
splitter is applied to each graph to generate five subgraphs for each client. We also split the nodes
into train/valid/test sets, where the ratio is 60%:20%:20%.
Hetero-task is a graph classification dataset adopted from Graph-DC (Yao et al., 2022), which
contains 5 clients. Each client has different but similar graph classification task, such as molec-
ular attribute prediction. In addition, we set the ratio of train/valid/test splits in each client to
80%:10%:10%.
Tabular datasets are consist of 7 tabular datasets from OpenML (Bischl et al., 2017), whose task ids
(name of source data) are 31 (credit-g), 53 (vehicle), 3917 (kc1), 10101 (blood-transfusion-service-
center), 146818 (Australian), 146821 (car) and 146822 (segment). We split each dataset into 5
clients by LDA, respectively. In addition, we set the ratio of train/valid/test splits to 80%:10%:10%.
FedNetflix is a recommendation dataset from The Netflix Prize (Bennett & Lanning, 2007), whose
task is to predict the ratings between users and movies. Netflix consists of around 100 million ratings
between 480,189 users and 171,770 movies. We split the Netflix dataset into 480,189 clients by
users. In addition, we set the ratio of train/valid/test splits to 80%:10%:10%.
Twitter is a sentiment analysis dataset from LEAF (Caldas et al., 2018), whose task is to determine
sentiment of sentences. We use a subsample of Twitter with around 3300 clients. Moreover, we use
the train/valid/test splits for each client, where the ratio is 80% : 10% : 10%. It is worth noting that


                                                   19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


the average number of samples is only 1.94, which means some clients do not have valid split or test
split, and we evaluate the performance on a shared test split merged by all clients.

E    S YSTEM M ODEL
In this section, we will discuss the system model in detail we have proposed and implemented. The
total execution time of FL consists of the time consumed by communication and the time consumed
by calculation, thus, the system model is as follows:


           T (f, λ, b) = Tcomm (f, λ, b) + Tcomp (f, λ, b),
                         Sdown (f, λ) Sup (f, λ)
       Tcomm (f, λ, b) =               +            + α(N ),                                                           (1)
                            Bdown           Bup
                                                                              (client)
        Tcomp (f, λ, b) = ET (client) ∼Exp(·|      1
                                                         ),i=1,...,N
                                                                       [max({Ti          })] + T (server) (f, λ, b),
                               i                c(f,λ,b)



where N denotes the number of clients sampled in this round, α(N ) denotes the latency, which is an
increasing function of N but is independent of the message size (contains the time needed to establish
the transmission between the server and the clients), S(f, λ) denotes the download/upload size,
B denotes the download/upload bandwidth of client, T (server) is the time consumed by server-side
                    (client)
computation, and Ti          denotes the computation time consumed by i-th client, which is sampled
from an exponential distribution with c(f, λ, b) as its mean. This design intends to simulate the
heterogeneity among clients’ computational capacity, where the assumed exponential distribution
has been widely adopted in system designs (Wang et al., 2021a) and is consistent with real-world
applications (Huba et al., 2022).
We provide default parameters of our system model, including c(f, λ, b), Bup , Bdown , and T (server) ,
based on observations collected from FL trials we have conducted and real-world network bandwidth.
Users are allowed to specify these parameters according to their scenarios or other system statistic
providers, e.g., estimating the computation time of stragglers by sampling from FedScale (Lai
et al., 2022). As for the network bandwidth, we set Bdown ∼ 0.75MB/secs, Bup ∼ 0.25MB/secs
following (Lai et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2021a). The default value of c(f, λ, b) is obtained by
averaging the recorded client-wise time costs in trials of tabular mode benchmarks. Due to the limit
on the number of ports of the server, we set the default value of the maximum number of connections
in calculating α(N ) to 65535.
To implement our system model, we use the following proposition to calculate Eq. 1 analytically,
where we use c as a shorthand for c(f, λ, b) to keep clarity.
Proposition 1. When the computation time of clients is identically independently distributed, fol-
lowing an exponential distribution Exp(·| 1c ), then the expected time for the straggler of N uniformly
                  PN
sampled clients is i=1 ci .

What we need to calculate is the expected maximum of i.i.d. exponential random variable. Proposi-
tion 1 states that, for N exponential variables independently drawn from Exp(·| 1c ), the expectation is
PN c
   i=1 i . There are many ways to prove this useful proposition, and we provide a proof starting from
studying the minimum of the exponential random variables.

Proof. At first, the minimum of N such random variables obeys Exp(·| Nc ) (Graham et al.,
1989). Denoting the i-th minimum of them by Ti , T1 ∼ Exp(·| Nc ) and TN is what we are
interested in. Meanwhile, it is well known that exponential distribution is memoryless, namely,
Pr(X > s + t|X > s) = Pr(X > t). Thus, T2 − T1 obeys the same distribution as the minimum of
N − 1 such random variables, that is to say, T2 − T1 is a random variable drawn from Exp(·| N c−1 ).
Similarly, (Ti+1 − Ti ) ∼ Exp(·| Nc−i ), i = 1, . . . , N − 1. Thus, we have:
                                        N −1                               N −1         N
                                        X                              c   X      c    X   c
                   E[TN ] = E[T1 +              (Ti+1 − Ti )] =          +           =       ,                         (2)
                                         i=1
                                                                       N   i=1
                                                                                N −i   i=1
                                                                                           i


                                                            20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                          Server


Figure 6: A general algorithmic view for FedHPO methods: They are allowed to concurrently explore different
client-side configurations in the same round of FL, but the clients are heterogeneous, i.e., corresponding to
                     (c)
different functions fi (·). Operators in brackets are optional.

which concludes this proof.

It is worth noting that we provide several optional system models. For example, for point-to-point
transport protocols, Tcomm should contain the time the server sends the model to each client.

F    D ETAILS OF THE I MPLEMENTATIONS OF F ED E X AND FTS

We first present a general algorithmic view in Figure 6, which unifies several such methods as well as
their personalized counterparts. At a high level, a policy π for determining the optimal lower-level
response λ(c)∗ = minλ(c) f (λ(s) , λ(c) ) is to be federally learned, along with the FL course itself. In
the t-th communication round: (1) In addition to the model θ(t) , either the policy π (t) or its decisions
  (c)
λi is also broadcasted. (2) For the i-th client, if π (t) is received, it needs to synchronize its local
          (t)                                                                            (c)
policy πi with this global one and then sample a hyperparameter configuration λi from its local
                                                     (c)
policy. (3) Either received or locally sampled, λi is used to specify the local update procedure of
                                               (t+1)            (t+1)
FL, which results in updated local model θi   . (4) Then θi           is evaluated to provide the result of
                                         (c)    (c)
(client-specific) function evaluation fi       λi     . (5) For personalized FedHPO methods that maintain
                                                                       (t+1)
a local policy πi , it is updated w.r.t. (λi , fi (λi )) to produce
                                                                   πi    .  (6) In  addition to the local
        (t+1)                              (t+1)                (c)    (c)    (c)
model θi        , either the local policy πi  or the feedback λi , fi        λi       is sent to the server.

                                    (t+1)                    (t+1)      (c)    (c)    (c)
(7) Finally, the server aggregates θi     s into θ(t+1) and πi     s/ λi , fi        λi      s into π (t+1) ,
respectively.
In FedEx (Khodak et al., 2021), λi s are independently sampled from π, and the aggregation operator
“aggrp ” is exponential gradient descent. In FTS (Dai et al., 2020), the broadcasted policy π (t) is the
samples drawn from all clients’ posterior beliefs. The synchronous operator “syncp ” can be regarded
as mixing Gaussian process (GP) models. The update operator “updatep ” corresponds to updating
                                                                                                  (t+1)
local GP model. Then a sample drawn from local GP posterior belief is regarded as πi                      and
uploaded. Finally, the aggregation operator “aggrp ” is packing received samples together.

G    S TUDIES ABOUT THE N EW F IDELITY

In FL, a larger client_sample_rate leads to a minor variance of the aggregated model in each round,
which is believed to need less #round for convergence and to perform better. Therefore, we tend
to set the client_sample_rate as close to 1 as possible. However, according to our system model
in Section 3.2, a large client_sample_rate leads to an increase in latency (α(N )), which makes the
communication cost higher. To answer RQ3, we use tabular mode and study the trade-off between
these two fidelity dimensions: client_sample_rate and #round. We simulate two distinct system
conditions by specifying different parameters for our system model.
Protocol. We compare the performance of HB with different client_sample_rates to learn a 2-layer
CNN with 2,048 hidden units on FEMNIST. To simulate a system condition with bad network
status, we set the upload bandwidth Bup to 0.25MB/second and the download bandwidth Bdown to
0.75MB/second (Wang et al., 2021a). As for good network status, we set the upload bandwidth Bup to
0.25GB/second and the download bandwidth B(down) to 0.75GB/second. In both cases, we consider


                                                       21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                            20%                                                         20%
                            1.0                             40%                         1.0                             40%
                                                            60%                                                         60%


               Loss (log)


                                                                           Loss (log)
                            0.5                             80%                         0.5                             80%
                                                            100%                                                        100%
                            0.0                                                         0.0
                            0.5                                                         0.5
                                  0.0   0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8         1.0                           0.0   0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8         1.0
                                           Fraction of budget                                          Fraction of budget
                            (a) With bad network status                                 (b) With good network status

         Figure 7: Performances of different client_sample_rate under different system conditions.


different computation overhead so that it is negligible and significant, respectively. As for the rest
settings, we largely follow that in Section 4.1.
Results and Analysis. We have an answer to RQ3: with the same time budget, the FL procedure
with a lower client_sample_rate achieves a better result than higher client_sample_rate with the
bad network status. In comparison, that with a higher client_sample_rate achieves a better result
than lower client_sample_rate in the good network status. In conclusion, this study suggests a best
practice of pursuing a more economic accuracy-efficiency trade-off by balancing client_sample_rate
with #round, w.r.t. the system condition. Better choices tend to achieve more economical accuracy-
efficiency trade-offs for FedHPO.


H     D ETAILS ON F ED HPO-B ENCH B ENCHMARKS

F ED HPO-B ENCH consists of serveral categories of benchmarks on the different datasets (see
Appendix D) with three modes. If not specified, we use the model as the name of the benchmark
in cross-silo scenario. In this part, we provide more details about how we construct the FedHPO
problems provided by current F ED HPO-B ENCH and the three modes to interact with them.

H.1   C ATEGORY

We categorize our benchmarks by model types. Each benchmark is designed to solve specific FL
HPO problems on its data domain, wherein CNN benchmark on CV, BERT benchmark on NLP, GNN
benchmark on the graphs, and LR & MLP benchmark on tabular data. All benchmarks have several
hyperparameters on configuration space and two on fidelity space, namely sample rate of FL and FL
round. And the benchmarks support several FL algorithms, such as FedAvg and FedOpt.
CNN benchmark learns a two-layer CNN with 2048 hidden units on FEMNIST and 128 hidden
units on CIFAR-10 with five hyperparameters on configuration space that tune the batch size of the
dataloader, the weight decay, the learning rate, the dropout of the CNN models, and the step size of
local training round in client each FL communication round. The tabular and surrogate mode of the
CNN benchmark only supports FedAvg due to our limitations in computing resources for now, but
we will update F ED HPO-B ENCH with more results as soon as possible.
BERT benchmark fine-tunes a pre-trained language model, BERT-Tiny, which has two layers and
128 hidden units, on CoLA and SST-2. The BERT benchmark also has five hyperparameters on
configuration space which is the same as CNN benchmark. In addition, the BERT benchmark support
FedAvg and FedOpt with all three mode.
GNN benchmark learns a two-layer GCN with 64 hidden units on Cora, CiteSeer and PubMed. The
GNN benchmark has four on hyperparameters configuration space that tune the weight decay, the
learning rate, the dropout of the GNN models, and the step size of local training round in client each
FL communication round. The GNN benchmark support FedAvg and FedOpt with all three mode.
Hetero benchmark learns a two-layer GCN with 64 hidden units as backbone to be aggregated. The
Hetero benchmark has two on hyperparameters configuration space that tune the learning rate and the
step size of local training round in client each FL communication round. For each client, there are


                                                                      22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Table 8: The search space of our benchmarks, where continuous search spaces are discretized into several bins
under the tabular mode.

    Benchmark                          Name               Type    Log   #Bins             Range
                                     batch_size            int    ×         -         {16, 32, 64}
                                   weight_decay           float   ×        4            [0, 0.001]
                     Client            dropout            float   ×        2             [0, 0.5]
                                      step_size            int    ×        4               [1, 4]
        CNN                        learning_rate          float   ✓        10          [0.01, 1.0]
                                     momentum             float   ×        2            [0.0, 0.9]
                     Server
                                   learning_rate          float   ×        3            [0.1, 1.0]
                                client_sample_rate        float   ×        5            [0.2, 1.0]
                    Fidelity
                                        round              int    ×       250            [1, 500]
                                     batch_size            int    ×         -     {8, 16, 32, 64, 128}
                                   weight_decay           float   ×        4            [0, 0.001]
                     Client            dropout            float   ×        2             [0, 0.5]
                                      step_size            int    ×        4               [1, 4]
       BERT                        learning_rate          float   ✓        10          [0.01, 1.0]
                                     momentum             float   ×        2            [0.0, 0.9]
                     Server
                                   learning_rate          float   ×        3            [0.1, 1.0]
                                client_sample_rate        float   ×        5            [0.2, 1.0]
                    Fidelity
                                        round              int    ×        40             [1, 40]
                                   weight_decay           float   ×        4            [0, 0.001]
                                       dropout            float   ×        2             [0, 0.5]
                     Client
                                      step_size            int    ×        8               [1, 8]
                                   learning_rate          float   ✓        10          [0.01, 1.0]
       GNN
                                     momentum             float   ×        2            [0.0, 0.9]
                     Server
                                   learning_rate          float   ×        3            [0.1, 1.0]
                                client_sample_rate        float   ×        5            [0.2, 1.0]
                    Fidelity
                                        round              int    ×       500            [1, 500]
                                   learning_rate          float   ✓        2          [0.001, 0.01]
                     Client
                                      step_size            int    ×        2               [1, 4]
       Hetero
                                client_sample_rate        float   ×        5            [0.2, 1.0]
                    Fidelity
                                        round              int    ×       500            [1, 500]
                                     batch_size            int    ✓        7             [4, 256]
                                   weight_decay           float   ×        4            [0, 0.001]
                     Client
                                      step_size            int    ×        4               [1, 4]
                                   learning_rate          float   ✓        6         [0.00001, 1.0]
         LR
                                     momentum             float   ×        2            [0.0, 0.9]
                     Server
                                   learning_rate          float   ×        3            [0.1, 1.0]
                                client_sample_rate        float   ×        5            [0.2, 1.0]
                    Fidelity
                                        round              int    ×       500            [1, 500]
                                     batch_size            int    ✓        7             [4, 256]
                                   weight_decay           float   ×        4            [0, 0.001]
                                      step_size            int    ×        4               [1, 4]
                     Client
                                   learning_rate          float   ✓        6         [0.00001, 1.0]
                                        depth              int    ×        3               [1, 3]
        MLP
                                        width              int    ✓        7           [16, 1024]
                                     momentum             float   ×        2            [0.0, 0.9]
                     Server
                                   learning_rate          float   ×        3            [0.1, 1.0]
                                client_sample_rate        float   ×        5            [0.2, 1.0]
                    Fidelity
                                        round              int    ×       500            [1, 500]


                                                     23
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


personalized encoder and classifier to handle different tasks. Thus, the Hadamard product of each
client’s configuration makes the search space.
LR benchmark learns an lr on seven tasks from OpenML, see Appendix D for details. The LR
benchmark has four on hyperparameters configuration space that tune the batch size of the dataloader,
the weight decay, the learning rate, and the step size of local training round in client each FL
communication round. The LR benchmark support FedAvg and FedOpt with all three mode.
MLP benchmark’s the vast majority of settings are the same as LR benchmark. But in particular, we
add depth and width of the MLP to search space in terms of model architecture. The MLP benchmark
also support FedAvg and FedOpt with all three mode.
Cross-device. In cross-device scenarios, there can be large number of clients in total, but only a
few participate in each communication round. This benchmark contains two datasets, Twitter and
FedNetflix. We use a bag of words model with LR and tune the learning_rate, weight_decay, and
step_size of local training round in Twitter. As for FedNetflix, we tune an HMFNet (Li et al., 2021c)
in the learning_rate, batch_size, and step_size of local training round. Due to the time limit, the
results FedNetflix is incomplete, and we present the ECDF of Twitter in Figure 9.

H.2    M ODE

Following HPOBench (Eggensperger et al., 2021), F ED HPO-B ENCH provides three different modes
for function evaluation: the tabular mode, the surrogate mode, and the raw mode. The valid input
hyperparameter configurations and the speed of acquiring feedback vary from mode to mode. Users
can choose the desired mode according to the purposes of their experiments.
Tabular mode. The idea is to evaluate the performance of many different hyperparameter configura-
tions in advance so that users can acquire their results immediately. For efficient function evaluation,
we implement the tabular mode of F ED HPO-B ENCH by running the FL algorithms configured by
the grid search space in advance from our original search space (see Table 8). For hyperparameters
whose original search space is discrete, we just preserve its original one. As for continuous ones,
we discretize them into several bins (also see Table 8 for details). To ensure that the results are
reproducible, we execute the FL procedure in the Docker container environment. Each specific
configuration λ is repeated three times with different random seeds, and the resulted performances,
including loss, accuracy and f1-score under train/validation/test splits, are averaged and adopted
as the results of f (λ). Users can choose the desired metric as the output of the black-box function
via F ED HPO-B ENCH’s APIs. Besides, we provide not only the results of f (λ) (i.e., that with
full-fidelity) but also results of f (λ, b), where b is enumerated across different #round and different
client_sample_rate. Since executing function evaluation is much more costly in FL than traditional
centralized learning, such lookup tables are precious. In creating them, we spent about two months of
computation time on six machines, each with four Nvidia V100 GPUs. Now we make them publicly
accessible via the tabular mode of F ED HPO-B ENCH.
Surrogate mode.
As tabular mode has discretized the original search space and thus cannot respond to queries other
than the grids, we train random forest models on these lookup tables, i.e., {(λ, b), f (λ, b))}. These
models serve as a surrogate of the functions to be optimized and can answer any query λ by simply
making an inference. Specifically, we conduct 10-fold cross-validation to train and evaluate random
forest models (implemented in scikit-learn (Pedregosa et al., 2011)) on the tabular data. Meanwhile,
we search for suitable hyperparameters for the random forest models with the number of trees in
{10, 20} and the max depth in {10, 15, 20}. The mean absolute error (MAE) of the surrogate model
w.r.t. the true value is within an acceptable threshold. For example, in predicting the true average loss
on the CNN benchmark, the surrogate model has a training error of 0.00609 and a testing error of
0.00777. In addition to the off-the-shelf surrogate models we provide, F ED HPO-B ENCH offers tools
for users to build brand-new surrogate models. Meanwhile, we notice the recent successes of neural
network-based surrogate, e.g., YAHPO Gym (Pfisterer et al., 2022), and we will also try it in the next
version of F ED HPO-B ENCH.
Raw mode. Both of the above modes, although they can respond quickly, are limited to pre-designed
search space. Thus, we introduce raw mode to F ED HPO-B ENCH, where user-defined search spaces
are allowed. Once F ED HPO-B ENCH’s APIs are called with specific hyperparameters, a containerized


                                                   24
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


and standalone FL procedure (supported by FS) will be launched. It is worth noting that although we
use standalone simulation to eliminate the communication cost, raw mode still consumes much more
computation cost than tabular and surrogate modes.

H.3     N EW H YPERPARAMETERS

The FL setting introduces new hyperparameters such as server-side learning_rate, momentum for
FedOpt (Asad et al., 2020) and client-side #local_update_step. Different FL algorithms have different
parameters, which correlate with hyperparameters related to general ML procedures. In this section,
we first adopt FedProx (Li et al., 2020b) to study the impact of server-side hyperparameters mu, the
coefficient of the regular term, on the results. And then we compare the landscape of the federated
learning method and non-federated method.

H.3.1    T RENDS WITH D IFFERENT R EGULARITY IN F ED P ROX
To extend the tabular benchmarks with more FL algorithms, we adopt FedProx (Li et al., 2020b) to
GNN benchmark. Based on Table 8, we tune the server-side hyperparameters mu, the coefficient of
the regular term, in {0.1, 1.0, 5.0} to study the trends with different regularity in FedProx. We show
the landscape in Figure 10 with learning rate in [0.01, 1.0] and mu in [0.1, 5.0], and we observe that
when the learning rate is low, the effect of mu has little impact on the accuracy; however, when the
learning rate is large, the increase of mu can seriously damage the accuracy.

H.3.2    L ANDSCAPES ON ML- RELATED H YPERPARAMETERS
In this section, to study the validation loss landscape of the federated learning method (FedAvg) and
non-federated method (Isolated), we consider learning_rate and batch_size, the hyperparameters
of the ML algorithm, as the coordinate axis to build the loss landscapes. We fix other ML-related
hyperparameters weight_decay to 0.0, dropout to 0.5 for both FedAvg and Isolated, which is the
best configuration chosen from the tabular benchmark <CNN, FEMNIST, FedAvg> under 1.0
client_sample_rate. As the loss landscapes shown in Figure 8 with learning rate in [0.01, 1.0] and
batch size in 16, 32, 64, we observe that the FedAvg with a higher learning rate achieves better results,
while the non-federated method (Isolated) prefer a lower learning rate. Their differences suggest the
uniqueness of FedHPO’s objective functions.



                                                                                                    0.8
                                                0.86



                                                                                                    0.7

                                                0.84

                                                                                                    0.6



                                                0.82
                                                                                                    0.5


                                                                                                    0.4
                                                0.8



                                                                                                    0.3


                                                0.78

                                                                                                    0.2


                                                0.76                                                0.1


                    (a) FedAvg                                          (b) Isolated

            Figure 8: Landscape with the hyperparameters of the ML algorithm on FEMNIST.


H.4     DATA A NALYTICS

H.4.1    T RENDS IN D IFFERENT P RIVACY B UDGETS
We extend the tabular benchmarks with different levels of privacy budgets in FEMNIST and Cora. To
explore the trends of optimal configurations under different privacy budgets, we adopt NbAFL (Wei


                                                       25
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


et al., 2020) with ϵ ∈ {1, 10, 20}. We observe that the best configuration varies under different
levels of privacy budgets in and Cora, as shown in Table 10. Under different privacy budgets, a large
step_size all leads to a good performance. However, when the noise is intense, a higher learning_rate
is preferred, while a lower learning_rate will perform better when the noise is weak.

        1.0
        0.8
                                                   ϵ    learning_rate     weight_decay     dropout    step_size    Test Acc. (%)
P(X <= x)


        0.6
                                                   1    1.0               0.001            0.5        7            63.87 ± 6.38
        0.4
                                                   10   0.59948           0.0              0.5        6            87.02 ± 1.16
        0.2
                                         Twitter   20   0.59948           0.001            0.5        6            87.30 ± 0.54
        0.0
              0.0   0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
                       Normalized regret
Figure 9: ECDF on Twitter.                         Table 10: Best configuration with different levels of privacy budgets in Cora.



H.4.2               E RRORS OF S URROGATE B ENCHMARKS
As we mentioned in Section H.2, we report the regression error of training surrogate model in
Table 12. Meanwhile, we present the mean rank over time of optimizers with surrogate modes in
Figure 22 and Figure 23. Compared to the results of tabular modes in 13 and 14, BOGP shows good
performance in both modes, while Random Search does not. This show the consistent performance
of the same optimizer when it interplays with surrogate and tabular benchmarks.


                                                           0.9


                                                                  Model      Dataset       Algo.     Train MAE    Test MAE
                                                           0.8
                                                                  CNN       FEMNIST       FedAvg      0.00609      0.00777
                                                           0.7                            FedAvg      0.04724      0.05454
                                                                                CoLA
                                                                                          FedOpt      0.02426      0.02959
                                                           0.6    BERT
                                                                                          FedAvg      0.02597      0.03227
                                                                                SST2
                                                           0.5
                                                                                          FedOpt      0.02802      0.03166
                                                                                          FedAvg      0.04702      0.04839
                                                                                Cora
                                                           0.4
                                                                                          FedOpt      0.05703      0.05893
                                                                                          FedAvg      0.01334      0.01381
                                                           0.3
                                                                  GNN          CiteSeer
                                                                                          FedOpt      0.01652      0.01717
                                                           0.2                            FedAvg      0.04042      0.04148
                                                                               PubMed
                                                                                          FedOpt      0.04816      0.05699
    Figure 10: Landscape with the different
        regularity of FedProx on Cora.                               Table 12: The regression error of surrogate models.



H.4.3               VARIANCE OF D IFFERENT S AMPLE R ATE
As we build our tabular benchmark from FL courses executed in docker images provided by FS, we
can fully reproduce all the results given the same random seed in raw mode. Other than that, to study
the noise of different federated optimization, we analyze the variance of validation loss with 500
rounds under different sample rates in FEMNIST. And the mean standard deviation validation loss
is {1.945e-2, 1.7e-2, 1.728e-2, 1.715e-2, 1.43e-2} with sample rate {0.2, 0.4, 0.6, 0.8, 1.0}, which
shows that the higher sample rate tends to have lower variance. The reason is apparent: the lower the
sampling rate, the more inconsistent the set of clients sampled during the training process leads to
this error.

H.4.4               ECDF WITH DIFFERENT HETEROGENEITY
We extend our LR benchmarks with different heterogeneity settings. As we discussed in Appendix D,
we split the tabular dataset with LDA, whose α is in {0.1, 0.5, 0.7} (the smaller the alpha, the more
the heterogeneous). We show the ECDF of the normalized regret of evaluated configurations with
different α in Figure 11, which shows that as the α decreases, it is harder to find a good configuration.
This phenomenon shows the necessity of tuning hyperparameters in FL with heterogeneous data.


                                                                          26
  Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


        1.0                                                                  1.0                                                                1.0
        0.8                                                                  0.8                                                                0.8
P(X <= x)                                        credit-g                                                                                                                          credit-g


                                                                     P(X <= x)


                                                                                                                                        P(X <= x)
        0.6                                      vehicle                     0.6                                       credit-g                 0.6                                vehicle
                                                                                                                       vehicle
        0.4                                      kc1                         0.4                                       kc1                      0.4                                kc1
                                                 blood-transf..                                                        blood-transf..                                              blood-transf..
        0.2                                      Australian                  0.2                                       Australian               0.2                                Australian
                                                 car                                                                   car                                                         car
                                                 segment                                                               segment                                                     segment
        0.0                                                                  0.0                                                                0.0
                   0.0    0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8                    1.0                     0.0    0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8                       1.0                  0.0   0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8                     1.0
                             Normalized regret                                                 Normalized regret                                                Normalized regret
                              (a) α = 0.1                                                        (b) α = 0.5                                                    (c) α = 0.7
            Figure 11: Empirical Cumulative Distribution Functions with different heterogeneity in LR benchmark.
  I                M ORE R ESULTS
  In this section, we show the detailed experimental results of the optimizers on F ED HPO-B ENCH
  benchmarks under different modes. We first report the averaged best-seen validation loss, from
  which the mean rank over time for all optimizers can be deduced. Due to time and computing
  resource constraints, we do not have a complete experimental result of the raw mode, which we will
  supplement as soon as possible.

  I.1               TABULAR MODE

  Following Section 4.1, we show the overall mean rank overtime on all FedHPO problems with
  FedOpt, whose pattern is similar to that of FedAvg in Figure 4. Then, we report the final results with
  FedAvg and FedOpt in Table 13 and 14, respectively. Finally, we report the mean rank over time in
  Figure 13-21. Due to time and computing resource constraints, the results on CNN benchmark are
  incomplete (lacking that with FedOpt), which we will supplement as soon as possible.
               5                                                                 5                                                                  10
                                                                                                                                                     9
               4                                                                 4                                                                   8
                                                                                                                                                     7
       Mean rank


                                                                        Mean rank


                                                                                                                                           Mean rank


               3                                                                 3                                                                   6
                                                                                                                                                     5
                                                                                                                                                     4
               2                                                                 2                                                                   3
                                                                                                                                                     2
               11e-4          1e-3 1e-2 1e-1                     1               11e-4       1e-3 1e-2 1e-1                       1                  11e-4      1e-3 1e-2 1e-1                   1
                               Fraction of budget                                             Fraction of budget                                                 Fraction of budget
                                 (a) BBO                                                           (b) MF                                                          (c) All


                                         Figure 12: Mean rank over time on all FedHPO problems (with FedOpt).


                           Table 13: Final results of the optimizers on tabular mode with FedAvg (lower is better).

    benchmark            RS               BOGP            BORF                   BOKDE            DE              HB                BOHB                 DEHB            TPEMD           TPEHB
    CNNFEMNIST           0.4969±0.0054    0.4879±0.0051   0.4885±0.0065          0.5004±0.0068    0.4928±0.0054   0.4926±0.0052     0.4945±0.0059        0.498±0.0061    0.5163±0.0028   0.5148±0.0047
    BERTSST-2            0.435±0.0142     0.4276±0.0082   0.4294±0.0071          0.4334±0.0081    0.437±0.0052    0.4311±0.0151     0.4504±0.0441        0.4319±0.0251   0.4341±0.0044   0.4251±0.0076
    BERTCoLA             0.6151±0.0014    0.6148±0.0014   0.6141±0.0016          0.6133±0.0022    0.6143±0.0006   0.6143±0.0016     0.6168±0.0025        0.6178±0.0025   0.6158±0.0014   0.6146±0.0018
    GNNCora              0.3265±0.0042    0.3258±0.0062   0.326±0.0063           0.3347±0.0078    0.3267±0.0066   0.3324±0.0136     0.3288±0.0030        0.3225±0.0039   0.3241±0.0014   0.3249±0.0020
    GNNCiteSeer          0.6469±0.0052    0.6442±0.0046   0.6499±0.0069          0.6442±0.0089    0.6453±0.0061   0.6387±0.0077     0.6425±0.0054        0.6452±0.0030   0.6324±0.0070   0.6371±0.0051
    GNNPubMed            0.5262±0.0167    0.5146±0.0136   0.5169±0.0193          0.5311±0.0110    0.5001±0.0082   0.5006±0.0144     0.5194±0.0212        0.4934±0.0010   0.506±0.0179    0.5044±0.0150
    LR31                 0.6821±0.1299    0.6308±0.0292   0.6382±0.0435          0.6385±0.0459    0.667±0.0888    0.6492±0.0187     0.6461±0.0472        0.6145±0.0242   0.7228±0.0427   0.758±0.0460
    LR53                 1.6297±0.1628    1.7288±0.2306   1.6116±0.2017          1.7142±0.1663    1.6062±0.1487   1.5765±0.1416     1.5634±0.1993        1.4755±0.1126   1.5506±0.0010   1.5506±0.0010
    LR3917               1.8892±0.2647    1.7561±0.2538   1.7186±0.3562          2.4271±1.1596    1.7519±0.6093   3.948±2.5432      1.6384±0.1849        3.1183±2.9336   2.1344±1.0268   2.6576±1.1446
    LR10101              0.548±0.0002     0.5483±0.0002   0.5482±0.0003          0.5487±0.0008    0.5481±0.0002   0.5504±0.0049     0.5505±0.0047        0.5516±0.0064   0.5483±0.0009   0.5487±0.0017
    LR146818             0.5294±0.0006    0.5291±0.0002   0.5295±0.0006          0.5289±0.0004    0.5291±0.0007   0.5292±0.0008     0.529±0.0004         0.5293±0.0002   0.5328±0.0055   0.5387±0.0186
    LR146821             0.4733±0.0025    0.464±0.0068    0.4722±0.0123          0.4843±0.0205    0.4971±0.0312   0.4678±0.0109     0.4747±0.0127        0.4707±0.0095   0.4792±0.0083   0.4688±0.0086
    LR146822             0.4581±0.0202    0.4481±0.0102   0.4505±0.0182          0.4731±0.0197    0.4587±0.0118   0.4478±0.0122     0.4446±0.0066        0.4304±0.0071   0.4376±0.0071   0.4419±0.0089
    MLP31                0.5899±0.0032    0.5891±0.0052   0.5808±0.0094          0.5904±0.0035    0.5925±0.0008   0.5921±0.0017     0.5929±0.0001        0.593±0.0001    0.593±0.0000    0.593±0.0000
    MLP53                0.7795±0.0156    0.7373±0.0186   0.7849±0.0215          0.8215±0.1220    0.8068±0.0752   0.769±0.0226      0.7577±0.0222        0.8173±0.1407   0.9491±0.0951   1.0567±0.0158
    MLP3917              0.3863±0.0099    0.3937±0.0094   0.3858±0.0105          0.3958±0.0088    0.383±0.0074    0.3895±0.0049     0.3911±0.0079        0.4084±0.0407   0.3979±0.0035   0.3988±0.0036
    MLP10101             0.4054±0.0113    0.4217±0.0065   0.4361±0.0124          0.4162±0.0154    0.418±0.0083    0.4137±0.0109     0.4152±0.0142        0.4102±0.0109   0.4522±0.0491   0.4352±0.0407
    MLP146818            0.5089±0.0092    0.4997±0.0072   0.5125±0.0076          0.5112±0.0049    0.5138±0.0107   0.5009±0.0043     0.5199±0.0118        0.5039±0.0060   0.5392±0.0129   0.54±0.0197
    MLP146821            0.184±0.0187     0.1251±0.0167   0.155±0.0183           0.1769±0.0410    0.1851±0.0236   0.1561±0.0279     0.1683±0.0291        0.1572±0.0305   0.1654±0.0422   0.1761±0.0409
    MLP146822            0.2839±0.0259    0.2892±0.0363   0.317±0.0147           0.3586±0.0754    0.2928±0.0325   0.2927±0.0233     0.2823±0.0445        0.2549±0.0176   0.2745±0.0334   0.2755±0.0221


                                                                                                       27
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                   Table 14: Final results of the optimizers on tabular mode with FedOpt (lower is better).

benchmark     RS                 BOGP             BORF            BOKDE               DE              HB              BOHB                DEHB            TPEMD           TPEHB
BERTSST-2     0.441±0.0049       0.4325±0.0125    0.4301±0.0087   0.4463±0.0093       0.4351±0.0185   0.4403±0.0064   0.4295±0.0066       0.4285±0.0068   0.4293±0.0106   0.4332±0.0122
BERTCoLA      0.616±0.0008       0.616±0.0011     0.6141±0.0022   0.6137±0.0025       0.6159±0.0005   0.6154±0.0013   0.6157±0.0018       0.6176±0.0004   0.6172±0.0005   0.6168±0.0004
GNNCora       0.3264±0.0027      0.3235±0.0004    0.3268±0.0032   0.3322±0.0101       0.3256±0.0009   0.3245±0.0014   0.3347±0.0121       0.3254±0.0008   0.3405±0.0129   0.3361±0.0187
GNNCiteSeer   0.6483±0.0028      0.6517±0.0053    0.6497±0.0050   0.6535±0.0072       0.6458±0.0028   0.6442±0.0034   0.6543±0.0112       0.6463±0.0029   0.6488±0.0008   0.6495±0.0007
GNNPubMed     0.4777±0.0118      0.4426±0.0132    0.4718±0.0204   0.4943±0.0359       0.4318±0.0001   0.4559±0.0135   0.4699±0.0248       0.4318±0.0001   0.4368±0.0098   0.4402±0.0167
LR31          0.7358±0.0937      0.6831±0.0198    0.6849±0.0523   0.8152±0.1180       0.7085±0.0660   0.6772±0.0527   0.6877±0.0561       0.6385±0.0498   0.8652±0.0851   0.7044±0.0403
LR53          1.7838±0.2698      1.5609±0.1957    1.5241±0.0547   1.5116±0.0437       1.6208±0.3794   1.6045±0.2433   1.7236±0.4056       1.3488±0.1343   1.6654±0.2338   1.7978±0.2937
LR3917        2.254±0.5724       2.0316±0.5246    2.3952±0.7949   1.9788±0.5290       2.6261±0.5535   2.3472±1.2238   2.5452±0.5266       2.3144±0.8685   3.2131±2.2754   2.0291±0.3674
LR10101       0.5533±0.0078      0.55±0.0036      0.5505±0.0032   0.5509±0.0032       0.549±0.0012    0.5504±0.0029   0.5476±0.0017       0.5522±0.0056   0.5612±0.0201   0.8567±0.6019
LR146818      0.511±0.0099       0.506±0.0103     0.5034±0.0097   0.5133±0.0078       0.5007±0.0021   0.5032±0.0054   0.5086±0.0067       0.4974±0.0030   0.4983±0.0049   0.5104±0.0157
LR146821      0.4017±0.0272      0.3599±0.0148    0.4121±0.0188   0.4134±0.0364       0.4079±0.0242   0.395±0.0228    0.398±0.0448        0.3902±0.0300   0.4447±0.0447   0.4625±0.0735
LR146822      0.3972±0.0060      0.4211±0.0236    0.4037±0.0191   0.4442±0.0261       0.4075±0.0127   0.4131±0.0215   0.4008±0.0085       0.3916±0.0086   0.3878±0.0074   0.3871±0.0043
MLP31         0.5912±0.0012      0.5914±0.0024    0.5912±0.0012   0.5912±0.0023       0.5918±0.0011   0.5923±0.0007   0.5921±0.0007       0.5911±0.0023   0.5921±0.0006   0.5921±0.0006
MLP53         0.9096±0.0690      0.8166±0.0890    0.8111±0.0998   0.8872±0.1465       0.8546±0.1223   1.0163±0.0781   0.8565±0.0574       0.9849±0.1238   1.1276±0.0394   1.0952±0.0293
MLP3917       0.3798±0.0126      0.3937±0.0086    0.3862±0.0075   0.3871±0.0110       0.3867±0.0086   0.4109±0.0402   0.4262±0.0687       0.3812±0.0125   0.4003±0.0000   0.4003±0.0001
MLP10101      0.4219±0.0168      0.4141±0.0056    0.4197±0.0138   0.4111±0.0078       0.4303±0.0369   0.4145±0.0106   0.4256±0.0286       0.4215±0.0277   0.4502±0.0390   0.4502±0.0300
MLP146818     0.4943±0.0018      0.4913±0.0108    0.5022±0.0090   0.5023±0.0113       0.4884±0.0058   0.4995±0.0087   0.5046±0.0298       0.4921±0.0293   0.4978±0.0135   0.4861±0.0240
MLP146821     0.1169±0.0128      0.0836±0.0132    0.0915±0.0149   0.1674±0.0600       0.1079±0.0444   0.0891±0.0150   0.1389±0.0465       0.0838±0.0270   0.1051±0.0138   0.1194±0.0130
MLP146822     0.2963±0.0264      0.2914±0.0215    0.2705±0.0240   0.3025±0.0447       0.2779±0.0063   0.2759±0.0216   0.2621±0.0201       0.2549±0.0108   0.257±0.0020    0.2518±0.0055


                             10                                              5                                                5
                              9
                              8                                              4                                                4
                              7                                      Mean rank


                                                                                                                      Mean rank
                     Mean rank


                              6                                              3                                                3
                              5
                              4                                              2
                              3                                                                                               2
                              2
                              1                                              1                                                11e-4
                               1e-4    1e-3 1e-2 1e-1         1               1e-4    1e-3 1e-2 1e-1          1                        1e-3 1e-2 1e-1          1
                                        Fraction of budget                             Fraction of budget                               Fraction of budget

                                 (a) ALLFEMNIST                                  (b) BBOFEMNIST                                       (c) MFFEMNIST


                                        Figure 13: Mean rank over time on CNN benchmark (FedAvg).

                             10                                              5                                                5
                              9
                              8                                              4                                                4
                              7
                                                                     Mean rank


                                                                                                                      Mean rank
                     Mean rank


                              6                                              3                                                3
                              5
                              4
                              3                                              2                                                2
                              2
                              11e-4    1e-3 1e-2 1e-1         1              11e-4    1e-3 1e-2 1e-1          1               11e-4    1e-3 1e-2 1e-1          1
                                        Fraction of budget                             Fraction of budget                               Fraction of budget

                                      (a) ALLBERT                                    (b) BBOBERT                                       (c) MFBERT
                             10                                              5                                                5
                              9
                              8                                              4                                                4
                              7
                                                                     Mean rank


                                                                                                                      Mean rank
                     Mean rank


                              6                                              3                                                3
                              5
                              4
                              3                                              2                                                2
                              2
                              11e-4    1e-3 1e-2 1e-1         1              11e-4    1e-3 1e-2 1e-1          1               11e-4    1e-3 1e-2 1e-1          1
                                        Fraction of budget                             Fraction of budget                               Fraction of budget

                                      (d) ALLCoLA                                    (e) BBOCoLA                                       (f) MFCoLA
                             10                                              5                                                5
                              9
                              8                                              4                                                4
                              7
                                                                     Mean rank


                                                                                                                      Mean rank
                     Mean rank


                              6                                              3                                                3
                              5
                              4
                              3                                              2                                                2
                              2
                              1                                              11e-4                                            11e-4
                               1e-4    1e-3 1e-2 1e-1         1                       1e-3 1e-2 1e-1          1                        1e-3 1e-2 1e-1          1
                                        Fraction of budget                             Fraction of budget                               Fraction of budget

                                      (g) ALLSST-2                                   (h) BBOSST-2                                      (i) MFSST-2


                                        Figure 14: Mean rank over time on BERT benchmark (FedAvg).



                                                                                           28
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                      10                                             5                                           5
                       9
                       8                                             4                                           4
                       7


                                                             Mean rank


                                                                                                         Mean rank
              Mean rank
                       6                                             3                                           3
                       5
                       4
                       3                                             2                                           2
                       2
                       1                                             11e-4                                       11e-4
                        1e-4    1e-3 1e-2 1e-1         1                      1e-3 1e-2 1e-1         1                   1e-3 1e-2 1e-1         1
                                 Fraction of budget                            Fraction of budget                         Fraction of budget

                               (a) ALLBERT                                   (b) BBOBERT                                 (c) MFBERT
                                                                     5                                           5
                      10
                       9
                       8                                             4                                           4
                       7


                                                             Mean rank


                                                                                                         Mean rank
              Mean rank


                       6                                             3                                           3
                       5
                       4
                       3                                             2                                           2
                       2
                       1                                             11e-4                                       11e-4
                        1e-4    1e-3 1e-2 1e-1         1                      1e-3 1e-2 1e-1         1                   1e-3 1e-2 1e-1         1
                                 Fraction of budget                            Fraction of budget                         Fraction of budget

                               (d) ALLCoLA                                   (e) BBOCoLA                                 (f) MFCoLA
                      10                                             5                                           5
                       9
                       8                                             4                                           4
                       7
                                                             Mean rank


                                                                                                         Mean rank
              Mean rank


                       6                                             3                                           3
                       5
                       4
                       3                                             2                                           2
                       2
                       1                                             11e-4                                       11e-4
                        1e-4    1e-3 1e-2 1e-1         1                      1e-3 1e-2 1e-1         1                   1e-3 1e-2 1e-1         1
                                 Fraction of budget                            Fraction of budget                         Fraction of budget

                               (g) ALLSST-2                                  (h) BBOSST-2                                (i) MFSST-2


                                 Figure 15: Mean rank over time on BERT benchmark (FedOpt).


I.2   S URROGATE MODE

We report the the final results with FedAvg on FEMNIST and BERT benchmarks in Table 15. Then
we present the mean rank over time of the optimizers in Figure 22 and Figure 23.

                          Table 15: Final results of the optimizers in surrogate mode (lower is better).

 benchmark                RS         BOGP             BORF               BOKDE      DE              HB               BOHB       DEHB           TPEMD    TPEHB
 CNNFEMNIST               0.0508     0.0478           0.0514             0.0492     0.0503          0.0478           0.048      0.0469         0.0471   0.0458
 BERTSST-2                0.4909     0.4908           0.4908             0.4908     0.4908          0.4908           0.4908     0.4917         0.4908   0.4908
 BERTCoLA                 0.5013     0.4371           0.4113             0.487      0.444           0.4621           0.4232     0.4204         0.3687   0.3955


                                                                                   29
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                   10                                          5                                           5
                    9
                    8                                          4                                           4
                    7


                                                       Mean rank


                                                                                                   Mean rank
           Mean rank


                    6                                          3                                           3
                    5
                    4
                    3                                          2                                           2
                    2
                    11e-4    1e-3 1e-2 1e-1        1           11e-4     1e-3 1e-2 1e-1        1           11e-4    1e-3 1e-2 1e-1        1
                              Fraction of budget                          Fraction of budget                         Fraction of budget

                            (a) ALLGNN                                  (b) BBOGNN                                 (c) MFGNN
                   10                                          5                                           5
                    9
                    8                                          4                                           4
                    7
                                                       Mean rank


                                                                                                   Mean rank
           Mean rank


                    6                                          3                                           3
                    5
                    4
                    3                                          2                                           2
                    2
                    1                                          11e-4                                       11e-4
                     1e-4    1e-3 1e-2 1e-1        1                     1e-3 1e-2 1e-1        1                    1e-3 1e-2 1e-1        1
                              Fraction of budget                          Fraction of budget                         Fraction of budget

                            (d) ALLCora                                 (e) BBOCora                                 (f) MFCora
                   10                                          5                                           5
                    9
                    8                                          4                                           4
                    7
                                                       Mean rank


                                                                                                   Mean rank
           Mean rank


                    6                                          3                                           3
                    5
                    4
                    3                                          2                                           2
                    2
                    11e-4    1e-3 1e-2 1e-1        1           11e-4     1e-3 1e-2 1e-1        1           11e-4    1e-3 1e-2 1e-1        1
                              Fraction of budget                          Fraction of budget                         Fraction of budget

                        (g) ALLCiteSeer                                (h) BBOCiteSeer                             (i) MFCiteSeer
                   10
                                                               5                                           5
                    9
                    8                                          4                                           4
                    7
                                                       Mean rank


                                                                                                   Mean rank
           Mean rank


                    6                                          3                                           3
                    5
                    4                                                                                      2
                    3                                          2
                    2
                    1                                          11e-4                                       1
                     1e-4    1e-3 1e-2 1e-1        1                     1e-3 1e-2 1e-1        1            1e-4    1e-3 1e-2 1e-1        1
                              Fraction of budget                          Fraction of budget                         Fraction of budget

                        (j) ALLPubMed                                  (k) BBOPubMed                               (l) MFPubMed


                              Figure 16: Mean rank over time on GNN benchmark (FedAvg).


                                                                              30
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                   10                                          5                                           5
                    9
                    8                                          4                                           4
                    7


                                                       Mean rank


                                                                                                   Mean rank
           Mean rank


                    6                                          3                                           3
                    5
                    4
                    3                                          2                                           2
                    2
                    11e-4    1e-3 1e-2 1e-1        1           11e-4     1e-3 1e-2 1e-1        1           11e-4    1e-3 1e-2 1e-1        1
                              Fraction of budget                          Fraction of budget                         Fraction of budget

                            (a) ALLGNN                                  (b) BBOGNN                                 (c) MFGNN
                   10                                          5                                           5
                    9
                    8                                          4                                           4
                    7
                                                       Mean rank


                                                                                                   Mean rank
           Mean rank


                    6                                          3                                           3
                    5
                    4
                    3                                          2                                           2
                    2
                    11e-4    1e-3 1e-2 1e-1        1           11e-4     1e-3 1e-2 1e-1        1           11e-4    1e-3 1e-2 1e-1        1
                              Fraction of budget                          Fraction of budget                         Fraction of budget

                            (d) ALLCora                                 (e) BBOCora                                 (f) MFCora
                   10                                          5                                           5
                    9
                    8                                          4                                           4
                    7
                                                       Mean rank


                                                                                                   Mean rank
           Mean rank


                    6                                          3                                           3
                    5
                    4
                    3                                          2                                           2
                    2
                    11e-4    1e-3 1e-2 1e-1        1           11e-4     1e-3 1e-2 1e-1        1           11e-4    1e-3 1e-2 1e-1        1
                              Fraction of budget                          Fraction of budget                         Fraction of budget

                        (g) ALLCiteSeer                                (h) BBOCiteSeer                             (i) MFCiteSeer
                   10                                          5                                           5
                    9
                    8                                          4                                           4
                    7
                                                       Mean rank


                                                                                                   Mean rank
           Mean rank


                    6                                          3
                    5                                                                                      3
                    4
                    3                                          2                                           2
                    2
                    11e-4    1e-3 1e-2 1e-1        1           11e-4     1e-3 1e-2 1e-1        1           11e-4    1e-3 1e-2 1e-1        1
                              Fraction of budget                          Fraction of budget                         Fraction of budget

                        (j) ALLPubMed                                  (k) BBOPubMed                               (l) MFPubMed


                              Figure 17: Mean rank over time on GNN benchmark (FedOpt).


                                                                              31
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                   10                                         5                                         5
                    9
                    8                                         4                                         4
                    7


                                                      Mean rank


                                                                                                Mean rank
           Mean rank
                    6                                         3                                         3
                    5
                    4
                    3                                         2                                         2
                    2
                    11e-4   1e-3 1e-2 1e-1        1           11e-4   1e-3 1e-2 1e-1        1           11e-4     1e-3 1e-2 1e-1        1
                             Fraction of budget                        Fraction of budget                          Fraction of budget

                            (a) ALLLR                                 (b) BBOLR                                   (c) MFLR
                   10
                                                              5                                         5
                    9
                    8                                         4                                         4
                    7


                                                      Mean rank


                                                                                                Mean rank
           Mean rank


                    6                                         3                                         3
                    5
                    4
                    3                                         2                                         2
                    2
                    1                                         11e-4                                     1
                     1e-4   1e-3 1e-2 1e-1        1                   1e-3 1e-2 1e-1        1            1e-4     1e-3 1e-2 1e-1        1
                             Fraction of budget                        Fraction of budget                          Fraction of budget

                        (d) ALL31OpenML                            (e) BBO31OpenML                            (f) MF31OpenML
                   10
                                                              5                                         5
                    9
                    8                                         4                                         4
                    7
                                                      Mean rank


                                                                                                Mean rank
           Mean rank


                    6                                         3                                         3
                    5
                    4
                    3                                         2                                         2
                    2
                    11e-4   1e-3 1e-2 1e-1        1           11e-4   1e-3 1e-2 1e-1        1           11e-4     1e-3 1e-2 1e-1        1
                             Fraction of budget                        Fraction of budget                          Fraction of budget

                        (g) ALL53OpenML                            (h) BBO53OpenML                              (i) MF53OpenML
                   10
                                                              5                                         5
                    9
                    8                                         4                                         4
                    7
                                                      Mean rank


                                                                                                Mean rank
           Mean rank


                    6                                         3                                         3
                    5
                    4                                                                                   2
                    3                                         2
                    2
                    1                                         11e-4                                     1
                     1e-4   1e-3 1e-2 1e-1        1                   1e-3 1e-2 1e-1        1            1e-4     1e-3 1e-2 1e-1        1
                             Fraction of budget                        Fraction of budget                          Fraction of budget

                       (j) ALL10101OpenML                         (k) BBO10101OpenML                        (l) MF10101OpenML
                   10                                         5                                         5
                    9
                    8                                         4                                         4
                    7
                                                      Mean rank


                                                                                                Mean rank
           Mean rank


                    6                                         3                                         3
                    5
                    4
                    3                                         2                                         2
                    2
                    11e-4   1e-3 1e-2 1e-1        1           11e-4   1e-3 1e-2 1e-1        1           11e-4     1e-3 1e-2 1e-1        1
                             Fraction of budget                        Fraction of budget                          Fraction of budget

                   (m) ALL146818OpenML                            (n) BBO146818OpenML                       (o) MF146818OpenML
                   10                                         5                                         5
                    9
                    8                                         4                                         4
                    7
                                                      Mean rank


                                                                                                Mean rank
           Mean rank


                    6                                         3                                         3
                    5
                    4
                    3                                         2                                         2
                    2
                    11e-4   1e-3 1e-2 1e-1        1           11e-4   1e-3 1e-2 1e-1        1           11e-4     1e-3 1e-2 1e-1        1
                             Fraction of budget                        Fraction of budget                          Fraction of budget

                       (p) ALL146821OpenML                        (q) BBO146821OpenML                       (r) MF146821OpenML
                   10
                                                              5                                         5
                    9
                    8                                         4                                         4
                    7
                                                      Mean rank


                                                                                                Mean rank
           Mean rank


                    6                                         3                                         3
                    5
                    4
                    3                                         2                                         2
                    2
                    1                                         11e-4                                     11e-4
                     1e-4   1e-3 1e-2 1e-1        1                   1e-3 1e-2 1e-1        1                     1e-3 1e-2 1e-1        1
                             Fraction of budget                        Fraction of budget                          Fraction of budget

                       (s) ALL146822OpenML                        (t) BBO146822OpenML                       (u) MF146822OpenML


                              Figure 18: Mean rank over time on LR benchmark (FedAvg).
                                                                           32
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                   10                                              5                                             5
                    9
                    8                                              4                                             4
                    7


                                                           Mean rank


                                                                                                         Mean rank
           Mean rank
                    6                                              3                                             3
                    5
                    4
                    3                                              2                                             2
                    2
                    11e-4       1e-3 1e-2 1e-1         1           11e-4       1e-3 1e-2 1e-1        1           11e-4        1e-3 1e-2 1e-1         1
                                 Fraction of budget                             Fraction of budget                             Fraction of budget

                                (a) ALLLR                                      (b) BBOLR                                      (c) MFLR
                       10                                              5                                             5
                        9
                        8                                              4                                             4
                        7


                                                            Mean rank


                                                                                                          Mean rank
            Mean rank


                        6                                              3                                             3
                        5
                        4
                        3                                              2                                             2
                        2
                        1                                              11e-4                                         1
                         1e-4    1e-3 1e-2 1e-1        1                       1e-3 1e-2 1e-1        1                1e-4     1e-3 1e-2 1e-1        1
                                  Fraction of budget                            Fraction of budget                              Fraction of budget

                          (d) ALL31OpenML                                   (e) BBO31OpenML                                (f) MF31OpenML
                       10                                              5                                             5
                        9
                        8                                              4                                             4
                        7
                                                            Mean rank


                                                                                                          Mean rank
            Mean rank


                        6                                              3                                             3
                        5
                        4
                        3                                              2                                             2
                        2
                        1                                              11e-4                                         11e-4
                         1e-4    1e-3 1e-2 1e-1        1                       1e-3 1e-2 1e-1        1                         1e-3 1e-2 1e-1        1
                                  Fraction of budget                            Fraction of budget                              Fraction of budget

                          (g) ALL53OpenML                                   (h) BBO53OpenML                                  (i) MF53OpenML
                       10                                              5                                             5
                        9
                        8                                              4                                             4
                        7
                                                            Mean rank


                                                                                                          Mean rank
            Mean rank


                        6                                              3                                             3
                        5
                        4
                        3                                              2                                             2
                        2
                        11e-4    1e-3 1e-2 1e-1        1               11e-4   1e-3 1e-2 1e-1        1               11e-4     1e-3 1e-2 1e-1        1
                                  Fraction of budget                            Fraction of budget                              Fraction of budget

                        (j) ALL10101OpenML                                 (k) BBO10101OpenML                            (l) MF10101OpenML
                       10
                                                                       5                                             5
                        9
                        8                                              4                                             4
                        7
                                                            Mean rank


                                                                                                          Mean rank
            Mean rank


                        6                                              3                                             3
                        5
                        4
                        3                                              2                                             2
                        2
                        11e-4    1e-3 1e-2 1e-1        1               11e-4   1e-3 1e-2 1e-1        1               11e-4     1e-3 1e-2 1e-1        1
                                  Fraction of budget                            Fraction of budget                              Fraction of budget

                       (m) ALL146818OpenML                              (n) BBO146818OpenML                              (o) MF146818OpenML
                       10                                              5                                             5
                        9
                        8                                              4                                             4
                        7
                                                            Mean rank


                                                                                                          Mean rank
            Mean rank


                        6                                              3                                             3
                        5
                        4
                        3                                              2                                             2
                        2
                        11e-4    1e-3 1e-2 1e-1        1               11e-4   1e-3 1e-2 1e-1        1               11e-4     1e-3 1e-2 1e-1        1
                                  Fraction of budget                            Fraction of budget                              Fraction of budget

                        (p) ALL146821OpenML                             (q) BBO146821OpenML                              (r) MF146821OpenML
                                                                       5                                             5
                       10
                        9
                        8                                              4                                             4
                        7
                                                            Mean rank


                                                                                                          Mean rank
            Mean rank


                        6                                              3                                             3
                        5
                        4                                                                                            2
                        3                                              2
                        2                                                                                            1
                        11e-4    1e-3 1e-2 1e-1        1               11e-4   1e-3 1e-2 1e-1        1                1e-4     1e-3 1e-2 1e-1        1
                                  Fraction of budget                            Fraction of budget                              Fraction of budget

                        (s) ALL146822OpenML                             (t) BBO146822OpenML                              (u) MF146822OpenML


                                    Figure 19: Mean rank over time on LR benchmark (FedOpt).
                                                                                     33
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                   10                                          5                                          5
                    9
                    8                                          4                                          4
                    7


                                                       Mean rank


                                                                                                  Mean rank
           Mean rank
                    6                                          3                                          3
                    5
                    4
                    3                                          2                                          2
                    2
                    11e-4    1e-3 1e-2 1e-1        1           11e-4    1e-3 1e-2 1e-1        1           11e-4     1e-3 1e-2 1e-1        1
                              Fraction of budget                         Fraction of budget                          Fraction of budget

                            (a) ALLM LP                                (b) BBOM LP                                 (c) MFM LP
                                                               5                                          5
                   10
                    9
                    8                                          4                                          4
                    7


                                                       Mean rank


                                                                                                  Mean rank
           Mean rank


                    6                                          3                                          3
                    5
                    4                                          2
                    3                                                                                     2
                    2
                    11e-4    1e-3 1e-2 1e-1        1           11e-4    1e-3 1e-2 1e-1        1           11e-4     1e-3 1e-2 1e-1        1
                              Fraction of budget                         Fraction of budget                          Fraction of budget

                        (d) ALL31OpenML                             (e) BBO31OpenML                             (f) MF31OpenML
                                                               5                                          5
                   10
                    9
                    8                                          4                                          4
                    7
                                                       Mean rank


                                                                                                  Mean rank
           Mean rank


                    6                                          3                                          3
                    5
                    4                                          2
                    3                                                                                     2
                    2
                    11e-4    1e-3 1e-2 1e-1        1           11e-4    1e-3 1e-2 1e-1        1           11e-4     1e-3 1e-2 1e-1        1
                              Fraction of budget                         Fraction of budget                          Fraction of budget

                        (g) ALL53OpenML                             (h) BBO53OpenML                               (i) MF53OpenML
                   10                                          5                                          5
                    9
                    8                                          4                                          4
                    7
                                                       Mean rank


                                                                                                  Mean rank
           Mean rank


                    6                                          3                                          3
                    5
                    4
                    3                                          2                                          2
                    2
                    11e-4    1e-3 1e-2 1e-1        1           11e-4    1e-3 1e-2 1e-1        1           11e-4     1e-3 1e-2 1e-1        1
                              Fraction of budget                         Fraction of budget                          Fraction of budget

                       (j) ALL10101OpenML                          (k) BBO10101OpenML                         (l) MF10101OpenML
                   10                                          5                                          5
                    9
                    8                                          4                                          4
                    7
                                                       Mean rank


                                                                                                  Mean rank
           Mean rank


                    6                                          3                                          3
                    5
                    4
                    3                                          2                                          2
                    2
                    11e-4    1e-3 1e-2 1e-1        1           11e-4    1e-3 1e-2 1e-1        1           11e-4     1e-3 1e-2 1e-1        1
                              Fraction of budget                         Fraction of budget                          Fraction of budget

                   (m) ALL146818OpenML                             (n) BBO146818OpenML                        (o) MF146818OpenML
                   10                                          5                                          5
                    9
                    8                                          4                                          4
                    7
                                                       Mean rank


                                                                                                  Mean rank
           Mean rank


                    6                                          3                                          3
                    5
                    4
                    3                                          2                                          2
                    2
                    11e-4    1e-3 1e-2 1e-1        1           11e-4    1e-3 1e-2 1e-1        1           11e-4     1e-3 1e-2 1e-1        1
                              Fraction of budget                         Fraction of budget                          Fraction of budget

                       (p) ALL146821OpenML                         (q) BBO146821OpenML                        (r) MF146821OpenML
                   10                                          5                                          5
                    9
                    8                                          4                                          4
                    7
                                                       Mean rank


                                                                                                  Mean rank
           Mean rank


                    6                                          3                                          3
                    5
                    4
                    3                                          2                                          2
                    2
                    1                                          11e-4                                      1
                     1e-4    1e-3 1e-2 1e-1        1                    1e-3 1e-2 1e-1        1            1e-4     1e-3 1e-2 1e-1        1
                              Fraction of budget                         Fraction of budget                          Fraction of budget

                       (s) ALL146822OpenML                         (t) BBO146822OpenML                        (u) MF146822OpenML


                              Figure 20: Mean rank over time on MLP benchmark (FedAvg).
                                                                             34
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                   10                                          5                                          5
                    9
                    8                                          4                                          4
                    7


                                                       Mean rank


                                                                                                  Mean rank
           Mean rank
                    6                                          3                                          3
                    5
                    4
                    3                                          2                                          2
                    2
                    11e-4    1e-3 1e-2 1e-1        1           11e-4    1e-3 1e-2 1e-1        1           11e-4     1e-3 1e-2 1e-1        1
                              Fraction of budget                         Fraction of budget                          Fraction of budget

                            (a) ALLM LP                                (b) BBOM LP                                 (c) MFM LP
                   10                                          5                                          5
                    9
                    8                                          4                                          4
                    7


                                                       Mean rank


                                                                                                  Mean rank
           Mean rank


                    6                                          3                                          3
                    5
                    4
                    3                                          2                                          2
                    2
                    11e-4    1e-3 1e-2 1e-1        1           11e-4    1e-3 1e-2 1e-1        1           11e-4     1e-3 1e-2 1e-1        1
                              Fraction of budget                         Fraction of budget                          Fraction of budget

                        (d) ALL31OpenML                             (e) BBO31OpenML                             (f) MF31OpenML
                   10                                          5                                          5
                    9
                    8                                          4                                          4
                    7
                                                       Mean rank


                                                                                                  Mean rank
           Mean rank


                    6                                          3
                    5                                                                                     3
                    4
                    3                                          2                                          2
                    2
                    11e-4    1e-3 1e-2 1e-1        1           11e-4    1e-3 1e-2 1e-1        1           11e-4     1e-3 1e-2 1e-1        1
                              Fraction of budget                         Fraction of budget                          Fraction of budget

                        (g) ALL53OpenML                             (h) BBO53OpenML                               (i) MF53OpenML
                   10                                          5                                          5
                    9
                    8                                          4                                          4
                    7
                                                       Mean rank


                                                                                                  Mean rank
           Mean rank


                    6                                          3                                          3
                    5
                    4
                    3                                          2                                          2
                    2
                    11e-4    1e-3 1e-2 1e-1        1           11e-4    1e-3 1e-2 1e-1        1           11e-4     1e-3 1e-2 1e-1        1
                              Fraction of budget                         Fraction of budget                          Fraction of budget

                       (j) ALL10101OpenML                          (k) BBO10101OpenML                         (l) MF10101OpenML
                   10                                          5                                          5
                    9
                    8                                          4                                          4
                    7
                                                       Mean rank


                                                                                                  Mean rank
           Mean rank


                    6                                          3                                          3
                    5
                    4
                    3                                          2                                          2
                    2
                    11e-4    1e-3 1e-2 1e-1        1           11e-4    1e-3 1e-2 1e-1        1           11e-4     1e-3 1e-2 1e-1        1
                              Fraction of budget                         Fraction of budget                          Fraction of budget

                   (m) ALL146818OpenML                             (n) BBO146818OpenML                        (o) MF146818OpenML
                   10                                          5                                          5
                    9
                    8                                          4                                          4
                    7
                                                       Mean rank


                                                                                                  Mean rank
           Mean rank


                    6                                          3                                          3
                    5
                    4
                    3                                          2                                          2
                    2
                    11e-4    1e-3 1e-2 1e-1        1           11e-4    1e-3 1e-2 1e-1        1           11e-4     1e-3 1e-2 1e-1        1
                              Fraction of budget                         Fraction of budget                          Fraction of budget

                       (p) ALL146821OpenML                         (q) BBO146821OpenML                        (r) MF146821OpenML
                   10                                          5                                          5
                    9
                    8                                          4                                          4
                    7
                                                       Mean rank


                                                                                                  Mean rank
           Mean rank


                    6                                          3                                          3
                    5
                    4
                    3                                          2                                          2
                    2
                    11e-4    1e-3 1e-2 1e-1        1           11e-4    1e-3 1e-2 1e-1        1           11e-4     1e-3 1e-2 1e-1        1
                              Fraction of budget                         Fraction of budget                          Fraction of budget

                       (s) ALL146822OpenML                         (t) BBO146822OpenML                        (u) MF146822OpenML


                              Figure 21: Mean rank over time on MLP benchmark (FedOpt).
                                                                             35
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                   10                                          5                                          5
                    9
                    8                                          4                                          4
                    7


                                                       Mean rank


                                                                                                  Mean rank
           Mean rank
                    6                                          3                                          3
                    5
                    4
                    3                                          2                                          2
                    2
                    11e-4    1e-3 1e-2 1e-1        1           11e-4    1e-3 1e-2 1e-1        1           11e-4    1e-3 1e-2 1e-1        1
                              Fraction of budget                         Fraction of budget                         Fraction of budget

                       (a) ALLFEMNIST                              (b) BBOFEMNIST                                 (c) MFFEMNIST


          Figure 22: Mean rank over time on CNN benchmark under surrogate mode (FedAvg).


                   10                                          5                                          5
                    9
                    8                                          4                                          4
                    7
                                                       Mean rank


                                                                                                  Mean rank
           Mean rank


                    6                                          3                                          3
                    5
                    4
                    3                                          2                                          2
                    2
                    11e-4    1e-3 1e-2 1e-1        1           11e-4    1e-3 1e-2 1e-1        1           11e-4    1e-3 1e-2 1e-1        1
                              Fraction of budget                         Fraction of budget                         Fraction of budget

                            (a) ALLBERT                                (b) BBOBERT                                 (c) MFBERT
                   10                                          5                                          5
                    9
                    8                                          4                                          4
                    7
                                                       Mean rank


                                                                                                  Mean rank
           Mean rank


                    6                                          3
                    5                                                                                     3
                    4                                          2
                    3                                                                                     2
                    2
                    11e-4                                      1                                          11e-4
                             1e-3 1e-2 1e-1        1            1e-4    1e-3 1e-2 1e-1        1                    1e-3 1e-2 1e-1        1
                              Fraction of budget                         Fraction of budget                         Fraction of budget

                            (d) ALLCoLA                                (e) BBOCoLA                                 (f) MFCoLA
                   10                                          5                                          5
                    9
                    8                                          4                                          4
                    7
                                                       Mean rank


                                                                                                  Mean rank
           Mean rank


                    6                                          3                                          3
                    5
                    4
                    3                                          2                                          2
                    2
                    1                                          11e-4                                      11e-4
                     1e-4    1e-3 1e-2 1e-1        1                    1e-3 1e-2 1e-1        1                    1e-3 1e-2 1e-1        1
                              Fraction of budget                         Fraction of budget                         Fraction of budget

                            (g) ALLSST-2                               (h) BBOSST-2                                (i) MFSST-2


         Figure 23: Mean rank over time on BERT benchmark under surrogate mode (FedAvg).


                                                                             36
