Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A DVERSARIAL P OLICIES B EAT S UPERHUMAN G O AI S
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                             A BSTRACT
         We attack the state-of-the-art Go-playing AI system, KataGo, by training adver-
         sarial policies that play against frozen KataGo victims. Our attack achieves a
         >99% win-rate when KataGo uses no tree-search, and a >77% win-rate when
         KataGo uses enough search to be superhuman. Notably, our adversaries do not
         win by learning to play Go better than KataGo—in fact, our adversaries are eas-
         ily beaten by human amateurs. Instead, our adversaries win by tricking KataGo
         into making serious blunders. Our results demonstrate that even superhuman AI
         systems may harbor surprising failure modes. Example games are available at
         https://go-attack-iclr.netlify.app/.


1   I NTRODUCTION
Reinforcement learning from self-play has achieved superhuman performance in a range of games
including Go (Silver et al., 2016), chess and shogi (Silver et al., 2016), and Dota (OpenAI et al.,
2019). Moreover, idealized versions of self-play provably converge to Nash equilibria (Brown,
1951; Heinrich et al., 2015). Although realistic versions of self-play may not always converge, the
strong empirical performance of self-play seems to suggest this is rarely an issue in practice.
Nonetheless, prior work has found that seemingly highly capable continuous control policies trained
via self-play can be exploited by adversarial policies (Gleave et al., 2020; Wu et al., 2021). This
suggests that self-play may not be as robust as previously thought. However, although the victim
agents are state-of-the-art for continuous control, they are still well below human performance. This
raises the question: are adversarial policies a vulnerability of self-play policies in general, or simply
an artifact of insufficiently capable policies?
To answer this, we study a domain where self-play has achieved very strong performance: Go.
Specifically, we train adversarial policies end-to-end to attack KataGo (Wu, 2019), the strongest
publicly available Go-playing AI system. Using less than 5% of the compute used to train KataGo,
we obtain adversarial policies that win >99% of the time against KataGo with no search, and >77%
against KataGo with enough search to be superhuman.
Critically, our adversaries do not win by learning a generally capable Go policy. Instead, the adver-
saries trick KataGo into making serious blunders that result in KataGo losing the game (Figure 1).
Despite being able to beat KataGo, our adversarial policies lose against even amateur Go players
(see Appendix F.1). So KataGo is in this instance less robust than human amateurs, despite having
superhuman capabilities. This is a striking example of non-transitivity, illustrated in Figure 2.
Our adversaries have no special powers: they can only place stones, or pass, like a regular player.
We do, however, give our adversaries access to the victim network they are attacking. In particular,
we train our adversaries using an AlphaZero-style training process (Silver et al., 2018), similar to
that of KataGo. The key differences are that we collect games with the adversary playing the victim,
and that we use the victim network to select victim moves during the adversary’s tree search.
KataGo is the strongest publicly available Go AI system at the time of writing. With search, KataGo
is strongly superhuman, winning (Wu, 2019, Section 5.1) against ELF OpenGo (Tian et al., 2019)
and Leela Zero (Pascutto, 2019) that are themselves superhuman. In Appendix D, we estimate that
KataGo without search plays at the level of a top 100 European player, and that KataGo with 2048
visits per move of search is much stronger than any human.
Our paper makes three contributions. First, we propose a novel attack method, hybridizing the
attack of Gleave et al. (2020) and AlphaZero-style training (Silver et al., 2018). Second, we demon-


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


(a) Adversary wins as black by tricking the victim       (b) Adversary wins as white by capturing a group (X)
(Latest, no search) into passing prematurely, end-       that the victim (Latestdef , 2048 visits) leaves vul-
ing the game. Explore the game.                          nerable. Explore the game.

Figure 1: Two randomly sampled games against the strongest policy network, Latest. (a) An
adversarial policy beats KataGo by tricking it into passing. The adversary then passes in turn, end-
ing the game with the adversary winning under the Tromp-Taylor ruleset for computer Go (Tromp,
2014) that KataGo was trained and configured to use (see Appendix A). The adversary gets points
for its territory in the top-right corner (devoid of victim stones) whereas the victim does not get
points for the territory in the bottom-left due to the presence of the adversary’s stones. (b) A differ-
ent adversarial policy beats a superhuman-level victim immunized against the “passing trick”. The
adversary lures the victim into letting a large group of victim stones (X) get captured by the adver-
sary’s next move (∆). Appendix F.3 has a more detailed description of this adversary’s behavior.


strate the existence of two distinct adversarial policies against the state-of-the-art Go AI system,
KataGo. Finally, we provide a detailed empirical investigation into these adversarial policies, in-
cluding a qualitative analysis of their game play. Our open-source implementation is available at
—anonymized—.

2   R ELATED W ORK

Our work is inspired by the presence of adversarial examples in a wide variety of models (Szegedy
et al., 2014). Notably, many image classifiers reach or surpass human performance (Ho-Phuoc,
2018; Russakovsky et al., 2015; Shankar et al., 2020; Pham et al., 2021). Yet even these state-
of-the-art image classifiers are vulnerable to adversarial examples (Carlini et al., 2019; Ren et al.,
2020). This raises the question: could highly capable deep RL policies be similarly vulnerable?
One might hope that the adversarial nature of self-play training would naturally lead to robustness.
This strategy works for image classifiers, where adversarial training is an effective if computation-
ally expensive defense (Madry et al., 2018; Ren et al., 2020). This view is further bolstered by
the fact that idealized versions of self-play provably converge to a Nash equilibrium, which is un-
exploitable (Brown, 1951; Heinrich et al., 2015). However, our work finds that in practice even
state-of-the-art and professional-level deep RL policies are still vulnerable to exploitation.
It is known that self-play may not converge in non-transitive games (Balduzzi et al., 2019). However,
Czarnecki et al. (2020) has argued that real-world games like Go grow increasingly transitive as skill
increases. This would imply that while self-play may struggle with non-transitivity early on during
training, comparisons involving highly capable policies such as KataGo should be mostly transitive.
By contrast, we find a striking non-transitivity: our adversaries exploit KataGo agents that beat
human professionals, yet even an amateur Go player can beat our adversaries (Appendix F.1).
Most prior work attacking deep RL has focused on perturbing observations (Huang et al., 2017;
Ilahi et al., 2022). Concurrent work by Lan et al. (2022) shows that KataGo with ≤50 visits can


                                                     2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                  KataGo                          Human                     Human
      Adversary      BEATS                          BEATS                       BEATS
                                  Victim                        Professional                Amateur


                                  Unexpected Result: If play were transitive,
                                   Human players would not beat Adversary!


                                                  BEATS?!

Figure 2: A human amateur beats our adversarial policy (Appendix F.1) that beats KataGo. This
non-transitivity shows the adversary is not a generally capable policy, and is just exploiting KataGo.


be induced to play poorly by adding two adversarially chosen moves to the move history input of
the KataGo network, even though these moves do not substantially change the win rate estimated
by KataGo with 800 visits. However, the perturbed input is highly off-distribution, as the inputs tell
KataGo that it chose to play a seemingly poor move on the previous turn. Moreover, an attacker that
can force the opponent to play a specific move has easier ways to win: it could simply make the
opponent resign, or play a maximally bad move. We instead follow the threat model introduced by
Gleave et al. (2020) of an adversarial agent acting in a shared environment.
Prior work on such adversarial policies has focused on attacking subhuman policies in simulated
robotics environments (Gleave et al., 2020; Wu et al., 2021). In these environments, the adversary
can often win just by causing small changes in the victim’s actions. By contrast, our work focuses
on exploiting professional-level Go policies that have a discrete action space. Despite the more
challenging setting, we find these policies are not only vulnerable to attack, but also fail in surprising
ways that are quite different from human-like mistakes.
Adversarial policies give a lower bound on the exploitability of an agent: how much expected utility
a best-response policy achieves above the minimax value of the game. Exactly computing a policy’s
exploitability is feasible in some low-dimensional games (Johanson et al., 2011), but not in larger
games such as Go which has approximately 10172 possible states (Allis, 1994, Section 6.3.12). Prior
work has lower bounded the exploitability in some poker variants using search (Lisý & Bowling,
2017), but the method relies on domain-specific heuristics that are not applicable to Go.
In concurrent work Timbers et al. (2022) developed the approximate best response (ABR) method to
estimating exploitability. Whereas we exploit the open-source KataGo agent, they exploit a propri-
etary replica of AlphaZero from Schmid et al. (2021). They obtain a 90% win rate against no-search
AlphaZero and 65% with 800 visits (Timbers et al., 2022, Figure 3). In Appendix D.3 we estimate
that their AlphaZero victim with 800 visits plays at least at the level of a top-200 professional, and
may be superhuman. That we were both able to exploit unrelated codebases confirms the vulnera-
bility is in AlphaZero-style training as a whole, not merely an implementation bug.
Our attack methodology is similar to Timbers et al.: we both use an AlphaZero-style training proce-
dure that is adapted to use the opponent’s policy during search. However, unlike Timbers et al. we
attempt to model the victim’s search process inside our adversary via A-MCTS-R (see Section 4).
Additionally, our curriculum uses checkpoints as well as search. Finally, we provide a detailed
empirical investigation into how our attack works, including examples of games played by the ad-
versaries, the victim’s predicted win rate, the degree to which the adversaries transfer to different
victims and an investigation of possible defenses.


3     BACKGROUND

3.1     T HREAT M ODEL

Following Gleave et al. (2020), we consider the setting of a two-player zero-sum Markov
game (Shapley, 1953). Our threat model assumes the attacker plays as one of the agents, which


                                                      3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


we will call the adversary, and seeks to win against some victim agent. Critically, the attacker does
not have any special powers—they can only take the same actions available to a regular player.
The key capability we grant to the attacker is gray-box access to the victim agent. That is, the
attacker can evaluate the victim’s neural network on arbitrary inputs. However, the attacker does
not have direct access to the network weights. We furthermore assume the victim agent follows a
fixed policy, corresponding to the common case of a pre-trained model deployed with static weights.
Gray-box access to a fixed victim naturally arises whenever the attacker can run a copy of the victim
agent, such as a commercially available or open-source Go AI system.
This is a challenging setting even with gray-box access. Although finding an exact Nash equilibrium
in a game as complex as Go is intractable, a priori it seems plausible that a professional-level Go
system might have reached a near-Nash or ϵ-equilibrium. In this case, the victim could only be
exploited by an ϵ margin. Moreover, even if there exists a policy that can exploit the victim, it might
be computationally expensive to find given that self-play training did not discover the vulnerability.
Consequently, our two primary success metrics are the win rate of the adversarial policy against
the victim and the adversary’s training time. We also track the mean score difference between
the adversary and victim, but this is not explicitly optimized for by the attack. Crucially, tracking
training time rules out the degenerate “attack” of simply training KataGo for longer than the victim.
In principle, it is possible that a more sample-efficient training regime could produce a stronger agent
than KataGo in a fraction of the training time. While this might be an important advance in computer
Go, we would hesitate to classify it as an attack. Rather, we are looking for the adversarial policy
to demonstrate non-transitivity, as this suggests the adversary is winning by exploiting a specific
weakness in the opponent. That is, as depicted in Figure 2, the adversary beats the victim, the victim
beats some baseline opponent, and that baseline opponent can in turn beat the adversary.

3.2   K ATAG O

We chose to attack KataGo as it is the strongest publicly available Go AI system. KataGo won
against ELF OpenGo (Tian et al., 2019) and Leela Zero (Pascutto, 2019) after training for only 513
V100 GPU days (Wu, 2019, section 5.1). ELF OpenGo is itself superhuman, having won all 20
games played against four top-30 professional players. The latest networks of KataGo are even
stronger than the original, having been trained for over 10,000 V100-equivalent GPU days. Indeed,
even the policy network with no search is competitive with top professionals (see Appendix D.1).
KataGo learns via self-play, using an AlphaZero-style training procedure (Silver et al., 2018). The
agent contains a neural network with a policy head, outputting a probability distribution over the
next move, and a value head, estimating the win rate from the current state. It then conducts Monte-
Carlo Tree Search (MCTS) using these heads to select self-play moves, described in Appendix B.1.
KataGo trains the policy head to predict the outcome of this tree search, a policy improvement
operator, and trains the value head to predict whether the agent wins the self-play game.
In contrast to AlphaZero, KataGo also has a number of additional heads predicting auxiliary targets
such as the opponent’s move on the following turn and which player “owns” a square on the board.
These heads’ output are not used for actual game play—they serve only to speed up training via
the addition of auxiliary losses. KataGo additionally introduces architectural improvements such as
global pooling, and improvements to the training process such as playout cap randomization.
These modifications to KataGo improve its sample and compute efficiency by several orders of
magnitude relative to prior work such as ELF OpenGo. For this reason, we choose to build our
attack on top of KataGo, although in principle the same attack could be implemented on top of any
AlphaZero-style training pipeline. We describe our extensions to KataGo in the following section.


4     ATTACK M ETHODOLOGY

Prior works, such as KataGo and AlphaZero, train on self-play games where the agent plays many
games against itself. We instead train on games between our adversary and a fixed victim agent, and
only train the adversary on data from the turns where it is the adversary’s move, since we wish to
train the adversary to exploit the victim, not mimic it. We dub this procedure victim-play.


                                                   4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


In regular self-play, the agent models its opponent’s moves by sampling from its own policy network.
This makes sense in self-play, as the policy is playing itself. But in victim-play, it would be a
mistake to model the victim as playing from the adversary’s policy network. We introduce two
distinct families of Adversarial MCTS (A-MCTS) to address this problem. See Appendix C for the
hyperparameter settings we used in experiments.
Adversarial MCTS: Sample (A-MCTS-S). In A-MCTS-S (Appendix B.2), we modify the adver-
sary’s search procedure to sample from the victim’s policy network at victim-nodes in the Monte
Carlo tree when it is the victim’s move, and from the adversary’s network at adversary-nodes where
it is the adversary’s turn. We also disable some optimizations added in KataGo, such as adding noise
to the policy prior at the root. Finally, we introduce a variant A-MCTS-S++ that averages the victim
policy network’s predictions over board symmetries, to match the default behavior of KataGo.
Adversarial MCTS: Recursive (A-MCTS-R). A-MCTS-S systematically underestimates the
strength of victims that use search since it models the victim as sampling directly from the policy
head. To resolve this, A-MCTS-R runs MCTS for the victim at each victim node in the A-MCTS-R
tree. Unfortunately, this change increases the computational complexity of both adversary training
and inference by a factor equal to the victim search budget. We include A-MCTS-R primarily as an
upper bound to establish how much benefit can be gained by resolving this misspecification.
Initialization. We randomly initialize the adversary’s network. Note that we cannot initialize the
adversary’s weights to those of the victim as our threat model does not allow white-box access.
Additionally, a random initialization encourages exploration to find weaknesses in the victim, rather
than simply a stronger Go player. However, a randomly initialized network will almost always lose
against a highly capable network, leading to a challenging initial learning problem. KataGo use of
auxiliary targets partially alleviates this problem, as the adversary’s network can learn something
useful about the game even from lost matches.
Curriculum. To help overcome the challenging random initialization, we introduce a curriculum
that trains against successively stronger versions of the victim. We switch to a more challenging
victim agent once the adversary’s win rate exceeds a certain threshold. We modulate victim strength
in two ways. First, we train against successively later checkpoints of the victim agent, as KataGo
releases its entire training history. Second, we gradually increase the amount of search that the
victim performs during victim-play.


5   E VALUATION

We evaluate our attack method against KataGo (Wu, 2019). In Section 5.1 we find our A-MCTS-
S algorithm achieves a 99.9% win rate against Latest (the strongest KataGo network) playing
without search. Notably Latest is very strong even without search: we find in Appendix D.1 that
it is comparable to a top 100 European player. We win against Latest by tricking it into passing
early and losing.
In Section 5.2, we then add a pass-alive defense to the victim to defend against the aforementioned
attack. The defended victim Latestdef is provably unable to lose via accidentally passing and is
roughly the same strength as Latest.1 However, we are still able to find an attack that achieves a
99.8% win rate against Latestdef playing without search. The attack succeeds against the victim
playing with search as well, with our best result in Section 5.3 being a 79.6% win rate against
Latestdef with 2048 visits.
Our second attack is qualitatively very different from our first attack as it does not use the pass-
trick. To check that our defense did not introduce any unintended weaknesses, we evaluate our
attack against the unmodified Latest. Our second attack achieves a 100% win rate (over 500
games) against Latest without search, and a 77.6% win rate against Latest with 2048 visits. In
Appendix D.2, we estimate that Latest with 2048 visits is much stronger than the best human Go
players.

   1
     Latestdef won 456 / 1000 games against Latest when both agents used no tree-search and 461 / 1000
games when both agents used 2,048 visits / move of search.


                                                  5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


5.1   ATTACKING THE V ICTIM P OLICY N ETWORK

We train an adversarial policy using A-MCTS-S and a curriculum, as described in Section 4. We
start from a checkpoint cp127 around a quarter of the way through training, until reaching the
Latest checkpoint corresponding to the strongest KataGo network (see Appendix C.1 for details).
Our best adversarial policy checkpoint playing with 600 visits against Latest playing with no
search achieves a 99.9% win rate. Notably, this high win rate is achieved despite our adversarial
policy being trained for only 3.4 × 107 time steps—just 0.3% as many time steps as the victim
it is exploiting. Critically, this adversarial policy does not win by playing a stronger game of Go
than the victim. Instead, it follows a bizarre strategy illustrated in Figure 1 that loses even against
human amateurs (see Appendix F.1). The strategy tricks the KataGo policy network into passing
prematurely at a point where the adversary has more points.
Appendix E contains further evaluation and analysis of this adversarial attack. Though this adversary
was only trained on no-search victims, it transfers to the low-search regime, achieving a 54% win
rate against Latest playing with 64 visits by increasing the number of visits by our adversarial
policy to 4096.


5.2   A DDING A D EFENSE TO THE V ICTIM P OLICY N ETWORK

We design a hard-coded defense for the victim against the attack found in Section 5.1: only passing
when it cannot change the outcome of the game. Concretely, we only allow the victim to pass when
its only legal moves are in its own pass-alive territory, a concept described in the official KataGo
rules which extends the traditional Go notion of a pass-alive group (Wu, 2021) (see Appendix B.4
for a full description of the algorithm). Given a victim V, we let Vdef denote the victim with this
defense applied. The defense completely thwarts the adversary from Section 5.1; the adversary loses
every game out of 1600 against Latestdef .
With the defense always enabled for the victim, we again train an adversarial policy using A-
MCTS-S. The curriculum starts from an earlier checkpoint cp39def . After the curriculum reaches
Latestdef playing with no search, the curriculum starts increasing the number of visits used by
Latestdef . See Appendix C.2 for curriculum details.
In Figure 3 we evaluate our adversarial policy against the policy networks of cp39def , cp127def ,
and Latestdef . We see that an attack that worked against Latestdef transfers well to cp127def
but not to cp39def , and an attack against cp39def early in training did not transfer well to
cp127def or Latestdef . These results suggest that different checkpoints have unique vulnera-
bilities.
Our best adversarial policy checkpoint playing with 600 visits against Latestdef playing with no
search achieves a 99.8% win rate. The adversarial policy also still works against Latest with the
defense disabled, achieving a 100.0% win rate over 500 games. The adversary is trained for 4.98 ×
108 time steps—just 4.2% as many time steps as the Latest, but 15× more than the adversary
from Section 5.1. Again the adversarial policy loses against human amateurs (see Appendix F.1).


5.3   ATTACKING A V ICTIM W ITH S EARCH

We evaluate the ability of the adversarial policy trained in Section 5.2 to exploit Latestdef playing
with search. This adversary was trained on Latestdef only up to 256 victim visits. Although the
adversary using A-MCTS-S with 200 visits achieves a win rate of 100% over 60 games against
Latestdef without search, in Figure 4a we find the win rate drops to 65% at 2048 victim visits and
53% at 4096 victim visits. Although lower, this win rate still demonstrates striking non-transitivity,
as a merely average human amateur could beat this adversary (while standing little chance against
the victim), and its wins are produced when the victim makes severe mistakes a human would avoid
(see Appendix F.3 for further analysis).
This win rate can also be increased by running A-MCTS-S with a greater adversary visit count. In
Figure 4b we see that in this case, the win rate against 2048 victim visits seems to plateau beyond
512 adversary visits at 72%–79.6%.


                                                  6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                  cp39def                                        Latestdef
                                                                  cp127def                                       Latestdef (2048 visits)

                              100
 Adversary win rate %


                               80

                               60

                               40

                               20

                                0
                                                          1              2                 3                                         4               5
                                                                        Adversary training steps                                                   ×108

Figure 3: The win rate (y-axis) of the adversarial policy over time (x-axis) playing with 600 visits
against the cp39def , cp127def , and Latestdef victim policy networks playing without search, as
well as Latestdef playing with 2048 visits. The strongest adversary checkpoint (marked ♦) wins
547/548 = 99.8% games against Latestdef without search and 398/548 = 72.6% games against
Latestdef with 2048 visits. The shaded interval is a 95% Clopper-Pearson interval over 48 games
per checkpoint. The adversarial policy is trained with a curriculum, starting from cp39def without
search and ending at Latestdef with 256 visits. Vertical dashed lines denote switches to a later
victim training policy or increasing Latestdef ’s amount of search. See Appendix C.2 for the exact
curriculum specification.
   Adv. win % vs. Latestdef


                                                                                      Adv. win % vs. Latestdef


                              100                                                                                100
                                                                                                                              A-MCTS-S
                               75                                                                                 75          A-MCTS-S++

                               50                                                                                 50

                               25             A-MCTS-R                                                            25
                                              A-MCTS-S++
                                0                                                                                  0
                                         0        1           2     3        4
                                    10       10          10       10    10                                             100   101   102       103    104
                                                      Victim visits                                                           Adversary visits
(a) Win rate by number of victim visits (x-axis) for A-                              (b) Win rate of A-MCTS-S by number of adversary
MCTS-S and A-MCTS-R. The adversary is run with                                       visits, playing against victim with 2048 visits. Higher
200 visits.                                                                          adversary visits moderately improve win rates.

Figure 4: We evaluate the ability of the adversarial policy from Section 5.1 to win against the
Latestdef victim with search.


                                                                                 7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                           Adv. win                                                                       Adv.
                                           Victim win                                                                     Victim


                                                                      Probability of adversary win
       BCE loss (nats)                                                                               1.00

                         4                                                                           0.75

                                                                                                     0.50
                         2
                                                                                                     0.25

                         0                                                                           0.00
                             240 200 160 120 80 40            0                                          160   170   180 190 200    210
                                   Moves until game end                                                               Move number

(a) Binary cross entropy loss of the predicted win-                   (b) Probability of adversary victory according to the
rates for Latest at 1,600 visits, playing against an                  adversary and victim value networks, for a portion of
adversary at 200 visits. The green curve is averaged                  a randomly selected game. Note the sudden changes
over games won by the adversary; the purple curve is                  in winrate prediction between moves 196 and 204.
averaged over games won by the victim.                                Explore the game.

                                  Figure 5: Analysis of Latest and adversary’s predicted win rate.



A-MCTS-S models the victim as having no search at both training and inference time. Another way
to improve performance is to use A-MCTS-R, which correctly models the victim at inference by
performing an MCTS search at each victim node in the adversary’s tree. A-MCTS-R achieves an
impressive 100% win rate against Latestdef up to 128 victim visits over 90 games at each data
point. It is too computationally expensive at much higher visit counts, however.
Our adversarial policy with 600 adversary visits achieves a 77.6% win rate versus Latest with
2048 visits with the defense disabled, verifying that our policy is not exploiting anomalous behavior
introduced by the defense.


5.4                  U NDERSTANDING THE ATTACK

Qualitatively, the attack we trained in Section 5.2 wins by coaxing the victim into creating a large
group of stones in a circular pattern, thereby exploiting a weakness in KataGo’s value network
which allows it to capture the group. This causes the score to shift decisively and unrecoverably in
the adversary’s favor.
To better understand the attack, we examined the winrate predictions produced by both the adver-
sary’s and the victim’s value networks at each turn of a game. As depicted in Figure 5a, the victim’s
winrate predictions are strikingly uncalibrated in the games where it loses (the majority), with a high
cross-entropy loss throughout the bulk of the game. The predictions only improve in accuracy close
to the end game.
Typically the victim predicts that it will win with over 99% confidence2 for most of the game, then
suddenly realizes it will lose with high probability, often just one move before its circular group is
captured. In some games, we observe that the victim’s winrate prediction oscillates wildly before
finally converging on certainty that it will lose; see Figure 5b for an example. This is in stark contrast
to the adversary’s own predictions, which change much more slowly and are less confident.


   2
       Winrate predictions are rounded to the nearest two decimal places before being logged in KataGo.


                                                                  8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


6   L IMITATIONS AND F UTURE W ORK
This paper has demonstrated that even agents at the level of top human professionals can be vulner-
able to adversarial policies. However, our results do not establish how common such vulnerabilities
are: it is possible Go-playing AI systems are unusually vulnerable. A promising direction for future
work is to evaluate our attack against strong AI systems in other games.
If professional-level policies can be vulnerable to attack, it is natural to ask how we can defend
against this possibility. Fortunately, there are a number of promising multi-agent RL techniques. An
important direction for future work is to evaluate policies trained with these approaches to determine
if they are also exploitable, or if this is an issue limited to self-play.
One promising technique is counterfactual regret minimization (Zinkevich et al., 2007, CFR) that
can beat professional human poker players (Brown & Sandholm, 2018). CFR has difficulty scaling
to high-dimensional state spaces, but regularization methods (Perolat et al., 2021) can natively scale
to games such as Stratego with a game tree 10175 times larger than Go (Perolat et al., 2022). Alter-
natively, methods using populations of agents such as policy-space response oracles (Lanctot et al.,
2017), AlphaStar’s Nash league (Vinyals et al., 2019) or vanilla PBT (Czempin & Gleave, 2022)
may be more robust than self-play, although are substantially more computationally expensive.
Finally, we found it harder to exploit agents that use search, with our attacks achieving a lower win
rate and requiring more computational resources. An interesting direction for future work is to try
and find more effective and compute-efficient methods for attacking agents that use large amounts
of search, such as modeling the victim (Appendix B.3).

7   C ONCLUSION
We trained adversarial policies that are able to exploit a superhuman Go AI. Notably, the adversaries
do not win by playing a strong game of Go—in fact, they can be easily beaten by a human amateur.
Instead, the adversaries win by exploiting particular blindspots in the victim agent. This result
suggests that even highly capable agents can harbor serious vulnerabilities.
The original KataGo paper (Wu, 2019) was published in 2019 and KataGo has since been used by
many Go enthusiasts and professional players as a playing partner and analysis engine. However,
despite the large amount of attention placed on KataGo, to our knowledge the vulnerabilities dis-
cussed in this paper were previously unknown. This suggests that learning-based attacks like the
one developed in this paper may be an important tool for uncovering hard-to-spot vulnerabilities in
AI systems.
Our results underscore that improvements in capabilities do not always translate into adequate ro-
bustness. These failures in Go AI systems are entertaining, but similar failures in safety-critical sys-
tems such as automated financial trading or autonomous vehicles could have dire consequences. We
believe the ML research community should invest considerable effort into improving robust training
and adversarial defense techniques in order to produce models with the high levels of reliability
needed for safety-critical systems.

AUTHOR C ONTRIBUTIONS
Removed for double blind submission.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Removed for double blind submission.

R EFERENCES
Louis Victor Allis. Searching for Solutions in Games and Artificial Intelligence. PhD thesis, Maas-
  tricht University, 1994.
David Balduzzi, Marta Garnelo, Yoram Bachrach, Wojciech Czarnecki, Julien Pérolat, Max Jader-
  berg, and Thore Graepel. Open-ended learning in symmetric zero-sum games. In ICML, 2019.


                                                   9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Petr Baudiš and Jean-loup Gailly. PACHI: State of the art open source Go program. In Advances in
  Computer Games, 2012.
Petr Baudiš and Jean-loup Gailly. PACHI readme, 2020. URL https://github.com/pasky/
  pachi/blob/a7c60ec10e1a071a8ac7fc51f7ccd62f006fff21/README.md.
David B. Benson. Life in the game of Go. Information Sciences, 10(1):17–29, 1976.
George W Brown. Iterative solution of games by fictitious play. In Activity Analysis of Production
  and Allocation, volume 13, pp. 374, 1951.
Noam Brown and Tuomas Sandholm. Superhuman ai for heads-up no-limit poker: Libratus beats
  top professionals. Science, 359(6374):418–424, 2018.
Nicholas Carlini, Anish Athalye, Nicolas Papernot, Wieland Brendel, Jonas Rauber, Dimitris
  Tsipras, Ian Goodfellow, Aleksander Madry, and Alexey Kurakin. On evaluating adversarial
  robustness. arXiv:1902.06705v2 [cs.LG], 2019.
Rémi Coulom. Go ratings, 2022. URL https://archive.ph/H0VDl.
Wojciech M. Czarnecki, Gauthier Gidel, Brendan Tracey, Karl Tuyls, Shayegan Omidshafiei, David
 Balduzzi, and Max Jaderberg. Real world games look like spinning tops. In NeurIPS, 2020.
Pavel Czempin and Adam Gleave. Reducing exploitability with population based training. In ICML
  Workshop on New Frontiers in Adversarial Machine Learning, 2022.
EGD. European Go database, 2022. URL https://www.europeangodatabase.eu/EGD/.
European Go Federation.     European pros, 2022.     URL https://www.eurogofed.org/
  pros/.
Adam Gleave, Michael Dennis, Cody Wild, Neel Kant, Sergey Levine, and Stuart Russell. Adver-
  sarial policies: Attacking deep reinforcement learning. In ICLR, 2020.
Fu    Haoda   and   David    J.  Wu.           summarize_sgfs.py, 2022.
  URL                    https://github.com/lightvector/KataGo/blob/
  c957055e020fe438024ddffd7c5b51b349e86dcc/python/summarize_sgfs.
  py.
Johannes Heinrich, Marc Lanctot, and David Silver. Fictitious self-play in extensive-form games.
  In ICML, volume 37, pp. 805–813, 2015.
Tien Ho-Phuoc. CIFAR10 to compare visual recognition performance between deep neural networks
  and humans. arXiv:1811.07270v2 [cs.CV], 2018.
Sandy H. Huang, Nicolas Papernot, Ian J. Goodfellow, Yan Duan, and Pieter Abbeel. Adversarial
  attacks on neural network policies. arXiv:1702.02284v1 [cs.LG], 2017.
Inaam Ilahi, Muhammad Usama, Junaid Qadir, Muhammad Umar Janjua, Ala Al-Fuqaha, Dinh Thai
  Hoang, and Dusit Niyato. Challenges and countermeasures for adversarial attacks on deep rein-
  forcement learning. IEEE TAI, 3(2):90–109, 2022.
Michael Johanson, Kevin Waugh, Michael H. Bowling, and Martin Zinkevich. Accelerating best
 response calculation in large extensive games. In IJCAI, 2011.
KGS. gnugo2 rank graph, 2022a. URL https://www.gokgs.com/graphPage.jsp?
 user=gnugo2.
KGS. Top 100 KGS players, 2022b. URL https://archive.ph/BbAHB.
Li-Cheng Lan, Huan Zhang, Ti-Rong Wu, Meng-Yu Tsai, I-Chen Wu, and Cho-Jui Hsieh. Are
  alphazero-like agents robust to adversarial perturbations? In NeurIPS, 2022.
Marc Lanctot, Vinicius Zambaldi, Audrunas Gruslys, Angeliki Lazaridou, Karl Tuyls, Julien Pero-
 lat, David Silver, and Thore Graepel. A unified game-theoretic approach to multiagent reinforce-
 ment learning. In NeurIPS, pp. 4190–4203, 2017.


                                               10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Viliam Lisý and Michael Bowling. Equilibrium approximation quality of current no-limit poker
  bots. In AAAI Workshop on Computer Poker and Imperfect Information Games, 2017.
Aleksander Madry, Aleksandar Makelov, Ludwig Schmidt, Dimitris Tsipras, and Adrian Vladu.
  Towards deep learning models resistant to adversarial attacks. In ICLR, 2018.
OpenAI, Christopher Berner, Greg Brockman, Brooke Chan, Vicki Cheung, Przemysław D˛ebiak,
  Christy Dennison, David Farhi, Quirin Fischer, Shariq Hashme, Chris Hesse, Rafal Józefowicz,
  Scott Gray, Catherine Olsson, Jakub Pachocki, Michael Petrov, Henrique Pondé de Oliveira Pinto,
  Jonathan Raiman, Tim Salimans, Jeremy Schlatter, Jonas Schneider, Szymon Sidor, Ilya
  Sutskever, Jie Tang, Filip Wolski, and Susan Zhang. Dota 2 with large scale deep reinforcement
  learning. arXiv:1912.06680v1 [cs.LG], 2019.
John Pascutto. Leela Zero, 2019. URL https://zero.sjeng.org/.
Julien Perolat, Remi Munos, Jean-Baptiste Lespiau, Shayegan Omidshafiei, Mark Rowland, Pedro
  Ortega, Neil Burch, Thomas Anthony, David Balduzzi, Bart De Vylder, Georgios Piliouras, Marc
  Lanctot, and Karl Tuyls. From poincaré recurrence to convergence in imperfect information
  games: Finding equilibrium via regularization. In ICML, volume 139, pp. 8525–8535, 2021.
Julien Perolat, Bart de Vylder, Daniel Hennes, Eugene Tarassov, Florian Strub, Vincent de Boer,
  Paul Muller, Jerome T. Connor, Neil Burch, Thomas Anthony, Stephen McAleer, Romuald Elie,
  Sarah H. Cen, Zhe Wang, Audrunas Gruslys, Aleksandra Malysheva, Mina Khan, Sherjil Ozair,
  Finbarr Timbers, Toby Pohlen, Tom Eccles, Mark Rowland, Marc Lanctot, Jean-Baptiste Lespiau,
  Bilal Piot, Shayegan Omidshafiei, Edward Lockhart, Laurent Sifre, Nathalie Beauguerlange,
  Remi Munos, David Silver, Satinder Singh, Demis Hassabis, and Karl Tuyls. Mastering the game
  of Stratego with model-free multiagent reinforcement learning. arXiv: 2206.15378v1 [cs.AI],
  2022.
Hieu Pham, Zihang Dai, Qizhe Xie, and Quoc V. Le. Meta pseudo labels. In CVPR, June 2021.
Kui Ren, Tianhang Zheng, Zhan Qin, and Xue Liu. Adversarial attacks and defenses in deep learn-
  ing. Engineering, 6(3):346–360, 2020.
Rob. NeuralZ06 bot configuration settings, 2022. URL https://discord.com/channels/
  417022162348802048/583775968804732928/983781367747837962.
Olga Russakovsky, Jia Deng, Hao Su, Jonathan Krause, Sanjeev Satheesh, Sean Ma, Zhiheng
  Huang, Andrej Karpathy, Aditya Khosla, Michael Bernstein, Alexander C. Berg, and Li Fei-Fei.
  ImageNet large scale visual recognition challenge. IJCV, 115(3):211–252, dec 2015.
Martin Schmid, Matej Moravcik, Neil Burch, Rudolf Kadlec, Josh Davidson, Kevin Waugh, Nolan
 Bard, Finbarr Timbers, Marc Lanctot, Zach Holland, Elnaz Davoodi, Alden Christianson, and
 Michael Bowling. Player of games. arXiv: 2112.03178v1 [cs.LG], 2021.
Vaishaal Shankar, Rebecca Roelofs, Horia Mania, Alex Fang, Benjamin Recht, and Ludwig
  Schmidt. Evaluating machine accuracy on ImageNet. In ICML, 2020.
Lloyd S. Shapley. Stochastic games. PNAS, 39(10):1095–1100, 1953.
David Silver, Aja Huang, Chris J Maddison, Arthur Guez, Laurent Sifre, George Van Den Driessche,
  Julian Schrittwieser, Ioannis Antonoglou, Veda Panneershelvam, Marc Lanctot, et al. Mastering
  the game of Go with deep neural networks and tree search. Nature, 529(7587):484–489, 2016.
David Silver, Julian Schrittwieser, Karen Simonyan, Ioannis Antonoglou, Aja Huang, Arthur Guez,
  Thomas Hubert, Lucas Baker, Matthew Lai, Adrian Bolton, Yutian Chen, Timothy Lillicrap, Fan
  Hui, Laurent Sifre, George van den Driessche, Thore Graepel, and Demis Hassabis. Mastering
  the game of go without human knowledge. Nature, 550(7676):354–359, 2017.
David Silver, Thomas Hubert, Julian Schrittwieser, Ioannis Antonoglou, Matthew Lai, Arthur Guez,
  Marc Lanctot, Laurent Sifre, Dharshan Kumaran, Thore Graepel, Timothy Lillicrap, Karen Si-
  monyan, and Demis Hassabis. A general reinforcement learning algorithm that masters chess,
  shogi, and Go through self-play. Science, 362(6419):1140–1144, 2018.


                                               11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Richard S. Sutton and Andrew G. Barto. Reinforcement Learning: An Introduction. The MIT Press,
  second edition, 2018.
Christian Szegedy, Wojciech Zaremba, Ilya Sutskever, Joan Bruna, Dumitru Erhan, Ian J. Goodfel-
  low, and Rob Fergus. Intriguing properties of neural networks. In ICLR, 2014.
Yuandong Tian, Jerry Ma, Qucheng Gong, Shubho Sengupta, Zhuoyuan Chen, James Pinkerton, and
  Larry Zitnick. ELF OpenGo: an analysis and open reimplementation of AlphaZero. In ICML,
  2019.
Finbarr Timbers, Nolan Bard, Edward Lockhart, Marc Lanctot, Martin Schmid, Neil Burch, Julian
  Schrittwieser, Thomas Hubert, and Michael Bowling. Approximate exploitability: Learning a
  best response in large games. arXiv: 2004.09677v5 [cs.LG], 2022.
John Tromp. The game of Go, 2014. URL https://tromp.github.io/go.html.
Oriol Vinyals, Igor Babuschkin, Wojciech M. Czarnecki, Michaël Mathieu, Andrew Dudzik, Juny-
  oung Chung, David H. Choi, Richard Powell, Timo Ewalds, Petko Georgiev, Junhyuk Oh, Dan
  Horgan, Manuel Kroiss, Ivo Danihelka, Aja Huang, Laurent Sifre, Trevor Cai, John P. Agapiou,
  Max Jaderberg, Alexander S. Vezhnevets, Rémi Leblond, Tobias Pohlen, Valentin Dalibard, David
  Budden, Yury Sulsky, James Molloy, Tom L. Paine, Caglar Gulcehre, Ziyu Wang, Tobias Pfaff,
  Yuhuai Wu, Roman Ring, Dani Yogatama, Dario Wünsch, Katrina McKinney, Oliver Smith, Tom
  Schaul, Timothy Lillicrap, Koray Kavukcuoglu, Demis Hassabis, Chris Apps, and David Silver.
  Grandmaster level in StarCraft II using multi-agent reinforcement learning. Nature, 2019.
David J. Wu. Accelerating self-play learning in Go. arXiv: 1902.10565v5 [cs.LG], 2019.
David J. Wu. KataGo’s supported go rules (version 2), 2021. URL https://lightvector.
  github.io/KataGo/rules.html.
David J. Wu. KataGo - networks for kata1, 2022. URL https://katagotraining.org/
  networks/.
Xian Wu, Wenbo Guo, Hua Wei, and Xinyu Xing. Adversarial policy training against deep rein-
  forcement learning. In USENIX Security, 2021.
Martin Zinkevich, Michael Johanson, Michael Bowling, and Carmelo Piccione. Regret minimization
 in games with incomplete information. In NeurIPS, volume 20, 2007.


A     RULES OF G O U SED F OR E VALUATION
We evaluate all games with Tromp-Taylor rules (Tromp, 2014), after clearing opposite-color stones
within pass-alive groups computed by Benson’s algorithm (Benson, 1976). KataGo was configured
to play using these rules in all our matches against it. Indeed, these rules simply consist of KataGo’s
version of Tromp-Taylor rules with SelfPlayOpts enabled (Wu, 2021). We use a fixed Komi of
6.5.
We chose these modified Tromp-Taylor rules because they are simple, and KataGo was trained on
(variants) of these rules so should be strongest playing with them. Although the exact rules used were
randomized during KataGo’s training, modified Tromp-Taylor made up a plurality of the training
data. That is, modified Tromp-Taylor is at least as likely as any other configuration seen during
training, and is more common than some other options.3
In particular, KataGo training randomized between area vs. territory scoring as well as ko, suicide,
taxation and button rules from the options described in Wu (2021). These configuration settings are
provided as input to the neural network (Wu, 2019, Table 4), so the network should learn to play
appropriately under a range of rule sets. Additionally, during training Komi was sampled randomly
from a normal distribution with mean 7 and standard deviation 1 (Wu, 2019, Appendix D).
   3
     In private communication, the author of KataGo estimated that modified Tromp-Taylor made up a “a few
%” of the training data, “growing to more like 10% or as much as 20%” depending on differences such as
“self-capture and ko rules that shouldn’t matter for what you’re investigating, but aren’t fully the same rules as
Tromp-Taylor”.


                                                       12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A.1     D IFFERENCE F ROM T YPICAL H UMAN P LAY

Although KataGo supports a variety of rules, all of them involve automatically scoring the board at
the end of the game. By contrast, when a match between humans end, the players typically confer
and agree which stones are dead, removing them from the board prior to scoring. If no agreement
can be reached then the players either continue playing the game until the situation is clarified, or a
referee arbitrates the outcome of the game.
KataGo has a variety of optional features to help it play well under human scoring rules. For exam-
ple, KataGo includes an auxiliary prediction head for whether stones are dead or alive. This enables
it to propose which stones it believes are dead when playing on online Go servers. Additionally, it
include hard-coded features that can be enabled to make it play in a more human-like way, such as
friendlyPassOk to promote passing when heuristics suggest the game is nearly over.
These features have led some to speculate that the (undefended) victim passes prematurely in games
such as those in Figure 1 (left) because it has learned or is configured to play in a more human-
like way. Prima facie, this view seems credible: a human player certainly might pass in a similar
situation to our victim, viewing the game as already won under human rules. Although tempting,
this explanation is not correct: the optional features described above were disabled in our evaluation.
Therefore KataGo loses under the rules it was both trained and configured to use.
In fact, the majority of our evaluation used the match command to run KataGo vs. KataGo agents
which naturally does not support these human-like game play features. We did use the gtp com-
mand, implementing the Go Text Protocol (GTP), for a minority of our experiments, such as evalu-
ating KataGo against other AI systems or human players. In those experiments, we configured gtp
to follow the same Tromp-Taylor rules described above, with any human-like extensions disabled.


B     S EARCH A LGORITHMS

B.1     A R EVIEW OF M ONTE -C ARLO T REE S EARCH (MCTS)

In this section, we review the basic Monte-Carlo Tree Search (MCTS) algorithm as used in AlphaGo-
style agents (Silver et al., 2016). This formulation is heavily inspired by the description of MCTS
given in Wu (2019).
MCTS is an algorithm for growing a game tree one node at a time. It starts from a tree T0 with a
single root node x0 . It then goes through N playouts, where every playout adds a leaf node to the
tree. We will use Ti to denote the game tree after i playouts, and will use xi to denote the node that
was added to Ti−1 to get Ti . After MCTS finishes, we have a tree TN with N + 1 nodes. We then
use simple statistics of TN to derive a sampling distribution for the next move.


B.1.1     MCTS P LAYOUTS

MCTS playouts are governed by two learned functions:

        a. A value function estimator V̂ : T × X → R, which returns a real number V̂T (x) given a
           tree T and a node x in T . The value function estimator is meant to estimate how good it is
           to be at x from the perspective of the player to move at the root of the tree.

      b. A policy estimator π̂ : T × X → P(X ), which returns a probability distribution over
         possible next states π̂T (x) given a tree T and a node x in T . The policy estimator is meant
         to approximate the result of playing the optimal policy from x (from the perspective of the
         player to move at x).

For both KataGo and AlphaGo, the value function estimator and policy estimator are defined by two
deep neural network heads with a shared backbone. The reason that V̂ and π̂ also take a tree T as an
argument is because the estimators factor in the sequence of moves leading up to a node in the tree.


                                                  13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A playout is performed by taking a walk in the current game tree T . The walk goes down the tree
until it attempts to walk to a node x′ that either doesn’t exist in the tree or is a terminal node.4 At
this point the playout ends and x′ is added as a new node to the tree (we allow duplicate terminal
nodes in the tree).
Walks start at the root of the tree. Let x be where we are currently in the walk. The child c we walk
to (which may not exist in the tree) is given by
        walkMCTS
            T    (x)
                                            √
                                               ST (x)−1
           argmax V̄T (c) + α · π̂T (x)[c] · 1+S
           
                                                  T (c)
                                                                  if root player to move at x,
        =       c                            √                                                            (1)
                                               ST (x)−1
           argmin V̄T (c) − α · π̂T (x)[c] · 1+S
                                                                 if opponent player to move at x,
                                                  T (c)
                 c

where the argmin and argmax are taken over all children reachable in a single legal move from x.
There are some new pieces of notation in Eq 1. Here are what they mean:

      1. V̄T : X → R takes a node x and returns the average value of V̂T across all the nodes in the
         subtree of T rooted at x (which includes x). In the special case that x is a terminal node,
         V̄T (x) is the result of the finished game as given by the game-simulator. When x does not
         exist in T , we instead use the more complicated formula5
                                                   s         X
                    V̄T (x) = V̄T (parT (x)) − β ·                       π̂T (parT (x))[x′ ] ,
                                                       x′ ∈ childrenT (parT (x))

         where parT (x) is the parent of x in T and β is a constant that controls how much we
         de-prioritize exploration after we have already done some exploration.
      2. α ≥ 0 is a constant to trade off between exploration and exploitation.
      3. ST : X → Z≥0 takes a node x and returns the size of the subtree of T rooted at x. Duplicate
         terminal nodes are counted multiple times. If x is not in T , then ST (x) = 0.

The first term in Eq 1 can be thought of as the exploitation term, and the second term can be thought
of as the exploration term and is inspired by UCB algorithms.

B.1.2    MCTS F INAL M OVE S ELECTION
The final move to be selected by MCTS is sampled from a distribution proportional to
                                                STN (c)1/τ ,                                              (2)
where c in this case is a child of the root node. The temperature parameter τ trades off between
exploration and exploitation.6

B.1.3    E FFICIENTLY I MPLEMENTING MCTS
To efficiently implement the playout procedure one should keep running values of V̄T and ST for
every node in the tree. These values should be updated whenever a new node is added. The standard
formulation of MCTS bakes these updates into the algorithm specification. Our formulation hides
the procedure for computing V̄T and ST to simplify exposition.

B.2     A DVERSARIAL MCTS: S AMPLE (A-MCTS-S)

In this section, we describe in detail how our Adversarial MCTS: Sample (A-MCTS-S) attack is
implemented. We build off of the framework for vanilla MCTS as described in Appendix B.1.
    4
      A “terminal” node is one where the game is finished, whether by the turn limit being reached, one player
resigning, or by two players passing consecutively.
    5
      Which is used in KataGo and LeelaZero but not AlphaGo (Wu, 2019).
    6
      See search.h::getChosenMoveLoc and searchresults.cpp::getChosenMoveLoc to
see how KataGo does this.


                                                     14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A-MCTS-S, just like MCTS, starts from a tree T0 with a single root node and adds nodes to the tree
via a series of N playouts. We derive the next move distribution from the final game tree TN by
sampling from the distribution proportional to
                    STA-MCTS
                       N
                             (c)1/τ ,   where c is a child of the root node of TN .                  (3)
Here, STA-MCTS is a modified version of ST that measures the size of a subtree while ignoring non-
terminal victim-nodes (at victim-nodes it is the victim’s turn to move, and at self-nodes it is the
adversary’s turn to move). Formally, STA-MCTS (x) is the sum of the weights of nodes in the subtree
of T rooted at x, with weight function
                                      
                                      1 if x is self-node,
                        A-MCTS
                       wT      (x) = 1 if x is terminal victim-node,                            (4)
                                      
                                       0 if x is non-terminal victim-node.

We grow the tree by A-MCTS playouts. At victim-nodes, we sample directly from the victim’s
policy π v :
                              walkA-MCTS
                                   T      (x) := sample from πTv (x).                        (5)
This is a perfect model of the victim without search. However, it will tend to underestimate the
strength of the victim when the victim plays with search.
At self-nodes, we instead take the move with the best upper confidence bound just like in regular
MCTS:
                                                                     q
                                                                       STA-MCTS (x) − 1
          walkA-MCTS
               T      (x) := argmax V̄TA-MCTS (c) + α · π̂T (x)[c] ·                    .     (6)
                                 c                                    1 + STA-MCTS (c)
Note this is similar to Eq 1 from the previous section. The key difference is that we use STA-MCTS (x)
(a weighted version of ST (x)) and V̄TA-MCTS (c) (a weighted version of V̄T (c)). Formally, V̄TA-MCTS (c)
is the weighted average of the value function estimator V̂T (x) across all nodes x in the subtree of T
rooted at c, weighted by wTA-MCTS (x). If c does not exist in T or is a terminal node, we fall back to
the behavior of V̄T (c).

B.3   A DVERSARIAL MCTS: V ICTIM M ODEL (A-MCTS-VM)

In A-MCTS-VM, we propose fine-tuning a copy of the victim network to predict the moves played
by the victim in games played against the adversarial policy. This is similar to how the victim
network itself was trained, but may be a better predictor as it is trained on-distribution. The adversary
follows the same search procedure as in A-MCTS-S but samples from this predictive model instead
of the victim. This therefore has the same inference complexity as A-MCTS-S, with slightly greater
training complexity due to the need to train an additional network. However, it does require white-
box access to the victim.

B.4   PASS -A LIVE D EFENSE

Our hard-coded defense modifies KataGo’s C++ code to directly remove passing moves from con-
sideration after MCTS, setting their probability to zero. Since the victim must eventually pass in
order for the game to end, we allow passing to be assigned nonzero probability when there are no
legal moves, or when the only legal moves are inside the victim’s own pass-alive territory. We also
do not allow the victim to play within its own pass-alive territory—otherwise, after removing highly
confident pass moves from consideration, KataGo may play unconfident moves within its pass-alive
territory, losing liberties and eventually losing the territory altogether. We use a pre-existing func-
tion inside the KataGo codebase, Board::calculateArea, to determine which moves are in
pass-alive territory.
The term “pass-alive territory” is defined in the KataGo rules as follows (Wu, 2021):
         A {maximal-non-black, maximal-non-white} region R is pass-alive-territory for
         {Black, White} if all {black, white} regions bordering it are pass-alive-groups,
         and all or all but one point in R is adjacent to a {black, white} pass-alive-group,
         respectively.


                                                   15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


       Hyperparameter                                  Value        Different from KataGo?
       Batch Size                                      256          Same
       Learning Rate Scale of Hardcoded Schedule       1.0          Same
       Minimum Rows Before Shuffling                   250,000      Same
       Data Reuse Factor                               4            Similar
       Adversary Visit Count                           600          Similar
       Adversary Network Architecture                  b6c96        Different
       Gatekeeping                                     Disabled     Different
       Auto-komi                                       Disabled     Different
       Komi randomization                              Disabled     Different
       Handicap Games                                  Disabled     Different
       Game Forking                                    Disabled     Different

              Table 1: Key hyperparameter settings for our adversarial training runs.


The notion “pass-alive group” is a standard concept in Go (Wu, 2021):

         A black or white region R is a pass-alive-group if there does not exist any sequence
         of consecutive pseudolegal moves of the opposing color that results in emptying
         R.

KataGo uses an algorithm introduced by Benson (1976) to efficiently compute the pass-alive status
of each group. For more implementation details, we encourage the reader to consult the official
KataGo rules and the KataGo codebase on GitHub.

C     H YPERPARAMETER S ETTINGS
We enumerate the key hyperparameters used in our training run in Table 1. For brevity, we omit
hyperparameters that are the same as KataGo defaults and have only a minor effect on performance.
The key difference from standard KataGo training is that our adversarial policy uses a b6c96 net-
work architecture, consisting of 6 blocks and 96 channels. This is much smaller than the victim,
which uses a b20c256 or b40c256 architecture. We additionally disable a variety of game rule
randomizations that help make KataGo a useful AI teacher in a variety of settings but are unimpor-
tant for our attack. We also disable gatekeeping, designed to stabilize training performance, as our
training has proved sufficiently stable without it.
We train at most 4 times on each data row before blocking for fresh data. This is comparable to the
original KataGo training run, although the ratio during that run varied as the number of asynchronous
selfplay workers fluctuated over time. We use an adversary visit count of 600, which is comparable
to KataGo, though the exact visit count has varied between their training runs.

C.1   C ONFIGURATION FOR C URRICULUM AGAINST V ICTIM W ITHOUT S EARCH

In Section 5.1, we train using a curriculum over checkpoints, moving on to the next checkpoint when
the adversary’s win-rate exceeds 50%. We ran the curriculum over the following checkpoints, all
without search:

      1. Checkpoint 127: b20c256x2-s5303129600-d1228401921 (cp127).
      2. Checkpoint 200: b40c256-s5867950848-d1413392747.
      3. Checkpoint 300: b40c256-s7455877888-d1808582493.
      4. Checkpoint 400: b40c256-s9738904320-d2372933741.
      5. Checkpoint 469: b40c256-s11101799168-d2715431527.
      6. Checkpoint 505: b40c256-s11840935168-d2898845681 (Latest).

These checkpoints can all be obtained from Wu (2022).


                                                 16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


We start with checkpoint 127 for computational efficiency: it is the strongest KataGo network of
its size, 20 blocks or b20. The subsequent checkpoints are all 40 block networks, and are approx-
imately equally spaced in terms of training time steps. We include checkpoint 469 in between 400
and 505 for historical reasons: we ran some earlier experiments against checkpoint 469, so it is
helpful to include checkpoint 469 in the curriculum to check performance is comparable to prior
experiments.
Checkpoint 505 is the latest confidently rated network. There are some more recent, larger networks
(b60 = 60 blocks) that may have an improvement of up to 150 Elo. However, they have had too few
rating games to be confidently evaluated.

C.2   C ONFIGURATION FOR C URRICULUM AGAINST V ICTIM WITH PASSING D EFENSE

In Section 5.2, we ran the curriculum over the following checkpoints, all with the pass-alive defense
enabled:
    1. Checkpoint 39: b6c96-s45189632-d6589032 (cp39def ), no search
    2. Checkpoint 49: b6c96-s69427456-d10051148, no search.
    3. Checkpoint 63: b6c96-s175395328-d26788732, no search.
    4. Checkpoint 79: b10c128-s197428736-d67404019, no search.
    5. Checkpoint 99: b15c192-s497233664-d149638345, no search.
    6. Checkpoint 127:      b20c256x2-s5303129600-d1228401921, no search
       (cp127def ).
    7. Checkpoint 200: b40c256-s5867950848-d1413392747, no search
    8. Checkpoint 300: b40c256-s7455877888-d1808582493, no search.
    9. Checkpoint 400: b40c256-s9738904320-d2372933741, no search.
   10. Checkpoint 469: b40c256-s11101799168-d2715431527, no search.
   11. Checkpoint 505: b40c256-s11840935168-d2898845681 (Latestdef ), no search
       (1 visit).
   12. Checkpoint 505: b40c256-s11840935168-d2898845681 (Latestdef ), 2 visits.
   13. Checkpoint 505: b40c256-s11840935168-d2898845681 (Latestdef ), 4 visits.
   14. Checkpoint 505: b40c256-s11840935168-d2898845681 (Latestdef ), 8 visits.
   15. Checkpoint 505: b40c256-s11840935168-d2898845681 (Latestdef ), 16 visits.
16–18. ...
   19. Checkpoint 505: b40c256-s11840935168-d2898845681 (Latestdef ), 256 vis-
       its.
We move on to the next checkpoint when the adversary’s win-rate exceeds 50% until we reach
Latestdef without search, at which point we increase the win-rate threshold to 75%.

D     S TRENGTH OF G O AI SYSTEMS
In this section, we estimate the strength of KataGo’s Latest network with and without search nd
the AlphaZero agent from (Schmid et al., 2021) playing with 800 visits.

D.1   S TRENGTH OF K ATAG O W ITHOUT S EARCH

First, we estimate the strength of KataGo’s Latest agent playing without search. We use two
independent methodologies and conclude that Latest without search is at the level of a weak
professional.
One way to gauge the performance of Latest without search is to see how it fares against humans
on online Go platforms. Per Table 2, on the online Go platform KGS, a slightly earlier (and weaker)
checkpoint than Latest playing without search is roughly at the level of a top-100 European player.
However, some caution is needed in relying on KGS rankings:


                                                 17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


       KGS handle        Is KataGo?       KGS rank         EGF rank       EGD Profile
       Fredda                             22               25             Fredrik Blomback
       cheater                            25               6              Pavol Lisy
       TeacherD                           26               39             Dominik Boviz
       NeuralZ03         ✓                31
       NeuralZ05         ✓                32
       NeuralZ06         ✓                35
       ben0                               39               16             Benjamin Drean-Guenaizia
       sai1732                            40               78             Alexandr Muromcev
       Tichu                              49               64             Matias Pankoke
       Lukan                              53               10             Lukas Podpera
       HappyLook                          54               49             Igor Burnaevskij

Table 2: Rankings of various humans and no-search KataGo bots on KGS (KGS, 2022b). Hu-
man players were selected to be those who have European Go Database (EGD) profiles (EGD,
2022), from which we obtained the European Go Federation (EGF) rankings in the table. The
KataGo bots are running with a checkpoint slightly weaker than Latest, specifically Checkpoint
469 or b40c256-s11101799168-d2715431527 (Rob, 2022). Per Wu (2022), the checkpoint
is roughly 10 Elo weaker than Latest.


      1. Players on KGS compete under less focused conditions than in a tournament, so they may
         underperform.
      2. KGS is a less serious setting than official tournaments, which makes cheating (e.g., using
         an AI) more likely. Thus human ratings may be inflated.
      3. Humans can play bots multiple times and adjust their strategies, while bots remain static.
         In a sense, humans are able to run adversarial attacks on the bots, and are even able to do
         so in a white-box manner since the source-code and network weights of a bot like KataGo
         are public.
Another way to estimate the strength of Latest without search is to compare it to other AIs with
known strengths and extrapolate performance across different amounts of search. Our analysis criti-
cally assumes the transitivity of Elo at high levels of play. We walk through our estimation procedure
below:
      1. Our anchor is ELF OpenGo at 80,000 visits per move, which won all 20 games played
         against four top-30 professional players, including five games against the now world num-
         ber one (Tian et al., 2019). We assume that ELF OpenGo at 80,000 visits is strongly su-
         perhuman, meaning it has a 90%+ win rate over the strongest current human.7 At the time
         of writing, the top ranked player on Earth has an Elo of 3845 on goratings.org (Coulom,
         2022). Under our assumption, ELF OpenGo at 80,000 visits per move would have an Elo
         of 4245+ on goratings.org.
      2. The strongest network in the original KataGo paper was shown to be slightly stronger
         than ELF OpenGo (Wu, 2019, Table 1) when both bots were run at 1600 visits per move.
         From Figure 6, we see that the relative strengths of KataGo networks is maintained across
         different amounts of search. We thus extrapolate that strongest network in the original
         KataGo paper with 80,000 visits would also have an Elo of 4245+ on goratings.org.
      3. The strongest network in the original KataGo paper is comparable to the
         b15c192-s1503689216-d402723070 checkpoint on katagotraining.org (Wu,
         2022). We dub this checkpoint Original. In a series of benchmark games, we found
         that Latest without search won 29/3200 games against Original with 1600 visits.
         This puts Original with 1600 visits ~800 Elo points ahead of Latest without search.
      4. Finally, log-linearly extrapolating the performance of Original from 1600 to 80,000
         visits using Figure 6 yields an Elo difference of ~900 between the two visit counts.
    7
      This assumption is not entirely justified by statistics, as a 20:0 record only yields a 95% binomial lower
confidence bound of a 83.16% win rate against top-30 professional players in 2019. It does help however that
the players in question were rated #3, #5, #23, and #30 in the world at the time.


                                                      18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


        2000

                                                                                         Network
        1000                                                                            cp505 (Latest)
                                                                                        cp127
                                                                                        cp103 (Original)
 Elo


           0
                                                                                        cp99
                                                                                        cp79
       −1000                                                                            cp63
                                                                                        cp37

       −2000


               100               101               102               103
                                          Visits

Figure 6: Elo ranking (y-axis) of networks (different colored lines) by visit count (x-axis). The lines
are approximately linear on a log x-scale, with the different networks producing similarly shaped
lines vertically shifted. This indicates that there is a consistent increase in Elo, regardless of network
strength, that is logarithmic in visit count. Elo ratings were computed from self-play games among
the networks using a Bayesian Elo estimation algorithm (Haoda & Wu, 2022).



        5. Combining our work, we get that Latest without search is roughly 800 + 900 = ~1700
           Elo points weaker than ELF OpenGo with 80,000 visits. This would give Latest without
           search an Elo rating of 4245 − 1700 = ~2500 on goratings.org, putting it at the skill level
           of a weak professional.

As a final sanity check on these calculations, the raw AlphaGo Zero neural network was reported to
have an Elo rating of 3,055, comparable to AlphaGo Fan’s 3,144 Elo.8 Since AlphaGo Fan beat Fan
Hui, a 2-dan professional player (Silver et al., 2017), this confirms that well-trained neural networks
can play at the level of human professionals. Although there has been no direct comparison between
KataGo and AlphaGo Zero, we would expect them to be not wildly dissimilar. Indeed, if anything
the latest versions of KataGo are likely stronger, benefiting from both a large distributed training run
(amounting to over 10,000 V100 GPU days of training) and four years of algorithmic progress.


D.2     S TRENGTH OF K ATAG O W ITH S EARCH

In the previous section, we established that Latest without search is at the level of a weak profes-
sional with rating around ~2500 on goratings.org.
Assuming Elo transitivity, we can estimate the strength of Latest by utilizing Figure 6. In partic-
ular, our evaluation results tell us that Latest with 64 playouts/move is roughly 1063 Elo stronger
than Latest with no search. This puts Latest with 64 playouts/move at an Elo of ~3563 on
goratings.org—within the top 20 in the world. Beyond 256 playouts/move, Latest plays at a su-
perhuman level. Latest with 1024 playouts/move, for instance, is roughly 2129 Elo stronger than
Latest with no search, giving an Elo of ~4629, over 700 points higher than the top player on
goratings.org.


   8
     The Elo scale used in Silver et al. (2017) is not directly comparable to our Elo scale, although they should
be broadly similar as both are anchored to human players.


                                                       19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


            Agent                             Victim?      Elo (rel GnuGo)      Elo (rel victim)
            AlphaZero(s=16k, t=800k)                       +3139                +1040
            AG0 3-day(s=16k)                               +3069                +970
            AlphaGo Lee(time=1s)                           +2308                +209
            AlphaZero(s=800,t=800k)           ✓            +2099                0
            Pachi(s=100k)                                  +869                 -1230
            Pachi(s=10k)                                   +231                 -1868
            GnuGo(l=10)                                    +0                   -2099

Table 3: Relative Elo ratings for AlphaZero, drawing on information from Schmid et al. (2021,
Table 4), Silver et al. (2018) and Silver et al. (2017). s stands for number of steps, time for thinking
time, and t for number of training steps.


D.3    S TRENGTH OF A LPHA Z ERO

Prior work from Timbers et al. (2022) described in Section 2 exploited the AlphaZero replica from
Schmid et al. (2021) playing with 800 visits. Unfortunately, this agent has never been evaluated
against KataGo or against any human player, making it difficult to directly compare its strength to
those of our victims. Moreover, since it is a proprietary model, we cannot perform this evaluation
ourselves. Accordingly, in this section we seek to estimate the strength of these AlphaZero agents
using three anchors: GnuGo, Pachi and Lee Sedol. Our estimates suggest AlphaZero with 800 visits
ranges in strength from the top 200 of human players, to being slightly superhuman.
We reproduce relevant Elo comparisons from prior work in Table 3. In particular, Table 4 of Schmid
et al. (2021) compares the victim used in Timbers et al. (2022), AlphaZero(s=800,t=800k), to two
open-source AI systems, GnuGo and Pachi. It also compares it to a higher visit count version
AlphaZero(s=16k, t=800k), from which we can compare using Silver et al. (2018) to AG0 3-day
and from there using Silver et al. (2017) to AlphaGo Lee which played Lee Sedol.
Our first strength evaluation uses the open-source anchor point provided by Pachi(s=10k). The au-
thors of Pachi (Baudiš & Gailly, 2012) report it achieves a 2-dan ranking on KGS (Baudiš & Gailly,
2020) when playing with 5000 playouts and using up to 15,000 when needed. We conservatively
assume this corresponds to a 2-dan EGF player (KGS rankings tend to be slightly inflated), giving
an EGF Elo of 2200. Assuming transitivity, the victim AlphaZero(s=800,t=800k) would then have
an EGF Elo of 4299. The top EGF professional Ilya Shiskin has an EGF Elo of 2830 (Federation,
2022) at the time of writing, and 2979 on goratings.org (Coulom, 2022). Using Ilya as an anchor,
this would give AlphaZero(s=800,t=800k) a goratings.org Elo of 4299+2979-2830=4448. This is
superhuman, as the top player at the time of writing has an Elo of 3845.
However, some caution is needed here—the Elo gap between Pachi(s=10k) and Alp-
haZero(s=800,t=800k) is huge, making the exact value unreliable. The gap from Pachi(s=100k)
is smaller, however unfortunately to the best of our knowledge there is no public evaluation of Pachi
at this strength. However, the results in Baudiš & Gailly (2020) strongly suggest it would perform
at no more than a 4-dan KGS level, or at most an EGF Elo of 2400.9 Repeating the analysis above
then gives a goratings.org Elo of 2400+(2308-869)+(2979-2830)=3988 Elo. This still suggests the
victim is superhuman, but only barely.
However, if we instead take GnuGo level 10 as our anchor, we get a quite different result. It is known
to play between 10 and 11kyu KGS (KGS, 2022a), or an EGF Elo of around 1050. This gives an
    9
      In particular, Baudiš & Gailly (2020) report that Pachi achieves a 3-dan to 4-dan ranking on KGS when
playing on a cluster of 64 machines with 22 threads, compared to 2-dan on a 6-core Intel i7. Figure 4 of Baudiš
& Gailly (2012) confirms playouts are proportional to the number of machines and number of threads, and
we’d therefore expect the cluster to have 200x as many visits, or around a million visits. If 1 million visits
is at best 4-dan, then 100,000 visits should be weaker. However, there is a confounder: the 1 million visits
was distributed across 64 machines, and Figure 4 shows that distributed playouts do worse than playouts on
a single machine. Nonetheless, we would not expect this difference to make up for a 10x difference in visits.
Indeed, Baudiš & Gailly (2012, Figure 4) shows that 1 million playouts spread across 4 machines (red circle)
is substantially better than 125,000 visits on a single machine (black circle), achieving an Elo of around 150
compared to -20.


                                                      20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


implied EGF Elo for AlphaZero(s=800,t=800k) of 3149, or a goratings.org Elo of 3298 Elo. This is
still strong, in the top 200 world players, but is far from superhuman.
The large discrepancy between these results led us to seek a third anchor point: how AlphaZero
performed relative to previous AlphaGo models that played against humans. A complication is
that the version of AlphaZero that Timbers et al. use differs from that originally reported in Silver
et al. (2018), however based on private communication with Timbers et al. we are confident the
performance is comparable:
             These agents were trained identically to the original AlphaZero paper, and
         were trained for the full 800k steps. We actually used the original code, and did
         a lot of validation work with Julian Schrittweiser & Thomas Hubert (two of the
         authors of the original AlphaZero paper, and authors of the ABR paper) to verify
         that the reproduction was exact. We ran internal strength comparisons that match
         the original training runs.
Table 1 of Silver et al. (2018) shows that AlphaZero is slightly stronger than AG0 3-day (AlphaGo
Zero, after 3 days of training), winning 60 out of 100 games giving an Elo difference of +70. This
tournament evaluation was conducted with both agents having a thinking time of 1 minute. Table S4
from Silver et al. (2018) reports that 16k visits are performed per second, so the tournament eval-
uation used a massive 960k visits–significantly more than reported on in Table 3. However, from
Figure 6 we would expect the relative Elo to be comparable between the two systems at different
visit counts, so we extrapolate AG0 3-day at 16k visits as being an Elo of 3139 − 70 = 3069 relative
to AlphaZero(s=16k, t=800k).
Figure 3a from Silver et al. (2017) report that AG0 3-day achieves an Elo of around 4500. This
compares to an Elo of 3,739 for AlphaGo Lee. To the best of our knowledge, the number of visits
achieved per second of AlphaGo Lee has not been reported. However, we know that AG0 3-day and
AlphaGo Lee were given the same amount of thinking time, so we can infer that AlphaGo Lee has
an Elo of −761 relative to AG0 3-day. Consequently, AlphaGo Lee(time=1s) thinking for 1 second
has an Elo relative to GnuGo of 3069 − 761 = 2308.
Finally, we know that AlphaGo Lee beat Lee Sedol in four out of five matches, giving AlphaGo Lee
a +240 Elo difference relative to Lee Sedol, or that Lee Sedol has an Elo of 2068 relative to Gnu Go
level 10. This would imply that the victim is slightly stronger than Lee Sedol. However, this result
should be taken with some caution. First, it relies on transitivity through many different versions of
AlphaGo. Second, the match between AlphaGo Lee and Lee Sedol was played under two hours of
thinking time with 3 byoyomi periods of 60 seconds per move Silver et al. (2018, page 30). We are
extrapolating from this to some hypothetical match between AlphaGo Lee and Lee Sedol with only
1 second of thinking time per player. Although the Elo rating of Go AI systems seems to improve
log-linearly with thinking time, it is unlikely this result holds for humans.

E     D ETAILED E VALUATION AGAINST K ATAG O W ITHOUT PASS -A LIVE
      D EFENSE
In this section we provide more evaluation of our attack from Section 5.1 against victims without
the pass-alive defense.

E.1   ATTACKING THE V ICTIM P OLICY N ETWORK

In Figure 7 we evaluate our adversarial policy against the policy networks of both cp127 and
Latest throughout the training process of our policy. We find our adversary attains a large (>90%)
win rate against both victims throughout much of training. However, over time the adversary overfits
to Latest, with the win rate against cp127 falling to around 20%.

E.2   T RANSFERRING TO A V ICTIM W ITH S EARCH

We evaluate the ability of the adversarial policy trained in the Section 5.1 to exploit Latest playing
with search. The policy was trained only against no-search victims. Although our policy using A-
MCTS-S with 200 visits achieves a win rate of 100% over 160 games against Latest without


                                                 21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                 cp127                                    Latest

                           100

                            80
Adversary win rate %


                            60

                            40

                            20

                             0
                                        1                2            3               4                                  5            6
                                                               Adversary training steps                                              ×107

Figure 7: The win rate (y-axis) of the adversarial policy over time (x-axis) against the cp127
and Latest victim policy networks playing without search. The strongest adversary checkpoint
(marked ♦) wins 999/1000 games against Latest. The adversary overfits to Latest, winning
less often against cp127 over time. Shaded interval is a 95% Clopper-Pearson interval over n = 50
games per checkpoint. The adversarial policy is trained with a curriculum, starting from cp127 and
ending at Latest. Vertical dashed lines denote switches to a later victim training policy.


                           100                                                                     100
   Adv. win % vs. Latest


                                                                           Adv. win % vs. Latest


                                                                                                                        A-MCTS-S
                            75                                                                      75                  A-MCTS-S++
                                                                                                                        A-MCTS-R
                            50                                                                      50

                            25         A-MCTS-R                                                     25
                                       A-MCTS-S++
                             0                                                                       0
                                 100        101          102                                             100   101    102      103    104
                                            Victim visits                                                       Adversary visits
(a) Win rate by number of victim visits (x-axis) for                      (b) Win rate by number of adversary visits with A-
A-MCTS-S and A-MCTS-R. The adversary is run                               MCTS-S, playing against Latest with 64 visits. We
with 200 visits. The adversary is unable to exploit                       see that higher adversary visits lead to moderately
Latest when it plays with more than 100 visits.                           higher win rates.

Figure 8: We evaluate the ability of the adversarial policy from Section 5.1 trained against Latest
without search to transfer to Latest with search.


                                                                     22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                    100                                                               100
                                                    Latest                                                   cp127
 Adv-Latest win %


                                                                    Adv-cp127 win %
                     75                             cp127                              75                    Latest

                     50                                                                50

                     25                                                                25

                      0                                                                 0
                           0            1              2
                          10         10           10                                        101                  103
                                     Victim visits                                           Victim visits

Figure 9: An adversary trained against Latest (left) or cp127 (right), evaluated against both
Latest and cp127 at various visit counts. The adversary always uses 600 visits / move.


search, in Figure 8a we find the win rate drops to 61.3% at 32 victim visits. However, A-MCTS-S
models the victim as having no search at both training and inference time. We also test A-MCTS-R,
which correctly models the victim at inference by performing an MCTS search at each victim node
in the adversary’s tree. We find that A-MCTS-R performs somewhat better, obtaining a 82.5% win
rate against Latest with 32 visits, but performance drops to 3.8% at 128 visits.
Of course, A-MCTS-R is more computationally expensive than A-MCTS-S. An alternative way to
spend our inference-time compute budget is to perform A-MCTS-S with a greater adversary visit
count. In Figure 8b we show that we obtain up to a 54% win rate against Latest with 64 visits
when the adversary has 4,096 visits. This is very similar to the performance of A-MCTS-R with 200
visits, which has a 49% win rate against the same victim. Interestingly, the inference cost of these
attacks is also similar, with 4,096 neural network forward passes (NNFPs) per move for A-MCTS-S
(one per visit) versus 6,500 NNFPs / move for A-MCTS-R.10
Note these experiments only attempt to transfer our adversarial policy. It would also be possible to
repeat the attack from scratch against a victim with search, producing a new adversarial policy. We
leave this for future work.

E.3                   T RANSFERRING TO OTHER C HECKPOINTS

From Figure 9, we train adversaries against the Latest and cp127 checkpoints respectively
and evaluate against both checkpoints. An adversary trained against Latest does better against
Latest than cp127, despite Latest being a stronger agent. The converse also holds: an agent
trained against cp127 does better against cp127 than Latest. This pattern holds for most visit
counts where the adversary wins consistently, although in the case of the adversary for Latest the
gap is fairly narrow (99% vs. 80% win rate) at low visit counts. These results suggest that different
checkpoints have unique vulnerabilities.

E.4                   BASELINE ATTACKS

We also test hard-coded baseline adversarial policies. These baselines were inspired by the behavior
of our trained adversary. The Edge plays random legal moves in the outermost ℓ∞ -box available on
the board. The Spiral attack is similar to the Edge attack, except that it plays moves in a deterministic
counterclockwise order, forming a spiral pattern. Finally, we also implement Mirror Go, a classic
novice strategy which plays the opponent’s last move reflected about the y = x diagonal. If the
opponent plays on y = x, Mirror Go plays that move reflected along the y = −x diagonal. If the
mirrored vertex is taken, Mirror Go plays the closest legal move by ℓ1 distance.
In Figure 10, we plot the win rate of the baseline attacks against the KataGo victim Latest, and in
in Figure 11, we plot the win margin of Latest playing against baselines. The edge attack is the
         10
                    A-MCTS-R with 200 visits performs 100 · 64 + 100 = 6500 NNFPs / move.


                                                               23
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                  70
                                                                                      Edge attack
                  60                                                                  Mirror attack
                                                                                      Spiral attack
                  50
Adversary win %



                  40

                  30

                  20

                  10

                   0

                       2                4                 8                 16                    32
                                                     Visit count

Figure 10: Win rates of different baseline adversaries (see Section 4) versus Latest at varying
visit counts (x-axis) with adversary playing as white. 95% CIs are shown. See Figure 11 for the
average win margin of KataGo against the baselines.



most successful, achieving over 50% win rate at when Latest plays with few visits, but none of
the attacks work well once it is playing with at least 16 visits.


E.5                M IMICKING THE A DVERSARIAL P OLICY

Our passing-based adversarial policy appears to follow a very simple strategy. It plays in the corners
and edges, staking out a small region of territory while allowing the victim to amass a larger territory.
However, the adversary ensures that it is ahead in raw points prior to the victim securing its territory.
If the victim then passes prematurely, the adversary wins.
However, it is possible that this seemingly simple policy hides a more nuanced exploit. For example,
perhaps the pattern of stones it plays form an adversarial example for the victim’s network. To test
this, one of the authors attempted to mimic the adversarial policy after observing some of its games.
The author was unable replicate this attack when KataGo was configured in the same manner as
for the training and evaluation runs in this paper. However, when the friendlyPassOk flag in
KataGo was turned on, the author was able successfully replicate this attack against the NeuralZ06
bot on KGS, as illustrated in Figure 12. This bot uses checkpoint 469 (see Appendix C.1) with no
search. The author has limited experience in Go and is certainly weaker than 20 kyu, so they did not
win due to any skill in Go.
We observed in Figure 1 that the adversary appears to win by tricking the victim into passing pre-
maturely, at a time favorable to the adversary. In this section, we seek to answer three key questions.
First, why does the adversary pass even when it leads to a guaranteed loss? Second, is passing
causally responsible for the victim losing, or would it lose anyway for a different reason? Third, is
the adversary performing a simple strategy, or does it contain some hidden complexity?
Evaluating the Latest victim without search against the adversary from Section 5.1 over n = 250
games, we find that Latest passes (and loses) in 247 games and does not pass (and wins) in the
remaining 3 games. In all cases, Latest’s value head estimates a win probability of greater than
99.5% after the final move it makes, although its true win percentage is only 1.2%. Latest predicts
it will win by µ = 134.5 points (σ = 27.9) after its final move, and passing would be reasonable if
it were so far ahead. But in fact it is just one move away from losing by an average of 86.26 points.


                                                     24
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                 300
     Average KataGo win margin


                                 250


                                 200


                                 150

                                                                                       Edge attack
                                                                                       Mirror attack
                                 100                                                   Spiral attack

                                       2   4               8                  16                   32
                                                      Visit count

Figure 11: The win margin of the Latest victim playing against baselines for varying victim visit
counts (x-axis). Note the margin is positive indicating the victim on average gains more points than
the baseline.


Figure 12: An author of this paper plays as white mimicking our adversarial policy in a game against
a KataGo-powered, 8-dan KGS rank bot NeuralZ06 which has friendlyPassOk enabled.
White wins by 18.5 points under Tromp-Taylor rules. See the full game.


                                                25
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


We conjecture that the reason why the victim’s prediction is so mistaken is that the games induced
by playing against the adversarial policy are very different to those seen during the victim’s self-
play training. Certainly, there is no fundamental inability of neural networks to predict the outcome
correctly. The adversary’s value head achieves a mean-squared error of only 3.18 (compared to
49,742 for the victim) on the adversary’s penultimate move. The adversary predicts it will win
98.6% of the time—extremely close to the true 98.8% win rate in this sample.
To verify whether this pathological passing behavior is the reason the adversarial policy wins, we
design a hard-coded defense for the victim, the pass-alive defense described in Section 5.2. Whereas
the adversarial policy in Section 5.1 won greater than 99% of games against vanilla Latest, we
find that it loses all 1600 evaluation games against Latestdef . This confirms the adversarial policy
wins via passing.
Unfortunately, this “defense” is of limited effectiveness: as we saw in Section 5.1, repeating the
attack method finds a new adversary that can beat it. Moreover, the defense causes KataGo to
continue to play even when a game is clearly won or lost, which is frustrating for human opponents.
The defense also relies on hard-coded knowledge about Go, using a search algorithm to compute
the pass-alive territories.
Finally, we seek to determine if the adversarial policy is winning by pursuing a simple high-level
strategy, or via a more subtle exploit such as forming an adversarial example by the pattern of
stones it plays. We start by evaluating the hard-coded baseline adversarial policies described in
Appendix E.4. In Figure 10, we see that all of our baseline attacks perform substantially worse than
our trained adversarial policy (Figure 8a). Moreover, all our baseline attacks only win by komi and
therefore never win as black. By contrast, our adversarial policy in Section 5.1 wins playing as either
color, and often by a large margin (in excess of 50 points).
We also attempted to manually mimic the adversary’s gameplay with limited success in Ap-
pendix E.5. Although the basics of our adversarial policy seem easy to mimic, matching its per-
formance is challenging, suggesting it may be performing a more subtle exploit.


F     OTHER E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS

F.1   H UMANS VS . A DVERSARIAL P OLICIES

The same author from Appendix E.5 (strength weaker than 20kyu) played manual games against
both the strongest adversary from Figure 3 and the strongest adversary from Figure 7.
In the games against the adversary from Figure 7, the author was able to achieve an overwhelming
victory. In the game against the adversary from Figure 3, the author won but with a much smaller
margin. See Figure 13 for details.
Our evaluation is imperfect in one significant way: the adversary was not playing with an accurate
model of the author (rather it modeled the author as Latest with 1 visit). However, given the poor
transferability of our adversary to different KataGo checkpoints (see Figure 3 and Appendix E.3),
we predict that the adversary would not win even if it had access to an accurate model of the author.

F.2   A DVERSARIAL B OARD S TATE

This paper focuses on training an agent that can exploit Go-playing AI systems. A related problem
is to find an adversarial board state which could be easily won by a human, but which Go-playing AI
systems will lose from. In many ways this is a simpler problem, as an adversarial board state need
not be a state that the victim agent would allow us to reach in normal play. Nonetheless, adversarial
board states can be a useful tool to probe the blindspots that Go AI systems may have.
In Figure 14 we present a manually constructed adversarial board state. Although quite unlike what
would occur in a real game, it represents an interesting if trivial (for a human) problem. The black
player can always win by executing a simple strategy. If white plays in between two of black’s
disconnected groups, then black should immediately respond by connecting those groups together.
Otherwise, the black player can connect any two of its other disconnected groups together. Whatever
the white player does, this strategy ensures that blacks’ groups will eventually all be connected


                                                  26
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


(a) An author (B) defeats the strongest adversary        (b) An author (W) defeats the strongest adversary
from Figure 3 by 68.5 points. Explore the game.          from Figure 3 by 43.5 points. Explore the game.


(c) An author (B) defeats the strongest adversary        (d) An author (W) defeats the strongest adversary
from Figure 7. Explore the game.                         from Figure 7 using A-MCTS-S++. Explore the
                                                         game.

Figure 13: Games between an author of this paper and the strongest adversaries from Figure 3 and
Figure 7. In all games, the author achieves a victory. The adversary used 600 playouts / move and
used Latest as the model of its human opponent. The adversary used A-MCTS-S for all games
except the one marked otherwise.


                                                    27
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 14: A hand-crafted adversarial example for KataGo and other Go-playing AI systems. It is
black’s turn to move. Black can guarantee a win by connecting its currently disconnected columns
together and then capturing the large white group on the right. However, KataGo playing against
itself from this position loses 48% of the time—and 18% of the time it wins by a narrow margin of
only 0.5 points!


together. At this point, black has surrounded the large white group on the right and can capture it,
gaining substantial territory and winning.
Although this problem is simple for human players to solve, it proves quite challenging for otherwise
sophisticated Go AI systems such as KataGo. In fact, KataGo playing against a copy of itself loses
as black 48% of the time. Even its wins are far less decisive than they should be—18% of the
time it wins by only 0.5 points! We conjecture this is because black’s winning strategy, although
simple, must be executed flawlessly and over a long horizon. Black will lose if at any point it fails
to respond to white’s challenge, allowing white to fill in both empty spaces between black’s groups.
This problem is analogous to the classical cliff walking reinforcement learning task (Sutton & Barto,
2018, Example 6.6).

F.3   H UMAN A NALYSIS OF C APTURE -T YPE A DVERSARY

In the following we present human analysis of a game played by an adversary of the type shown
in Figure 1b. This analysis was done by an expert-level Go player on our team. The game shows
typical behavior and outcomes with this adversary: the victim gains an early and soon seemingly
insurmountable lead. The adversary sets a trap that would be easy for a human to see and avoid. But
the victim is oblivious and collapses.
In this game the victim plays black and the adversary white. The full game is available on our
website. We see in Figure 15a that the adversary plays non-standard, subpar moves right from the
beginning. The victim’s estimate of its win rate is over 90% before move 10, and a human in a
high-level match would likewise hold a large advantage from this position.
On move 20 (Figure 15b), the adversary initiates a tactic we see consistently, to produce a "dead"
(at least, according to normal judgment) square 4 group in one quadrant of the board. Elsewhere,
the adversary plays low, mostly second and third line moves. This is also common in its games, and
leads to the victim turning the rest of the center into its sphere of influence. We suspect this helps the
adversary later play moves in that area without the victim responding directly, because the victim is
already strong in that area and feels confident ignoring a number of moves.
On move 74 (Figure 15c), the adversary begins mobilizing its "dead" stones to set up an encir-
clement. Over the next 100+ moves, it gradually surrounds the victim in the top left. A key pattern
here is that it leads the victim into forming an isolated group that loops around and connects to itself


                                                   28
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                             20


          9


(a) Move 9: after this move victim already has the        (b) Move 20: adversary initiates a key tactic to create
advantage, if it were robust.                             a cycle group.

          74                                                                      X
                                                                 X       X        X

                                                                 X   X   X   X    X   X   X   X

                                                                 X                            X

                                                             X   X   X   X                    X
                                                                     X                        X

                                                                     X   X                    89

                                                                         X   X    X   X   X   X    X
                                                                     X   X            X

                                                                                  A


(c) Move 74: adversary slowly begins to surround          (d) Move 189 (89): victim could have saved X group
victim.                                                   by playing at "A" instead, but now it will be captured.

Figure 15: An adversarial policy (white) exploiting a KataGo victim (black) by capturing a large
group that a human could easily save. The subfigures show different moves in the game. Explore
the full game.


                                                     29
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


(a group with a cycle instead of tree structure). David Wu, creator of KataGo (Wu, 2019), suggested
Go-playing agents like the victim struggle to accurately judge the status of such groups, but they are
normally very rare. This adversary seems to produce them consistently.
Until the adversary plays move 189 (Figure 15d), the victim could still save that cycle group (marked
with X), and in turn still win by a huge margin. There are straightforward moves to do so that would
be trivial to find for any human playing at the victim’s normal level. Even a human who has only
played for a few months or less might find them. For instance, on 189 it could have instead played at
the place marked "A." But after 189, it is impossible to escape, and the game is reversed. The victim
seems to have been unable to detect the danger. Play continues for another 109 moves but there is
no chance for the victim (nor would there be for a human player) to get out of the massive deficit it
was tricked into.


                                                 30
