Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


M ODELING C ONTENT C REATOR I NCENTIVES ON
A LGORITHM -C URATED P LATFORMS
 Jiri Hron⋆,† , Karl Krauth⋆,♢ , Michael I. Jordan♢ , Niki Kilbertus♠ , Sarah Dean♣
 †
   University of Cambridge, ♢ UC Berkeley, ♠ TU Munich & Helmholtz Munich, ♣ Cornell University



                                            A BSTRACT
         Content creators compete for user attention. Their reach crucially depends on
         algorithmic choices made by developers on online platforms. To maximize
         exposure, many creators adapt strategically, as evidenced by examples like the
         sprawling search engine optimization industry. This begets competition for the
         finite user attention pool. We formalize these dynamics in what we call an exposure
         game, a model of incentives induced by algorithms, including modern factorization
         and (deep) two-tower architectures. We prove that seemingly innocuous algorithmic
         choices—e.g., non-negative vs. unconstrained factorization—significantly affect
         the existence and character of (Nash) equilibria in exposure games. We proffer
         use of creator behavior models, like exposure games, for an (ex-ante) pre-
         deployment audit. Such an audit can identify misalignment between desirable and
         incentivized content, and thus complement post-hoc measures like content filtering
         and moderation. To this end, we propose tools for numerically finding equilibria
         in exposure games, and illustrate results of an audit on the MovieLens and LastFM
         datasets. Among else, we find that the strategically produced content exhibits strong
         dependence between algorithmic exploration and content diversity, and between
         model expressivity and bias towards gender-based user and creator groups.

1   I NTRODUCTION
In 2018, Jonah Peretti (CEO, Buzzfeed) raised            n producers
alarm when a Facebook main feed update started
boosting junk and divisive content (Hagey &             s1                        fixed
Horwitz, 2021). In Poland, the same update                                demand distribution
caused an uptick in negative political messaging                                            c ∼ Pc
(Hagey & Horwitz, 2021). Tailoring content              s2
to algorithms is not unique to social media.
For example, some search engine optimization
(SEO) professionals specialize on managing                    ..
impacts of Google Search updates (Marentis,                    .
                                                       sn
2014; Dennis, 2016; Shahzad et al., 2020; Patil
                                                                             utility of si
et al., 2021; Goodwin, 2021). While motivations                         h                    n  i
                                                                   Ec∼Pc softmax τ1 ⟨c, sj ⟩ j=1

for adapting content range from economic to
                                                                                                  i
socio-political, they often translate into the same
operative goal: exposure maximization.              Figure 1: Exposure game. Items si ∈ S d−1
                                                    placed to maximize exposure to consumers c ∼ Pc .
We study how algorithms affect exposure-
maximizing content creators. We propose a novel incentive-based behavior model called an exposure
game, where producers compete for a finite user attention pool by crafting content ranked highly by
a given algorithm (Section 1.1). When producers act strategically, a steady state—Nash equilibrium
(NE)—may be reached, with no one able to unilaterally improve their exposure (utility). The content
produced in a NE can thus be interpreted as what the algorithm implicitly incentivizes.
We focus on algorithms which model user preferences as an inner product of d-dimensional user
and item embeddings, and rank items by the estimated preference. Section 2 presents theoretical
results on the NE induced by these algorithms. We identify cases where algorithmic changes
seemingly unconnected to producer incentives—e.g., switching from non-negative to unconstrained
embeddings—determine whether there are zero, one, or multiple NE. The character of NE is also


                                                  1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


affected by the level of algorithmic exploration. Perhaps counter-intuitively, we show that high levels
of exploration incentivize broadly appealing content, whereas low levels lead to specialization.
In Section 3, we explore how creator behavior models can facilitate a pre-deployment audit. Such
an audit could be particularly useful for assessing the producer impact of algorithmic changes,
which is hard to measure by A/B testing for two important reasons: (1) producers cannot be easily
randomized to distinct treatment groups, and (2) there is often a delay between deployment and
content adaptation. Our hope is that this new style of auditing will enable detection of misalignment
between the induced and desired incentives, and thus flag issues to either immediately address,
or monitor in content filtering and moderation. For demonstration, we execute a pre-deployment
audit on the MovieLens and LastFM datasets using the exposure game behavior model, and matrix
factorization based recommenders. We find a strong dependence between algorithmic choices like
embedding dimension and level of exploration, and properties of the incetivized content such as
diversity (confirming our theory), and targeting of gender-based user and creator groups.
1.1 S ETTING AND THE EXPOSURE GAME INCENTIVE MODEL
We assume there is a fixed recommender system trained on past data, and a fixed population of users
(consumers). Together, these induce a demand distribution Pc which represents typical traffic on
the platform over a predefined period of time. Content is created by n ∈ N producers who try to
maximize their expected exposure (utility). Denoting consumers by c ∼ Pc , an item created by the
ith producer by si (strategy), s := (si )i∈[n] , and s\i := (sj )j̸=i , we define (expected) exposure as the
proportion of the “user attention pool” captured by the ith producer
                   ui (s) = ui (si , s\i ) := Ec∼Pc [1{c is exposed to si }] = Ec∼Pc [pi (c)] ,
                                                                                 ⋆
                                                                                                                  (1)
with pi (c) ≥ 0 the probability that the algorithm exposes c to si rather than any s\i . As common in
game theory, we can extend from deterministic single item strategies to stochastic multi-item strategies
si ∼ Pi for some distribution Pi . This extension is discussed in more detail in Section 2.
The assumption that E[1{c is exposed to si }] = E[pi (c)] does not explicitly model interactions not
                                                        ⋆

mediated by the algorithm (e.g., YouTube videos linked to by an external website). This may be
a reasonable approximation for infinite feed platforms (e.g., Twitter, Facebook, TikTok) where most
consumers scroll through items in the algorithm-defined order, and search engines (e.g., Google,
Bing) where first-page bias is well documented (Craswell et al., 2008). While similar assumptions
are common in the literature (e.g., Li et al., 2010; Chen et al., 2019; Ben-Porat et al., 2020; Curmei
et al., 2021), alternative interaction models are an important future research direction.
Unlike previous work (Section 1.2), we focus on the popular class of factorization-based algorithms.
These models rank items by a score estimated by the inner product of user and item embeddings
c, si ∈ Rd . The larger this score, the higher the probability of exposure, which we model as
                                     exp(τ −1 ⟨c, si ⟩)                               n
                                                             = softmax τ −1 ⟨c, si′ ⟩ i′ =1 i ,

                     pi (c) = Pn               −1
                                                                                                                  (2)
                                   i′ =1 exp(τ    ⟨c, si′ ⟩)
where τ ≥ 0 is a temperature parameter which controls the spread of exposure probabilities
over the top scoring items. When τ = 0 (i.e., hardmax), these probabilities correspond to top-
1 recommendation or absolute first-position bias. Taking τ > 0 models the effects of ranked position,
injected randomness for exploration, and can partially adjust for user randomness and other factors
which make top-ranked items receive more but not all of the traffic. While an approximation in some
settings, Equation (2) has been directly used, e.g., by YouTube (Chen et al., 2019). We emphasize that
we make no assumption on how the embeddings are obtained. Our conclusions thus apply equally to
classical matrix factorization and deep learning-based systems.
We are now ready to formalize exposure games, an incentive-based model of creator behavior.
Definition 1. An exposure game consists of an embedding dimension d ∈ N, a demand distribution
Pc ∈ P(Rd ), and n ∈ N producers, each of whom chooses a strategy si ∈ S d−1 = {v ∈ Rd : ∥v∥ =
1}, to maximize their utility ui (s) = Ec∼Pc [pi (c)] with pi (c) as in Equation (2) for a given τ ≥ 0.
We restrict items si to the unit sphere S d−1 . A norm constraint is necessary as otherwise exposure
could be maximized by inflating ∥si ∥ → ∞, which is not observed in practice.1 We distinguish
   1
       Possibly due to the often finite rating scale, use of gradient clipping, and various forms of regularization.


                                                            2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


non-negative games where all embeddings lie in the positive orthant; this includes algorithms ranging
from TF-IDF, bag-of-words, to non-negative matrix factorization (Lee & Seung, 1999), topic models
(Blei et al., 2003), and constrained neural networks (Ayinde & Zurada, 2017).
Definition 2. A non-negative exposure game is an exposure game where the support of Pc is restricted
to the positive orthant, i.e., Pc ({c ∈ Rd : cj ≥ 0 , ∀j ∈ [d]}) = 1.
We assume all producers are rational, omniscient, and fully control placement of si in S d−1 . These
assumptions are standard in both machine learning and economics literature, including in the related
facility location games (see Section 1.2). They often provide a good first order approximation, and
an important basis for studying the subtleties of real-world behavior. Full control is perhaps the least
realistic, since producers can modify content features, but they often do not know how these changes
affect the content embedding. This assumption has a significant advantage though: it abstracts away an
explicit model of producer actions (cf. the variety of SEO techniques). Appropriateness of rationality
and complete information are then context-dependent; they may be respectively reasonable in
environments where strong profit motives or user profiling tools are common. However, investigating
alternatives to each of the above assumptions is an important direction of future work.

      Box 1: How our assumptions map onto YouTube
      (YT) as an illustrative example. On YT, a strategy                    ad share
                                                                                            sponsored content
      si is an embedding of a video, with creators able to          user payment
                                                                      (Super Chat                donation services
      produce multiple videos (mixed strategy si ∼ Pi ).            & Super Stickers)          (e.g., PayPal and Patreon)

      Rational behavior: YT creators receive income YouTube Premium creator affiliate marketing
                                                                                                     (sponsored links)
      proportional to their view numbers (Figure 2), which          memberships       income
      motivates exposure maximization. Most creators do                     merch     streams     webshops

      not earn significant income, but the majority of traffic    direct                                     external
                                                                           (YouTube Partner Programme)          (off-platform)

      is driven by only a few popular and high-earning Figure 2: YouTube revenue streams
      creators (Cheng et al., 2008). This motivates focus incentivizing exposure maximization
      on these few producers and their strategic behavior.     (Ørmen & Gregersen, 2022).
      Complete information and full-control.              YT
      creators cannot directly manipulate the embeddings of their videos si , or observe the user
      embeddings. However, popular creators have a myriad of analytic tools at their hand, with
      information about views, demographics (e.g., gender, age, region), acquisition channels,
      drivers of engagement, competition and more. They can also observe and adopt behaviors
      of other creators. Taking the strong monetary incentives into account, motivated creators
      will actively optimize their exposure using trial-and-error, making complete information and
      full-control an imperfect yet not unreasonable model of their behavior.

1.2      R ELATED WORK
Most relevant to our setup are works on the incentives of exposure-maximizing creators induced by
recommender and retrieval systems (Ben-Porat et al., 2020; Raifer et al., 2017; Ben-Basat et al., 2017;
Ben-Porat & Tennenholtz, 2018; Ben-Porat et al., 2019b;a). Interesting aspects of these works which
we omit include (i) repeated interactions (Ben-Porat et al., 2020; Raifer et al., 2017; Ben-Porat et al.,
2019b), (ii) user welfare (Ben-Porat et al., 2020; Ben-Basat et al., 2017; Ben-Porat & Tennenholtz,
2018; Ben-Porat et al., 2019a), and (iii) incomplete information (Raifer et al., 2017).
The most important distinction of our approach is that the above works constrain creators to a
predefined finite item catalog. This excludes the popular factorization-based algorithms—ranging
from standard matrix factorization (Koren et al., 2009) to (deep) two-tower architectures (Huang
et al., 2013; Yi et al., 2019)—whose continuous embedding space translates into an infinite number of
possible items. The only exception is (Ben-Porat et al., 2019a) where items are represented by [0, 1]
scalars, which is equivalent to the special case of two-dimensional non-negative exposure games.
Continuous embedding spaces were recently studied in (Mladenov et al., 2020; Zhan et al., 2021),
but neither studies producer incentives or competition. Mladenov et al. (2020) consider producers
who decide whether to stay or leave the platform if their exposure is too low. Zhan et al. (2021) study
design of recommender systems which optimize for both user and producer utility.
Concurrently but independently, Jagadeesan et al. (2022) study a model equivalent to hardmax non-
negative exposure games, except the ∥si ∥ = 1 constraint is replaced by a production cost, yielding


                                                              3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


ui (s) = E[pi (c)] − ∥si ∥β for some norm ∥ · ∥ and β ≥ 1 (higher norm interpreted as higher quality).
The authors investigate how the cost function influences the economic phenomena exhibited by NE,
from formation of “genres” (multiple directions with non-zero probability), to the possibility of
realizing positive profits (utility). In contrast, we investigate how NE depend on algorithmic and
environmental factors (non-negativity, exploration, dependence of exposure on ranking), and propose
an algorithmic audit which leverages the creator model. While taking β → ∞ in the Jagadeesan et al.’s
cost recovers our unit norm constraint, understanding the NE behavior at the limit remains a subject of
future work (e.g., pure NE exist only in our setup). Our works are thus largely complementary.
Literature on adaptive behavior in the presence of a prediction algorithm is also relevant (Hardt et al.,
2016; Kleinberg & Raghavan, 2020; Perdomo et al., 2020; Jagadeesan et al., 2021). The social impact
and potential disparate effects of strategic adaptation have been analyzed in (Milli et al., 2019; Hu
et al., 2019; Liu et al., 2020). Most relevant for us is a recent paper by Liu et al. (2022) which studies
strategic adaptation in the context of finite resources (e.g., number of accepted college applicants).
Unlike us, the authors assume a single score for each competitor, who can pay cost to improve it. A
principal then designs a reward function which allocates the finite resource based on the scores, and the
authors study how different choices affect various notions of welfare. The preliminary results on multi-
dimensional scores (appendix B) assume the scores and individual improvements are independent,
whereas our scores—⟨c, si ⟩ for each c—imply complex dependence and trade-offs.
Finally, our proposed methods for auditing recommender and information retrieval systems belong to
a rapidly growing algorithm auditing toolbox. We focus on understanding producer incentives caused
by a known algorithm. Thus, we complement prior work that aims to audit these systems based
upon: the degree of consumer control (Curmei et al., 2021), fairness (Do et al., 2021), compliance
with regulations (Cen & Shah, 2021), and dynamical behavior in simulations (Krauth et al., 2020;
Lucherini et al., 2021) or deployed systems Haroon et al. (2022).

2    E QUILIBRIA IN EXPOSURE GAMES
This section presents theoretical results on incentives in exposure games. We focus on the impact of
the recommender/information retrieval model on the competitive equilibria. Throughout, we find that
one of the most important factors determining existence and character of equilibria is the temperature
τ (see Equation (2)). We thus distinguish the softmax (τ > 0) and the hardmax (τ = 0) case.
In competitive settings, a key question is whether there are equilibria in which players are satisfied with
their strategies, as otherwise there may be never-ending oscillation in search for better outcomes. We
thus consider several solution concepts (i.e., definitions of equilibria) related to NE. A pure NE (PNE)
is a point in strategy space sNE ∈ (S d−1 )n where no player i can increase their utility by unilaterally
deviating from sNE  i  ∈ S d−1 . In other words, no content producer can increase their exposure by
modifying their content. Mixed NE (MNE) refer to the setting where players are allowed to choose
randomized (mixed) strategies Pi ∈ P(S d−1 ). Rather than selecting a single piece of content, a
creator following a mixed strategy samples si ∼ Pi . Alternative interpretation is that producers create
multiple items, splitting their time/budget proportionally to the Pi -probabilities.
In later sections, we explore the weaker solution concepts of ϵ-NE, local NE (LNE), and their
combination ϵ-LNE. An ϵ-NE is an approximate NE where no producer can unilaterally increase
their utility by more than ϵ (NE are “0-NE”). LNE are analogous to local optima: points where no
player benefits from small deviations from their strategy. The approximate and local perspectives
are relevant when deploying local search algorithms to find NE numerically (Section 3).
Exposure games are symmetric, meaning that any permutation of strategies forming an equilibrium
produces another equilibrium. Our statements on the existence and uniqueness of equilibria hold up
to player permutation. All proofs for the results in this section are presented in the appendix.
2.1 P URE AND MIXED NASH EQUILIBRIA
We begin by characterizing the existence of pure and mixed NE in general exposure games.
Theorem 1. Every exposure game has at least one mixed Nash equilibrium.
A key property of softmax games is that the utilities ui are continuous in s. This, and the compactness
of the strategy space S d−1 , guarantees existence of MNE (Glicksberg, 1952, section 2). In the
hardmax case (τ = 0), we can show that MNE are guaranteed to exist through a direct application


                                                    4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


 A) PNE non-existence     B) Slice position       C) Utility change along slice    D) Non-neg PNE example   E) Cluster PNE example
                                              0.00


                                              - 0.02                                                                  consumers
                                                                                           consumers                  producers
                                                                        n
                                                                                           producers,                 centres
                                                                            2              τ = 0 .25
                               producers                                    5
                                              - 0.04                                       producers,
            consumers          consumers                                    10             τ = 1 .0

                                                       0.0     0.5           1.0
                                                                λ

Figure 3: A) A game with no PNE (see the proof of Theorem 2). A PNE would exist if the strategy
space was convex, and utility quasi-concave (Fan, 1952). B) and C) demonstrate lack of quasi-
concavity even if we allow ∥si ∥ ≤ 1: B) n − 1 producers at midpoint, s1 along slice λc1 + (1 − λ)c2
(dashed line); C) Change in utility along the slice in B) demonstrates lack of quasi-concavity. D) A
non-negative game with very different PNE depending on τ . E) PNE with “protective positioning.”

of proposition 4 due to Simon (1987). The producer utilities ui are not differentiable in the hardmax
case though, which means we cannot use gradient information to find NE as in the softmax case. The
only procedure we know for finding NE in hardmax games requires solving the hitting set problem
which is NP-complete (Dasgupta et al., 2008). See Appendix B for further discussion.
We now turn to existence of pure NE, which is the setting where creators strategically design a single
piece of content. Unlike MNE, PNE are not guaranteed to exist even in the softmax case.
Theorem 2. PNE need not exist in either the hardmax (τ = 0) or softmax (τ > 0) exposure games.
Figure 3A illustrates the non-existence result. The counter-example holds even for n = 2 players and
planar (d = 2) strategies. A reader familiar with classic PNE results may ask if PNE would appear if
we relaxed the S d−1 strategy space to the convex B d = {v : ∥v∥ ≤ 1} (Glicksberg, 1952; Debreu,
1952; Fan, 1952). This is not true as the exposure utility is not quasi-concave (Figure 3B&C).
We now move to non-negative exposure games (Definition 2). For n = d = 2, non-negative
hardmax exposure games are equivalent to Hotelling games (Hotelling, 1929), and more generally to
facility location games on a line (Ben-Porat et al., 2019a; Procaccia & Tennenholtz, 2013). The next
proposition lists several special cases in which we understand existence and character of PNE.
Proposition 1. A PNE always exists in n = d = 2 non-negative hardmax games, but may not without
non-negativity or when d > 2. For n = 2 non-negative softmax games with ĉ := n1 (1 − n1 ) E[c] ̸= 0,
the only possible PNE is s1 = s2 = c̄ with c̄ := ĉ/∥ĉ∥ (independently of d), but a PNE may not exist.
When n > 2, non-negative softmax games can have a PNE other than s1 = · · · = sn = c̄.
Figure 3D illustrates a 4-player non-negative exposure game. Depending on the temperature, we
observe either the collapsed si = c̄ (large τ ), or what we term “protective positioning” (small τ ). In
Figure 3D, players place their strategies between a consumer and the next closest producer. Figure 3E
illustrates protective positioning for a higher number of consumers and n = 3. Here, consumers are
roughly clustered around three centers (blue dots). The producer strategies are close to these centers,
but again offset towards the most contested consumers.

2.2 ϵ-NASH EQUILIBRIA
While existence of NE is not guaranteed, the situation changes when we adopt the weaker solution
concept of ϵ-NE, in which no producer can unilaterally increase their utility by more than ϵ.
The existence and character of such equilibria strongly depends on the temperature τ . When τ = ∞,
exposure is equally likely pi (c) = n1 for all i and c regardless of the adopted strategies. Thus, every
strategy profile is an NE. Considering a sequence of increasing (τi )i≥1 , we can therefore argue that
the limit of any convergent sequence of NE indexed by τ is a NE at τ = ∞. Interestingly, Theorem 3
shows that a sufficiently large but finite τ > 0 is sufficient for existence of ϵ-(P)NE. The result is
constructive, showing that the ϵ-PNE is parallel to the average consumer embedding.
Theorem 3. For any ϵ > 0 and Pc ∈ P(Rd ) with compact support and E[c] ̸= 0, ∃τ0 > 0 s.t.
s1 = . . . = sn = c̄ is an ϵ-PNE for all τ ≥ τ0 . Moreover, for all τ ≥ τ0 , the smallest ϵτ for which c̄
is an ϵτ -PNE satisfies ϵτ ≤ τϵ . If also ϵ < ∥ĉ∥, then the set of better-responses to c̄

                        Ψ(c̄) := {v ∈ S d−1 : u1 (v, c̄, . . . , c̄) ≥ u1 (c̄, c̄, . . . , c̄)} ,                                    (3)

is a subset of Bδd (c̄) = {v : ∥v − c̄∥ ≤ δ} with δ = 2ϵ/(∥ĉ∥ − ϵ), and δ → 0 as τ → ∞.


                                                                 5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


This result shows that all ϵ-improvements concentrate near the consumer average ϵ-PNE as τ → ∞.
Additionally, the “consumer symmetry” ∥ĉ∥ = n1 (1 − n1 ) ∥E[c]∥ determines how quickly δ → 0.
When consumers are spread approximately symmetrically w.r.t. the origin, the degenerate equilibrium
appears only for large τ . However, smaller τ are sufficient for more directionally concentrated Pc .
A high number of producers also slows the concentration as the appeal of ui (c̄, . . . , c̄) = n1 decreases
with n. We conclude with a corollary based on our development so far.
Corollary 1. There is a fixed ϵ0 > 0 and a demand distribution Pc which—depending on the chosen
τ —induce zero, one, multiple, or infinitely many ϵ-NE for all ϵ ≤ ϵ0 .
Corollary 1 underscores the sensitivity of exposure games to the temperature parameter τ , with
uniformly homogeneous content at one end (high τ ), and potentially persistent oscillation behavior
in competition when no NE exist (low τ ). A higher τ > 0 can be a result of algorithmic exploration
(Chen et al., 2019; Cesa-Bianchi et al., 2017; Lattimore & Szepesvári, 2020), which is provably
necessary for optimal performance in static environments (Lattimore & Szepesvári, 2020). In
contrast, our results show that in environments with strategic actors, exploration may incentivize
content which is uniform and broadly appealing rather than diverse.
This may contradict the intuition that more exploration should lead to greater content diversity due
to the higher exposure of niche content. One way to understand this result is the tension between
randomization and the ability of niche creators to reach their audience: producers may be discouraged
from creating niche content when the algorithm is exploring too much (τ high), and encouraged to
mercilessly seek and protect their own niche when the algorithm performs little exploration (τ low).
When the algorithm captures user preferences well, exploration is typically thought of as having
negative impact on user experience through immediate reduction in quality of service as a result of
suboptimal recommendations. However, the above results show secondary long-term effects.
2.3 L OCAL NASH EQUILIBRIA
In a local NE, each si is optimal on some of its neighborhood within the embedding space. Sometimes
motivated as a form of bounded rationality, LNE can often be found by local search algorithms (e.g.,
Mazumdar et al., 2019). Since our motivation in studying exposure games is ultimately better system
understanding and audits, we are particularly interested in these algorithmic benefits.
Practical first-order algorithms for identifying LNE operate analogously to gradient descent, implying
they may terminate in critical points that are not LNE. Unlike NE, critical points always exist.
Proposition 2. Every τ > 0 exposure game with E[c] ̸= 0 has a critical point at s1 = . . . = sn = c̄.
As we have seen, s1 = . . . = sn = c̄ may be an equilibrium (Proposition 1). To distinguish LNE from
mere critical points, we use the Riemannian second derivative test, treating S d−1 as a Riemannian
submanifold of Rd as usual. For background, see (Boumal, 2022, sections 3 & 5).
Definition 3 (Boumal, 2022, lemma 5.41). A point s in strategy space satisfies the second derivative
test if ∀i (1) the Riemannian gradient (I − si s⊤i )∇si ui (s) is zero, and (2) the Riemannian Hessian

                    (I − si si ) ∇si ui (s) (I − si s⊤
                             ⊤
                                  2                                                  ⊤
                                                     i ) − ⟨si , ∇si ui (s)⟩(I − si si ) ,

is strictly negative definite in the subspace perpendicular to si .
This condition is sufficient but not necessary for a critical point to be an LNE. LNE which satisfy
Definition 3 are termed differentiable NE (Ratliff et al., 2016; Balduzzi et al., 2018). The distinction
is similar to that between the flat minimum of x4 at zero the more well-behaved x2 .

3    P RE - DEPLOYMENT AUDIT OF STRATEGIC CREATOR INCENTIVES
Beyond regularly retraining on new data, online platforms continuously roll out algorithm updates.
While A/B testing can detect changes in user metrics, like satisfaction or churn, prior to the full-scale
deployment (Tang et al., 2010; Hohnhold et al., 2015; Xu et al., 2015; Gordon et al., 2019), assessing
the impact on content producers is comparatively harder due to the longer delay between the roll-out
and corresponding content adaptation. Furthermore, since producers cannot be easily assigned to
distinct treatment groups without limiting their content to only a subset of consumers, modern A/B
testing methods must eschew making causal statements about producer impact (Nandy et al., 2021; Ha-
Thuc et al., 2020; Huszár et al., 2022). Undesirable results including promulgation of junk and abusive
content then have to be addressed via post-hoc measures like content filtration and moderation.


                                                    6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                 1.0             dim 3                       dim 50                                                  1.0            dim 3                      dim 50


                                                                                                          # clusters / # producers
      # clusters / # producers
                                 0.8                                                                                                 0.8

                                 0.6                                                                nmf                              0.6

                                 0.4                                                                pmf                              0.4

                                 0.2                                                                                                 0.2

                                 0.0                                                                                                 0.0
                                       0.01 0.1 1.0 0.01 0.1 1.0    0.01 0.1 1.0 0.01 0.1 1.0                                              0.01 0.1 1.0 0.1 1.0     0.01 0.1 1.0 0.01 0.1 1.0
                                                          temperature (τ )                                                                                  temperature (τ )

Figure 4: Clustering of strategic producers depends on the exploration level      √ τ . A cluster is a
set of points whose Euclidean distances from one another are less than 10−5 d. As Theorem 3
predicts, large τ (e.g., more exploration) leads to higher concentration, i.e., creating content which
appeals to more users. Left: MovieLens. Right: LastFM. See Section 3.2 for more discussion.

A tool for ex-ante (pre-deployment) assessment of producer impact could thus limit the harm
experienced by users, moderators, and other affected parties. We demonstrate how to utilize a creator
behavior model for this purpose, using the exposure game as a concrete example. The incorporation
of factorization-based algorithms in exposure games allows us to use real-world datasets and rating
models. While exposure games have limitations as a behavior model, we believe our experiments
provide a useful illustration of the insights the proposed audit can offer to platform developers.
3.1 S ETUP
We use the MovieLens-100K and LastFM-360K datasets (Harper & Konstan, 2015; Bertin-
Mahieux et al., 2011; Shakespeare et al., 2020), implement our code in Python (van Rossum &
Drake, 2009) and rely on numpy (Harris et al., 2020), scikit-surprise (Hug, 2020), pandas
(pandas development team, 2020), matplotlib (Hunter, 2007), jupyter (Kluyver et al., 2016),
reclab (Krauth et al., 2020), and JAX (Bradbury et al., 2018) packages to fit probabilistic (PMF;
Mnih & Salakhutdinov, 2007) and non-negative (NMF; Lee & Seung, 1999) matrix factorization.
The models are trained to predict the user ratings (centered in the PMF case). To select regularization
and learning rate, we performed a two-fold 90/10 split cross-validation separately on each dataset.
The tuned recommenders were then fit on the full dataset, and the resulting          user embeddings,
                                                                          1
{cj }j∈[m] ⊂ Rd , were used to construct the demand distribution Pc = m
                                                                            P
                                                                                j δcj , and evaluate the
recommendation probabilities pi (c). Details in Appendix C.1.
The only algorithm for finding NE in hardmax exposure games we know has exponential worst-case
complexity. We thus focus on the softmax case. While search for general mixed NE is possible in
special cases (Fudenberg & Kreps, 1993; Kaniovski & Young, 1995; Benaïm & Hirsch, 1997), we
are not aware of any technique applicable to n-player exposure games. We therefore focus on pure
ϵ-LNE (Section 2.3), where each producer creates a single new item. We employ simple gradient
ascent (Singh et al., 2000; Balduzzi et al., 2018, see Appendix C.2 for comparison with gradient
descent) combined with reparametrization si = θi /∥θi ∥ for each producer, where we iteratively
update θi,t = θi,t−1 + α∇θi,t−1 ui (si,t−1 , s\i,t−1 ) for shared step size α > 0, and
                                  ∇θi ui (s) = τ ∥θ1i ∥2 (I − si s⊤                              1             ⊤
                                                                  i ) E[pi (c)(1 − pi (c))c] = ∥θi ∥2 (I − si si ) ∇si ui (s) .                                                                 (4)

Equation (4) shows the update direction is parallel to the Riemannian gradient of ui (s) w.r.t. si ∈ S d−1
(Section 2.3). We also experimented with the related Riemannian gradient ascent optimizer (Boumal,
2022), but abandoned it after (predictably) observing little qualitative difference. We note that the
local updates themselves define better-response dynamics linked to iterative minor content changes;
investigation of their relation to real-world producer behavior is an interesting future direction.
We investigate the sensitivity of the incentivized content to the: (i) rating model ∈ {PMF, NMF},
(ii) embedding dimension d ∈ {3, 50}, and (iii) temperature log10 τ ∈ {−2, −1, 0}. We further vary
the number of producers n ∈ {10, 100} to examine scenarios with different producer to consumer
ratios (user count is fixed to the full 943 for MovieLens, and 13,698 for LastFM). The above values
were selected in a preliminary sweep as representative of the effects presented below. For every
setting, we used five random seeds for initialization of the recommender (affects Pc ), and for each
ran the gradient ascent algorithm 10x to identify possible ϵ-LNE.√We applied early stopping when
ℓ2 -change in parameters between iterations dipped below 10−8 · d; the number of iterations was
set to 50K so convergence was achieved for every run. We only report runs where the second-order
Riemannian test from Section 2.3 did not rule out an ϵ-LNE. Additional results, including those
where the Riemannian test was conclusive, are in Appendix C.3.


                                                                                                7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                             dim 3                           dim 50                                                          dim 3                           dim 50
                              0.025                                                                                        1.0


      ∆ med c max i r i (c)
                              0.020
                                                                                                                           0.5


                                                                                                            ∆ % nearest
                              0.015                                                                   nmf
                                                                                                      pmf                  0.0
                              0.010

                              0.005                                                                                       −0.5
                              0.000
                                                                                                                          −1.0
                                  0.01 0.1 1.0 b 0.01 0.1 1.0 b   0.01 0.1 1.0 b 0.01 0.1 1.0 b                                  0.01 0.1 1.0 b 0.01 0.1 1.0 b   0.01 0.1 1.0 b 0.01 0.1 1.0 b
                                                       temperature ( τ )                                                                              temperature ( τ )

Figure 5: Targeting of incentivized content by gender on MovieLens. Left: Difference between
medianc∈G {maxi∈[n] r̄i (c)} for men and women (group G), with r̄i (c) the normalized rating (cosine
similarity between c and the strategic si ). Positive values imply bias towards men (higher median).
Note the higher bias when d = 50 (more expressive algorithm); especially NMF incentivizes more
biased content relative to the pre-adaptation baseline ‘b’. Right: Difference in proportions of si
with best (normalized) rating by women/men. Positive values imply bias towards men (more items
best-rated by men). Bias again more pronounced at d = 50. See Section 3.2 for more discussion.

3.2                   R ESULTS
Emergence of clusters with growing τ . Theorem 3 shows that producers concentrate around
c̄ = E[c]/∥ E[c]∥ for sufficiently high τ . Figure 4 corroborates the result on both MovieLens and
LastFM, with the concentration happening already at τ = 1 regardless of the embedding dimension
d and producer count n. We also see that lower τ can lead to “local clustering” where only few
producers converge onto the same strategy. We hypothesize that the simultaneous local updates of
the consumers create “attractor zones” where close-by producers collapse onto each other; they will
remain collapsed henceforth due to equality of their gradients (by symmetry). Theorem 3 does tell us
collapse is to be expected for high τ , and it is possible that a local version of the result with more
than one clusters is true for intermediate values of τ . This highlights how crucial the algorithmic
choice of τ is for the induced incentives within our model.
Targeting of incentivized content by gender. The MovieLens dataset contains binarized user gender
information. In Figure 5, we examine targeting of incentivized content on women and men. To do so,
we employ aggregate statistics of predicted ratings. While predicted ratings may differ from actual
user preferences, they do determine recommendations and thus user experience. To help disentangle
effect of exposure maximization, we also include statistics based on the original item locations (labeled
by ‘b’), i.e., the content created before producers adapt to the recommender. Since the baseline
embeddings need not satisfy the unit norm constraint (see Definition 1), we measure normalized
ratings r̄i (c) := ⟨c,si ⟩/∥c∥∥si ∥ to facilitate comparison. The normalization also alleviates the known
issue of varying interpretation of ranking scales between users (Lynch Jr et al., 1991).
In Figure 5 (left), medianc∈men {maxi r̄i (c)} − medianc∈women {maxi r̄i (c)} measures if the
incentivised content is predicted to appeal toPwomen/men; Figure 5 (right) shows the fraction of
creators incentivised to target women/men: n1 i=1 1{argmaxc r̄i (c) ∈ men}− 1{argmaxc r̄i (c) ∈
                                               n

women}. Positive values signify content crafted for male audience (users are 71% male). Higher
embedding dimension results in more bias, presumably due to the larger model expressivity, and
thus enables more fine-grained targeting. NMF consistently incentivizes more biased content.
Association between incentivized content and creator gender. Platform developers may want
to know if some creators are being disadvantaged (Chokshi, 2017; Farokhmanesh, 2018; Rodriguez,
2022). While solutions were proposed in the static case (e.g, Beutel et al., 2019; Wang et al.,
2021), understanding if the algorithm (de)incentivizes content by particular creator groups may
limit future harm. In Figure 6, we measure the difference between the proportion of (left) and
the median distance to (right) baseline creator embeddings (learned by the recommender before
strategic adaptation), within increasingly large neighborhoods of each strategic si . Since the baseline
embeddings need not be unit norm, we use the cosine distance to define the neighborhoods.
Starting with the proportion (left), higher embedding dimension (more flexible model) incentivizes
content more typical of male artists. This may be related to the higher prevalence of men in LastFM,
combined with training by average loss minimization. The gender imbalance also explains why the
proportion (left) stabilizes at a positive value, whereas the median distance (right) reverts to zero,
as the number of considered neighbors grows. The bias is also related to the choice of rating model,
where especially PMF at high temperatures results in significant advantage for male artists.


                                                                                                  8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                      dim 3                                  dim 50                                                                       dim 3                              dim 50
                               1.00


    ∆ % neighbors of gender
                                                                                                                                                    1.0                                     nmf                                 0.01


                                                                                                                       ∆ med i medG∩N d(s i , c)
                               0.75                                                                                                                 0.8                                     pmf                                 0.1
                               0.50                                                                                                                                                                                             1.0
                                                                                                                                                    0.6
                               0.25
                                                                                                                                                    0.4
                               0.00
                                                                                                                                                    0.2
                              − 0.25
                                                                                                                0.01
                              − 0.50                                                                                                                0.0
                                                                        nmf                                     0.1
                              − 0.75                                    pmf                                     1.0                                − 0.2
                                       20   21   22     23    24   25         20   21   22      23    24   25                                              20   21   22      23   24   25         20   21   22   23   24   25
                                                 # neighbors                            # neighbors                                                                  # neighbors                            # neighbors


Figure 6: Incentivized content and creator gender on LastFM. Quantifying relative difficulty
of strategic adaptation for female and male content creators, Uses baseline creator embeddings
(and associated gender), and their cosine distance from strategic embeddings. Left: Difference
between fractions of male and female creators in increasingly large neighborhood of each strategic
item. Values above zero imply bias towards male producers. Higher embedding dimension (model
expressivity) again results in larger bias. The bias also seems to be larger for higher τ and for the PMF
rating model. Right: Difference between median cosine distance to female and male creators within
increasingly large neighborhood of each strategic item. Values above zero imply bias towards male
producers. Higher bias is again associated with higher embedding dimension and the PMF rating
model, but the impact of temperature τ is less pronounced. See Section 3.2 for more discussion.

4                              D ISCUSSION
From social media and streaming to Google Search, many of us interact with recommender and
information retrieval systems every day. While the core algorithms have been developed and analyzed
years ago, the socio-economic context in which they operate received comparatively little attention in
the academic literature. We make two main contributions: (a) we define exposure games, an incentive-
based model of content creators’ interactions with real-world algorithms including the popular matrix
factorization and two-tower systems, and (b) we formulate a a pre-deployment audit which employs a
model of creator behavior to identify misalignment between incentivized and desirable content.
Our main theoretical contributions focus on the properties of Nash equilibria in exposure games.
We found that seemingly innocuous algorithmic choices like temperature τ , embedding dimension d,
or a non-negativity constraint on embeddings can have serious impact on the induced incentives. For
example, high τ incentivizes uniform broadly appealing content, whereas low τ motivates targeting
smaller consumer groups. Since higher τ is often linked to exploration, which is necessary for
optimal performance in static settings (e.g., Lattimore & Szepesvári, 2020), this result highlights
the importance of considering the socio-economic context in algorithm development.
Our producer model has several limitations from assuming rationality, complete information, and full
control, to taking the skill set of each producer to be the same, their utility to be linear in total exposure,
and ignoring algorithmic diversification of recommendations. We also consider the attention pool as
fixed and finite, neglecting the problematic reality of the modern attention economy, where online
platforms constantly struggle to increase their user numbers and daily usage (Covington et al., 2016;
Williams, 2018; Bhargava & Velasquez, 2021). Our theoretical understanding is incomplete as, e.g.,
our understanding of the influence of constraining embeddings to be non-negative is limited to the
two-dimensional case. The empirical evaluation of our behavior model is hindered by the lack of
academic access to the almost exclusively privately owned platforms (Greene et al., 2022).
Due to their sizable influence on individuals, societies, and economy (Milano et al., 2020),
information and recommender systems are of critical importance from an ethical and societal
perspective. While we hope that a better understanding of the incentives these algorithms create
will mitigate their negative social consequences, this also entails risks. Perhaps the most important is
the possibility of employing an optimizer such as the one in Section 3 to game a real-world algorithm.
This is especially relevant to the current debate about transparency (e.g., Sonboli et al., 2021; Rieder
& Hofmann, 2020; Sinha & Swearingen, 2002), and the proposal to (partially) open-source the Twitter
code base (Knight, 2022). Due to the aforementioned limitations, we also caution against treating
the predictions of our incentive-based behavior model as definitive, especially given the significant
complexity of many real-world algorithms and the environments in which they operate.
Going forward, we want to deepen our understanding of exposure games, and make pre-deployment
audits a practical addition to the algorithm auditing toolbox. We hope this research enriches the
debate about online platforms by a useful perspective for thinking about harms, (over)amplification,
and design of algorithms with regard to the relevant incentives of the involved actors.


                                                                                                                       9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


R EFERENCES
Babajide O Ayinde and Jacek M Zurada. Deep learning of constrained autoencoders for enhanced
  understanding of data. IEEE TNNLS, 2017.
David Balduzzi, Sebastien Racaniere, James Martens, Jakob Foerster, Karl Tuyls, and Thore Graepel.
  The mechanics of n-player differentiable games. In ICML, 2018.
Ran Ben-Basat, Moshe Tennenholtz, and Oren Kurland. A game theoretic analysis of the adversarial
  retrieval setting. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research, 2017.
Omer Ben-Porat and Moshe Tennenholtz. A game-theoretic approach to recommendation systems
 with strategic content providers. In NeurIPS, 2018.
Omer Ben-Porat, Gregory Goren, Itay Rosenberg, and Moshe Tennenholtz. From recommendation
 systems to facility location games. In AAAI, 2019a.
Omer Ben-Porat, Itay Rosenberg, and Moshe Tennenholtz. Convergence of learning dynamics in
 information retrieval games. In AAAI, 2019b.
Omer Ben-Porat, Itay Rosenberg, and Moshe Tennenholtz. Content provider dynamics and
 coordination in recommendation ecosystems. In NeurIPS, 2020.
Michel Benaïm and Morris W Hirsch. Learning processes, mixed equilibria and dynamical systems
 arising from repeated games. Games and Economic Behavior, 1997.
Thierry Bertin-Mahieux, Daniel P.W. Ellis, Brian Whitman, and Paul Lamere. The million song
  dataset. In ISMIR, 2011.
Alex Beutel, Jilin Chen, Tulsee Doshi, Hai Qian, Li Wei, Yi Wu, Lukasz Heldt, Zhe Zhao, Lichan
  Hong, Ed H Chi, et al. Fairness in recommendation ranking through pairwise comparisons. In
  ACM SIGKDD, 2019.
Vikram R Bhargava and Manuel Velasquez. Ethics of the attention economy: The problem of social
  media addiction. Business Ethics Quarterly, 2021.
David M Blei, Andrew Y Ng, and Michael I Jordan. Latent dirichlet allocation. JMLR, 2003.
Nicolas Boumal. An Introduction to Optimization on Smooth Manifolds. Cambridge University Press,
  2022.
James Bradbury, Roy Frostig, Peter Hawkins, Matthew James Johnson, Chris Leary, Dougal
  Maclaurin, George Necula, Adam Paszke, Jake VanderPlas, Skye Wanderman-Milne, and Qiao
  Zhang. JAX: composable transformations of Python+NumPy programs, 2018.
Sarah Cen and Devavrat Shah. Regulating algorithmic filtering on social media. NeurIPS, 2021.
Nicolò Cesa-Bianchi, Claudio Gentile, Gábor Lugosi, and Gergely Neu. Boltzmann exploration done
  right. NeurIPS, 2017.
Karthekeyan Chandrasekaran, Richard Karp, Erick Moreno-Centeno, and Santosh Vempala.
  Algorithms for implicit hitting set problems. In Proceedings of the twenty-second annual ACM-
  SIAM symposium on Discrete Algorithms, pp. 614–629. SIAM, 2011.
Minmin Chen, Alex Beutel, Paul Covington, Sagar Jain, Francois Belletti, and Ed H Chi. Top-k
 off-policy correction for a REINFORCE recommender system. In ACM WSDM, 2019.
Xu Cheng, Cameron Dale, and Jiangchuan Liu. Statistics and social network of youtube videos. In
  IWQoS, 2008.
Niraj Chokshi. YouTube filtering draws ire of gay and transgender creators. https:
  //www.nytimes.com/2017/03/20/technology/youtube-lgbt-videos.html,
  2017. Accessed: 2022-05-16.
Paul Covington, Jay Adams, and Emre Sargin. Deep neural networks for YouTube recommendations.
  In ACM RecSys, 2016.


                                               10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Nick Craswell, Onno Zoeter, Michael Taylor, and Bill Ramsey. An experimental comparison of click
  position-bias models. In ACM WSDM, pp. 87–94, 2008.
Mihaela Curmei, Sarah Dean, and Benjamin Recht. Quantifying availability and discovery in
 recommender systems via stochastic reachability. In ICML, 2021.
Sanjoy Dasgupta, Christos H Papadimitriou, and Umesh Virkumar Vazirani. Algorithms. McGraw-
  Hill, 2008.
Gerard Debreu. A social equilibrium existence theorem. Proceedings of the National Academy of
  Sciences, 1952.
Andrew Dennis.     Penguin 4.0: Necessary and positive improvement. https://
  searchengineland.com/penguin-4-0-necessary-positive-improvement-
  261359, 2016. Accessed: 2022-05-13.
Virginie Do, Sam Corbett-Davies, Jamal Atif, and Nicolas Usunier. Online certification of preference-
  based fairness for personalized recommender systems. arXiv, 2021.
Robert Dorfman. Application of the simplex method to a game theory problem. In Activity Analysis
  of Production and Allocation-Proceedings of a Conference, pp. 348–358. Wiley, Chapman & Hall
  New York, London, 1951.
Ky Fan. Fixed-point and minimax theorems in locally convex topological linear spaces. Proceedings
  of the National Academy of Sciences, 1952.
Megan Farokhmanesh. YouTube is still restricting and demonetizing LGBT videos and adding anti-
 LGBT ads to some. https://www.theverge.com/2018/6/4/17424472/youtube-
 lgbt-demonetization-ads-algorithm, 2018. Accessed: 2022-05-16.
Drew Fudenberg and David M Kreps. Learning mixed equilibria. Games and Economic Behavior,
  1993.
Irving L Glicksberg. A further generalization of the Kakutani fixed point theorem, with application
   to Nash equilibrium points. Proceedings of the American Mathematical Society, 1952.
Danny Goodwin. A complete guide to the Google Panda update: 2011-21. https://www.
  searchenginejournal.com/google-algorithm-history/panda-update,
  2021. Accessed: 2022-05-13.
Brett R Gordon, Florian Zettelmeyer, Neha Bhargava, and Dan Chapsky. A comparison of approaches
  to advertising measurement: Evidence from big field experiments at Facebook. Marketing Science,
  2019.
Travis Greene, David Martens, and Galit Shmueli. Barriers to academic data science research in the
  new realm of algorithmic behaviour modification by digital platforms. Nature Machine Intelligence,
  2022.
Viet Ha-Thuc, Avishek Dutta, Ren Mao, Matthew Wood, and Yunli Liu. A counterfactual framework
  for seller-side a/b testing on marketplaces. In ACM SIGIR, 2020.
Keach Hagey and Jeff Horwitz. Facebook tried to make its platform a healthier place.
  It got angrier instead. https://www.wsj.com/articles/facebook-algorithm-
  change-zuckerberg-11631654215, 2021. Accessed: 2022-05-04.
Moritz Hardt, Nimrod Megiddo, Christos Papadimitriou, and Mary Wootters. Strategic classification.
 In ACM ITCS, 2016.
Muhammad Haroon, Anshuman Chhabra, Xin Liu, Prasant Mohapatra, Zubair Shafiq, and Magdalena
 Wojcieszak. Youtube, the great radicalizer? auditing and mitigating ideological biases in youtube
 recommendations. arXiv, 2022.
F Maxwell Harper and Joseph A Konstan. The MovieLens datasets: History and context. ACM TIIS,
  2015.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Charles R. Harris, K. Jarrod Millman, Stéfan J. van der Walt, Ralf Gommers, Pauli Virtanen, David
  Cournapeau, Eric Wieser, Julian Taylor, Sebastian Berg, Nathaniel J. Smith, Robert Kern, Matti
  Picus, Stephan Hoyer, Marten H. van Kerkwijk, Matthew Brett, Allan Haldane, Jaime Fernández
  del Río, Mark Wiebe, Pearu Peterson, Pierre Gérard-Marchant, Kevin Sheppard, Tyler Reddy,
  Warren Weckesser, Hameer Abbasi, Christoph Gohlke, and Travis E. Oliphant. Array programming
  with NumPy. Nature, 2020.

Henning Hohnhold, Deirdre O’Brien, and Diane Tang. Focusing on the long-term: It’s good for users
  and business. In ACM CIKM, 2015.

Harold Hotelling. Stability in competition. The Economic Journal, 1929.

Lily Hu, Nicole Immorlica, and Jennifer Wortman Vaughan. The disparate effects of strategic
  manipulation. In FAccT, 2019.

Po-Sen Huang, Xiaodong He, Jianfeng Gao, Li Deng, Alex Acero, and Larry Heck. Learning deep
  structured semantic models for web search using clickthrough data. In ACM CIKM, 2013.

Nicolas Hug. Surprise: A Python library for recommender systems. Journal of Open Source Software,
  2020.

John D Hunter. Matplotlib: A 2D graphics environment. Computing in Science & Engineering, 2007.

Ferenc Huszár, Sofia Ira Ktena, Conor O’Brien, Luca Belli, Andrew Schlaikjer, and Moritz Hardt.
  Algorithmic amplification of politics on Twitter. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
  2022.

Meena Jagadeesan, Celestine Mendler-Dünner, and Moritz Hardt. Alternative microfoundations for
 strategic classification. In ICML, 2021.

Meena Jagadeesan, Nikhil Garg, and Jacob Steinhardt. Supply-side equilibria in recommender
 systems. arXiv, 2022.

Yuri M Kaniovski and H Peyton Young. Learning dynamics in games with stochastic perturbations.
  Games and Economic Behavior, 1995.

Jon Kleinberg and Manish Raghavan. How do classifiers induce agents to invest effort strategically?
  ACM TEAC, 2020.

Thomas Kluyver, Benjamin Ragan-Kelley, Fernando Pérez, Brian Granger, Matthias Bussonnier,
  Jonathan Frederic, Kyle Kelley, Jessica Hamrick, Jason Grout, Sylvain Corlay, Paul Ivanov,
  Damián Avila, Safia Abdalla, Carol Willing, and Jupyter development team. Jupyter notebooks
 - a publishing format for reproducible computational workflows. In Positioning and Power in
  Academic Publishing: Players, Agents and Agendas, 2016.

Will Knight. Elon Musk’s plan to open source the Twitter algorithm won’t solve anything. https:
 //www.wired.com/story/twitter-open-algorithm-problem/, 2022. Accessed:
 2022-05-16.

Yehuda Koren, Robert Bell, and Chris Volinsky. Matrix factorization techniques for recommender
  systems. Computer, 2009.

Karl Krauth, Sarah Dean, Alex Zhao, Wenshuo Guo, Mihaela Curmei, Benjamin Recht, and Michael I
  Jordan. Do offline metrics predict online performance in recommender systems? arXiv, 2020.

Tor Lattimore and Csaba Szepesvári. Bandit Algorithms. Cambridge University Press, 2020.

Daniel D Lee and H Sebastian Seung. Learning the parts of objects by non-negative matrix
  factorization. Nature, 1999.

Lihong Li, Wei Chu, John Langford, and Robert E Schapire. A contextual-bandit approach to
  personalized news article recommendation. In TheWebConf, 2010.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Lydia T Liu, Ashia Wilson, Nika Haghtalab, Adam Tauman Kalai, Christian Borgs, and Jennifer
  Chayes. The disparate equilibria of algorithmic decision making when individuals invest rationally.
  In FAccT, 2020.
Lydia T Liu, Nikhil Garg, and Christian Borgs. Strategic ranking. In ICAS, 2022.
Eli Lucherini, Matthew Sun, Amy Winecoff, and Arvind Narayanan. T-RECS: A simulation tool to
  study the societal impact of recommender systems. arXiv, 2021.
John G Lynch Jr, Dipankar Chakravarti, and Anusree Mitra. Contrast effects in consumer judgments:
  Changes in mental representations or in the anchoring of rating scales? Journal of Consumer
  Research, 1991.
Chris Marentis. A complete guide to the essentials of post-Hummingbird SEO.
  https://searchengineland.com/adapting-googles-2013-algorithm-
  shake-ups-navigate-win-todays-seo-188427, 2014. Accessed: 2022-05-13.
Eric V Mazumdar, Michael I Jordan, and S Shankar Sastry. On finding local Nash equilibria (and
  only local Nash equilibria) in zero-sum games. arXiv, 2019.
Silvia Milano, Mariarosaria Taddeo, and Luciano Floridi. Recommender systems and their ethical
   challenges. AI & Society, 2020.
Smitha Milli, John Miller, Anca D Dragan, and Moritz Hardt. The social cost of strategic classification.
  In FAccT, 2019.
Martin Mladenov, Elliot Creager, Omer Ben-Porat, Kevin Swersky, Richard Zemel, and Craig
 Boutilier. Optimizing long-term social welfare in recommender systems: A constrained matching
 approach. In ICML, 2020.
Andriy Mnih and Russ R Salakhutdinov. Probabilistic matrix factorization. Advances in Neural
 Information Processing Systems, 20, 2007.
Preetam Nandy, Divya Venugopalan, Chun Lo, and Shaunak Chatterjee. A/b testing for recommender
  systems in a two-sided marketplace. NeurIPS, 2021.
John F Nash Jr. Equilibrium points in n-person games. Proceedings of the national academy of
  sciences, 36(1):48–49, 1950.
Jacob Ørmen and Andreas Gregersen. Institutional polymorphism: Diversification of content and
  monetization strategies on youtube. Television & New Media, 2022.
The pandas development team. pandas-dev/pandas: Pandas, February 2020. URL https://doi.
  org/10.5281/zenodo.3509134.
Akshita Patil, Jayesh Pamnani, and Dipti Pawade. Comparative study of Google search engine
  optimization algorithms: Panda, Penguin and Hummingbird. In I2CT, 2021.
Juan Perdomo, Tijana Zrnic, Celestine Mendler-Dünner, and Moritz Hardt. Performative prediction.
  In ICML, 2020.
Ariel D. Procaccia and Moshe Tennenholtz. Approximate mechanism design without money. ACM
  TEAC, 2013.
Nimrod Raifer, Fiana Raiber, Moshe Tennenholtz, and Oren Kurland. Information retrieval meets
  game theory: The ranking competition between documents’ authors. In ACM SIGIR, 2017.
Lillian J Ratliff, Samuel A Burden, and S Shankar Sastry. On the characterization of local Nash
  equilibria in continuous games. IEEE TACON, 2016.
Bernhard Rieder and Jeanette Hofmann. Towards platform observability. Internet Policy Review,
  2020.
Julian A Rodriguez. LGBTQ incorporated: YouTube and the management of diversity. Journal of
  Homosexuality, 2022.


                                                  13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Asim Shahzad, Deden Witarsyah Jacob, Nazri Mohd Nawi, Hairulnizam Mahdin, and Marheni Eka
  Saputri. The new trend for search engine optimization, tools and techniques. IJEECS, 2020.
Dougal Shakespeare, Lorenzo Porcaro, Emilia Gómez, and Carlos Castillo. Exploring artist gender
  bias in music recommendation. arXiv, 2020.
Leo K Simon. Games with discontinuous payoffs. The Review of Economic Studies, 1987.
Satinder Singh, Michael J Kearns, and Yishay Mansour. Nash convergence of gradient dynamics in
  general-sum games. In UAI, 2000.
Rashmi Sinha and Kirsten Swearingen. The role of transparency in recommender systems. In CHI
  Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems, 2002.
Nasim Sonboli, Jessie J Smith, Florencia Cabral Berenfus, Robin Burke, and Casey Fiesler. Fairness
  and transparency in recommendation: The users’ perspective. In ACM UMAP, 2021.
Diane Tang, Ashish Agarwal, Deirdre O’Brien, and Mike Meyer. Overlapping experiment
  infrastructure: More, better, faster experimentation. In ACM CIKM, 2010.
Guido van Rossum and Fred L Drake. Python 3 Reference Manual. CreateSpace, 2009.
Xuezhi Wang, Nithum Thain, Anu Sinha, Flavien Prost, Ed H Chi, Jilin Chen, and Alex Beutel.
  Practical compositional fairness: Understanding fairness in multi-component recommender
  systems. In ACM WSDM, 2021.
James Williams. Stand out of our light: freedom and resistance in the attention economy. Cambridge
  University Press, 2018.
Ya Xu, Nanyu Chen, Addrian Fernandez, Omar Sinno, and Anmol Bhasin. From infrastructure to
  culture: A/B testing challenges in large scale social networks. In ACM CIKM, 2015.
Xinyang Yi, Ji Yang, Lichan Hong, Derek Zhiyuan Cheng, Lukasz Heldt, Aditee Kumthekar, Zhe
  Zhao, Li Wei, and Ed Chi. Sampling-bias-corrected neural modeling for large corpus item
  recommendations. In ACM RecSys, 2019.
Ruohan Zhan, Konstantina Christakopoulou, Ya Le, Jayden Ooi, Martin Mladenov, Alex Beutel,
  Craig Boutilier, Ed Chi, and Minmin Chen. Towards content provider aware recommender systems:
  A simulation study on the interplay between user and provider utilities. In TheWebConf, 2021.

A    P ROOFS
List of abbreviations:
      • s.t. = such that
      • a.s. = almost surely
      • l.h.s. = left-hand side
      • r.h.s. = right-hand side
      • w.l.o.g. = without loss of generality
A.1 S TAND - ALONE STATEMENTS
Theorem 2. PNE need not exist in either the hardmax (τ = 0) or softmax (τ > 0) exposure games.
                                                                 P3
Proof of Theorem 2. (I) Hardmax: Take n = d = 2 and Pc = 13 j=1 δcj where the angle between
any cj ̸= ck is 2π
                 3 . Assume s = (s1 , s2 ) is a PNE. W.l.o.g. c1 = argmaxj ⟨s1 , cj ⟩. Then there is
s2 on the geodesic connecting c2 and c3 which has higher dot product with both c2 and c3 than s1 .
Hence u2 (s) ≥ 2/3 by the
                        Passumption that s is a PNE. The same argument implies u1 (s) ≥ /3. This
                                                                                           2
is a contradiction since i ui (s) = 1 by definition of the exposure utility.
(II) Softmax: Let n = d = 2, and Pc = 31 (2δe1 + δe2 ) where e1 = [1, 0]⊤ and e2 = [0, 1]⊤ . By
Proposition 1, we know that the only possible PNE is s1 = s2 = c̄ ∝ E[c] = [2, 1]/3, where both


                                                14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


players enjoy u1 (s) = u2 (s) = 12 . Let s′1 = (c̄ + ϵe1 )/∥c̄ + ϵe1 ∥ for some ϵ > 0. As τ → 0,
u1 (s′1 , c̄) → 23 by continuity. Hence ∃τ0 > 0 s.t. s1 = s2 = c̄ is not a PNE for all τ < τ0 .

Theorem 3. For any ϵ > 0 and Pc ∈ P(Rd ) with compact support and E[c] ̸= 0, ∃τ0 > 0 s.t.
s1 = . . . = sn = c̄ is an ϵ-PNE for all τ ≥ τ0 . Moreover, for all τ ≥ τ0 , the smallest ϵτ for which c̄
is an ϵτ -PNE satisfies ϵτ ≤ τϵ . If also ϵ < ∥ĉ∥, then the set of better-responses to c̄

                        Ψ(c̄) := {v ∈ S d−1 : u1 (v, c̄, . . . , c̄) ≥ u1 (c̄, c̄, . . . , c̄)} ,          (3)

is a subset of Bδd (c̄) = {v : ∥v − c̄∥ ≤ δ} with δ = 2ϵ/(∥ĉ∥ − ϵ), and δ → 0 as τ → ∞.

Proof of Theorem 3. We w.l.o.g. focus on the defection strategies for s1 . By the mean-value theorem
                         ∆ := u1 (s1 , c̄, . . . , c̄) − u1 (c̄, . . . , c̄) = ⟨g1′ , s1 − c̄⟩ ,
where g1′ = ∇s′1 u1 (s′1 , c̄, . . . , c̄) for some s′1 on the line connecting s1 and c̄. While the rigorous
argument below relies on a few technicalities, the main idea is simple: as τ → ∞, τ · g1′ → ĉ =
1      1                                       d−1
n (1 − n ) E[c] uniformly over s1 ∈ S              (Lemma 1), and thus τ · ∆ ≈ ⟨ĉ, s1 − c̄⟩ ≤ ∥ĉ∥(1 − 1) = 0.


Lemma 1. limτ →∞ sups1 ∈S d−1 ∥τ · g1′ − ĉ∥ → 0 .

Proof of Lemma 1. Since supp(Pc ) is compact by assumption, and τ · g1′ = E[p1 (c)(1 − p1 (c))c],
all we need is p1 (c)(1 − p1 (c)) → n1 (1 − n1 ) pointwise in c (dominated convergence), and uniform
over s′1 ∈ B d = {v : ∥v∥ ≤ 1} (mean-value theorem yields s′1 on the line connecting s1 with c̄). As
                                                        exp(τ −1 ⟨c,s′ ⟩)
                                p1 (c) = exp(τ −1 ⟨c,s′ ⟩)+(n−1) 1exp(τ −1 ⟨c,c̄⟩) ,
                                                          1


is monotonic in τ ⟨c, s′1 ⟩, and sups′1 ∈B d ⟨c, s′1 ⟩ = ∥c∥ < ∞ by compactness, p1 (c)(1 − p1 (c)) will
                   −1

converge to n1 (1 − n1 ) uniformly over B d by continuity of the exponential function at zero.

For any given ϵ > 0, Lemma 1 can be combined with
                               τ · ∆ ≤ ⟨ĉ, s1 − c̄⟩ + ∥τ · g1′ − ĉ∥∥s1 − c̄∥ ,

where ⟨ĉ, s1 − c̄⟩ ≤ 0 for all s1 ∈ S d−1 by c̄ = ĉ/∥ĉ∥, to obtain ∆ < ε for a sufficiently large τ . In
particular, Lemma 1 yields a τ0 such that ∥τ0 · g1′ − ĉ∥ ≤ ϵ/2, which ensures
                                ∥τ · g1′ − ĉ∥∥s1 − c̄∥ ≤ 2∥τ · g1′ − ĉ∥ ≤ ϵ ,
for all τ ≥ τ0 . Hence c̄ is at least an τϵ -PNE for all τ ≥ τ0 (w.l.o.g. τ0 ≥ 1).
The above can be used to obtain a bound on δ := ∥s1 − c̄∥ for s1 ∈ Ψ(c̄). Using orthogonality
                   ∆ = ⟨(I − c̄c̄⊤ )g1′ , s1 − c̄⟩ + ⟨c̄, g1′ ⟩⟨c̄, s1 − c̄⟩
                     ≤ τ −1 ∥s1 − c̄∥ (I − c̄c̄⊤ )τ · g1′ − 21 ⟨c̄, τ · g1′ ⟩ ∥s1 − c̄∥ ,


by the triangle inequality, and ⟨c̄, s1 − c̄⟩ = 12 (2⟨c̄, s1 ⟩ − 2) = − 21 ∥s1 − c̄∥2 by s1 , c̄ ∈ S d−1 . The
terms in the square bracket on the r.h.s. can be bounded using the Pythagoras’ theorem
                   ∥τ · g1′ − ĉ∥2 = ∥(I − c̄c̄⊤ )(τ · g1′ − ĉ)∥2 + ∥c̄c̄⊤ (τ · g1′ − ĉ)∥2
                                    = ∥(I − c̄c̄⊤ )τ · g1′ ∥2 + |⟨c̄, τ · g1′ ⟩ − ∥ĉ∥|2

where we used (I − c̄c̄⊤ )ĉ = 0 and ∥c̄∥ = 1. Because ∥τ · g1′ − ĉ∥ < ϵ, the same is true for (the square
roots of) both terms on the r.h.s. above. By a simple algebraic manipulation of these inequalities
                                     τ · ∆ < δ ϵ − 2δ (∥ĉ∥ − ϵ) .

                                                                                                        (5)
The r.h.s. is positive only when 0 < δ < 2ϵ/(∥ĉ∥ − ϵ). Since ϵ in Equation (5) is only used as an
upper bound on ∥τ · g1′ − ĉ∥, and Lemma 1 tells us this norm converges to zero, δ → 0 as τ → ∞.


                                                          15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Proposition 1. A PNE always exists in n = d = 2 non-negative hardmax games, but may not without
non-negativity or when d > 2. For n = 2 non-negative softmax games with ĉ := n1 (1 − n1 ) E[c] ̸= 0,
the only possible PNE is s1 = s2 = c̄ with c̄ := ĉ/∥ĉ∥ (independently of d), but a PNE may not exist.
When n > 2, non-negative softmax games can have a PNE other than s1 = · · · = sn = c̄.

Proof of Proposition 1. (I) Hardmax: For existence when n = d = 2, let θc be the angle of c from
(w.l.o.g.) [1, 0], and let A ⊂ C denote the set of angles such that for every θm ∈ A, P(θc ≤ θm ) ≥ 21
and P(θc ≥ θm ) ≥ 12 , with P implied by the underlying Pc . Then any (s1 , s2 ) ∈ A × A is a PNE.
                                                                      P3
For non-existence when d > 2, consider d = 3 and Pc = 13 j=1 δcj where cj are the three
canonical basis vectors. Assume s = (s1 , s2 ) is a PNE. Disregards of s1 location, there will be a
point s2 on the great circle connecting the two most distant points from s1 (break ties arbitrarily)
which is closer to both of the two. Hence u2 (s) ≥ 2/3 by thePassumption that s is a PNE. The same
argument implies u1 (s) ≥ 2/3. This is a contradiction since i ui (s) = 1 by definition.
For non-existence without non-negativity in d = 2, see the hardmax part of the Theorem 2 proof.
(II) Softmax: In the n = 2 case, a necessary condition for s = (s1 , s2 ) to be a PNE is that the
Riemannian gradients of the utility, (I − si s⊤     i )gi with gi = ∇si ui (s), are zero. Since ∇si ui (s) =
τ −1 E[pi (c)(1 − pi (c))c], gi belongs to the first orthant by the definition of a non-negative game, and
it is not zero (for τ > 0, all probabilities lie in (0, 1), and c is not a.s. zero since we assumed E[c] ̸= 0).
Hence the Riemannian gradients can only be zero if si ∝ gi , and in particular si = gi /∥gi ∥2 because
this is the direction which makes dot products with all vectors in the first orthant positive.
Crucially, g1 = g2 in 2-player games due to the symmetry of p1 (c)(1 − p1 (c)) = p1 (c)p2 (c) =
p2 (c)(1 − p2 (c)). Therefore at a PNE, s1 = s2 in which case pi (c) = 12 for all c. Thus gi (s) ∝
E[c], implying s1 = s2 = c̄ is the only possible PNE. To show it may not be a PNE, consider
Pc = 13 (2δc1 + δc2 ) for arbitrary non-zero c1 ̸= c2 in the first orthant. Then c̄ ∝ 2c1 + c2 with
u1 (c̄, c̄) = u2 (c̄, c̄) = 1/2. Fixing s1 = c1 /∥c1 ∥2 and taking τ ↓ 0, we get u1 (s1 , c̄) → 2/3, which
means there exists a τ > 0 for which s1 = c1 /∥c1 ∥2 is a strict improvement over s1 = c̄ when s2 = c̄.
For the n > 2 case, we focus on a two-dimensional n = 4 game with Pc = 12 (δc1 + δc2 ) with
c1 = [1, 0]⊤ and and c2 = [0, 1]⊤ (the two canonical basis vectors). In particular, we investigate
existence of NE of the form s1 = s2 and s3 = s4 . Since d = 2, the strategies are restricted to S 1 ,
which means we can use polar coordinates to parameterize si = φ(θi ) := [cos(θi ), sin(θi )]⊤ . We
will further restrict our attention to the symmetric case θ1 = θ2 = θ and θ3 = θ4 = π2 − θ for some
θ ∈ [0, π4 ] =: K. This allows us to define

                                                   0 −1
                                             Q :=            ,
                                                   1     0

and look for values of θ ∈ K where (w.l.o.g.) f (θ) := ∂u∂s1 (s)
                                                               1
                                                                 ∂s1
                                                                 ∂θ1 |θ1 =θ = ⟨g1 , Qs1 ⟩ is equal zero.
Note that in the definition of f , all si and gi vary with θ according to the relationship si = φ(θi )
with θ1 = θ2 = θ and θ3 = θ4 = π2 − θ. However, f (θ) is only the derivative of u1 (s) w.r.t. θ1 ,
ignoring the dependence of s2 , s3 and s4 on θ. This definition of f means that only the roots of
f can possibly be NE. The next lemma will help us locate these roots.

Lemma 2. For a sufficiently small τ > 0, f : θ 7→ ⟨g1 , Qs1 ⟩ is strictly convex on K.

Proof of Lemma 2. It is sufficient to prove that f ′′ > 0 on K. For this, observe f ′ (θ) =
∥Qs1 ∥2H1 − ⟨g1 , s1 ⟩ where H1 := ∇2s1 u1 (s), and f ′′ (θ) = ∥Qs1 ∥2∇θ H1 − ⟨Qs1 , 3H1 s1 + g1 ⟩ ≥
                                                                                    1
∥Qs1 ∥2∇θ H1 − 3∥H1 ∥2 − ∥g1 ∥2 , where by construction
         1

                                                 1 p1 (c1 )(1 − p1 (c1 ))
                                       g1 = 2τ        p1 (c2 )(1 − p1 (c2 )) ,

              H1 = 2τ12 (1 − 2p1 (c1 ))p10(c1 )(1 − p1 (c1 )) (1 − 2p1 (c2 ))p10(c2 )(1 − p1 (c2 ))

  ∇θ1 H1 = 2τ13 (1 − 6p1 (c1 )(1 − p1 (c01 ))p1 (c1 )(1 − p1 (c1 )) (1 − 6p1 (c2 )(1 − p1 (c02 ))p1 (c2 )(1 − p1 (c2 )) ,


                                                          16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                                                                      utility                                            gradient
  1.0                                               0.02                                                                                             0.025
                                                    0.00
                                                                                                 0.24                                                0.000
  0.8
                                                    0.02                                                                                             0.025
                                                                                                 0.22


                                                                                                                                             u1(s)
                                                                                         u1(s)
  0.6                                                                                                                                                0.050
                                                    0.04


                                             f( )


                                                                                                                                               1
                                                                                                 0.20                                                0.075
  0.4                                               0.06
                                                    0.08                                                                                             0.100
  0.2                                                                                            0.18
               consumers                                                                                                                             0.125
                                                    0.10
  0.0
               0.25                                                                                     0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00 1.25 1.50                   0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00 1.25 1.50
                                                           0.0   0.2   0.4   0.6   0.8
        0.0    0.2   0.4   0.6   0.8   1.0



Figure 7: n > 2 softmax case from the proof of Proposition 1. Left: Symmetric PNE location (here
for τ = 14 ). Middle left: Plot of f (θ) = ⟨g1 (s), Qs1 ⟩ with s1 = s2 = φ(θ) and s3 = s4 = φ( π2 −θ).
Right: Plot of utility and its gradient for all possible defection strategies s1 = φ(θ1 ) with s2 , s3 , s4
kept put in the positions defined by θτ⋆ from the left plots. Vertical line shows π4 (right end of K).


Hence ∥Qs1 ∥2∇θ H1 ∼ τ −3 , ∥H1 ∥2 ∼ τ −2 , and ∥g1 ∥2 ∼ τ −1 , implying that for τ low enough, the
                 1
positive term ∥Qs1 ∥2∇θ H1 dominates (using that all expressions share the term p1 (c)(1 − p1 (c)),
                         1
and thus after dividing and observing τ → 0 gives p1 (c) close to either one or zero, we get that all
the terms scale as p1 (c)(1 − p1 (c))/τ k for the appropriate k ∈ {1, 2, 3}).

Lemma 2 implies there are at most two NE (f is strictly convex, and f (θ) = 0 is a necessary
condition). At θ = π4 , s1 = s2 = s3 = s4 = c̄ by definition, which we know is a critical point,
so f ( π4 ) = 0. Since g1 ∝ E[p1 (c)(1 − p1 (c))c] ̸= 0 for any τ > 0 (c cannot be a.s. 0 by E[c] ̸= 0
and the non-negativity assumption), f (0) = ⟨g1 , Qs1 ⟩ > 0 (s1 = φ(0) = e1 = [1, 0]⊤ ). The other
possible root of f thus could only be in the interior (0, π4 ) of K. For small enough τ , moving from
θ = π8 towards e1 = [1, 0]⊤ will increase utility, implying f ( π8 ) < 0. Hence there exists τ > 0 and
θτ⋆ ∈ (0, π8 ) s.t. f (θτ⋆ ) = 0 by the mean value theorem.
So far we have established that s1 = s2 = φ(θτ⋆ ), s3 = s4 = φ( π2 − θτ⋆ ) is a local NE for the
corresponding small τ . By symmetry, it is sufficient to check if there is a defection strategy for
s1 . Any defection to θ1 ∈ (θτ⋆ , π2 − θτ⋆ ] will result in p1 (c) < 14 for both c = c1 , c2 , and thus
worse utility. Defection to ( π2 − θτ⋆ , π2 ] will not yield utility greater than defection to [0, θτ⋆ ) since
s3 = s4 = φ( π2 − θτ⋆ ), so it is sufficient to focus on θ1 ∈ [0, θτ⋆ ). Here

                           ∇θ1 u1 (s) = ⟨g1 , Qs1 ⟩
                                      ∝ p1 (c2 )(1 − p1 (c2 )) cos(θ1 ) − p1 (c1 )(1 − p1 (c1 )) sin(θ1 )
                                      ≥ p1 (c1 )(1 − p1 (c1 ))[cos(θ1 ) − sin(θ1 )] ,
since p1 (c1 ) grows quicker than p1 (c2 ) decays. By construction, θτ⋆ < π4 , and we know
cos(θ) − sin(θ) > 0 for θ ∈ [0, π4 ). In other words, the utility of s1 is strictly increasing on
θ1 ∈ [0, θτ⋆ ), i.e., none of the corresponding s1 = φ(θ1 ) is an improvement. Hence s1 = s2 = φ(θτ⋆ ),
s3 = s4 = φ( π2 − θτ⋆ ) is a NE. (The construction is illustrated in Figure 7.)

Proposition 2. Every τ > 0 exposure game with E[c] ̸= 0 has a critical point at s1 = . . . = sn = c̄.

Proof of Proposition 2. When s1 = · · · = sn = c̄, the gradient from Equation (4) is the same for all
producers, and it is proportional to (I − c̄c̄⊤ )ĉ. This is equal to zero by c̄ = ĉ/∥ĉ∥.

A.2           I NLINE STATEMENTS
                                                                                                                                                                                  P3
Lemma 3. The distribution from the part (I) of the proof of Theorem 2—d = 2, Pc = 13                                                                                                   j=1 δcj
with cj ̸= ck 2π
               3 apart—admits a mixed NE P1 = P2 = Pc at τ = 0.


Proof of Lemma 3. By symmetry, ui (Pc , Pc ) = 21 , ∀i. Since for any s1 ∈ supp(Pc ) = {c1 , c2 , c3 }

Ec,s2 [u1 (s1 , s2 ) | s1 ] = 31 [u1 (s1 , c1 ) + u1 (s1 , c2 ) + u1 (s1 , c3 )] = 13 [1 · 12 + 2 · 13 (1 + 12 + 0)] = 21 ,


                                                                                          17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


all we need is to show that Ec,s2 [u1 (s1 , s2 ) | s1 ] ≤ 12 for any s1 ∈
                                                                        / supp(Pc ). W.l.o.g. assume s1 lies
on the geodesic connecting c1 and c3 (i.e., on the arc opposite of c2 ). Such an s1 is closer to c1 and
c3 than c2 (u1 (s1 , c2 ) = 23 ), but is further from c1 and c2 (resp. c3 and c2 ) than c3 (resp. c1 ). Hence

      Ec,s2 [u1 (s1 , s2 ) | s1 ] = 13 [u1 (s1 , c1 ) + u1 (s1 , c2 ) + u1 (s1 , c3 )] = 13 [1 · 23 + 2 · 13 ] = 49 .

Since 49 < 12 , s1 has no incentive to move any of its mass away from supp(Pc ).


B     H ARDMAX GAMES
In this section we present two different algorithms for finding mixed Nash equilibria in two-player
hardmax games. We note that the set of allowable mixed strategies must be restricted in some way
since certain distributions with support on the unit-sphere S d−1 require infinite storage. Hence,
our first algorithm finds a mixed NE for a discretized strategy space, while our second algorithm
considers settings where Pc is discrete and finds a mixed NE with support over a finite number of
pure strategies in the original non-discretized space, assuming such a mixed NE exists.
We caution that both of these algorithms can only find mixed NE for small exposure games due
to their poor scaling properties. We list them here to highlight the difficulty of solving hardmax
games when compared to the softmax setting and to serve as inspiration for future research into more
efficient algorithms.

B.1    D ISCRETIZED G AMES
We first consider the setting where both players may only choose mixed strategies with support
over a finite subset A = {s(1) , s(2) , . . . , s(m) } ⊂ S d−1 of pure strategies. This setting includes
embeddings that are represented using floating point numbers although A will be very large. In this
case the mixed strategy of the players can be expressed as an m-dimensional probability vector πi
with πij = Pi s(j) . Since there are a finite set of pure strategies a mixed NE is guaranteed to exist

(Nash Jr, 1950). Furthermore since this is a two-player constant-sum game we can find a mixed NE
by solving the following linear program (Dorfman, 1951)

                                       maximize α
                                            α
                                       subject to      U x ≥ α1
                                                       1⊤ x = 1
                                                       xi ≥ 0, i = 1, . . . , m,

where Uij = u1 s(i) , s(j) ) . The strategies where π1 = π2 = x correspond to a mixed NE. While

such a problem is simple to formulate and solve, the number of possible strategies grows rapidly with
d for most discretization schemes. For example, we might create a uniform grid of k points over each
spherical coordinate, in which case we will have m = k d−1 pure strategies to consider.

B.2    F INITE S UPPORT
Next, we consider the setting where both players choose mixed strategies with support over at
most m pure strategies, and the support of Pc is over l points, supp(Pc ) = {c1 , c2 , . . . , cl }. Unlike
in the discretized case, the players may choose any pure strategy that lies on S d−1 . We begin by
outlining a method that, given a mixed strategy P , finds all pure strategies D that dominate it:
Es1 ∼P [u1 (s1 , s2 ) − u2 (s1 , s2 )] < 0 for all s2 ∈ D. By symmetry, we w.l.o.g. assume Player 1
provides the mixed strategy. We will then use this method as a subroutine to find a mixed NE.
Lemma 4. (P1 , P2 ) is a mixed NE if and only if Es1 ∼P1 [u1 (s1 , s)] ≥ 12 and Es2 ∼P2 [u2 (s, s2 )] ≥ 12
for all pure strategies s ∈ S d−1 .


Proof of Lemma 4. Assume (P1 , P2 ) is a mixed NE, then by definition E(s1 ,s2 )∼(P1 ,P ) [u1 (s1 , s2 )] ≥
1                                        d−1
2 for all mixed strategies P ∈ P(S           ), since each pure strategy is also a mixed strategy it follows
                                  1
that Es1 ∼(P1 ,s) [u1 (s1 , s)] ≥ 2 for all s ∈ S d−1 . Similarly for Player 2.


                                                           18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Now assume we have two mixed strategies (P1 , P2 ) such that Es1 ∼P1 [u1 (s1 , s)] ≥ 12 and
Es2 ∼P2 [u2 (s, s2 )] ≥ 21 for all s ∈ S d−1 . Given a mixed strategy P ∈ P(S d−1 ) it follows that
                   E(s1 ,s2 )∼(P1 ,P ) [u1 (s1 , s2 )] = Es2 ∼P [Es1 ∼P1 [u1 (s1 , s2 )]]
                                                         Z
                                                       =        Es1 ∼P1 [u1 (s1 , s2 )]dP (s2 )
                                                            d−1
                                                         ZS
                                                                1             1
                                                       ≥          dP (s2 ) = .
                                                          S d−1 2             2


Similarly for Player 2.

Lemma 4 allows us to only consider pure strategies when checking if strategies are mixed NE.
Now given a mixed strategy P with finite support supp(P ) = {s(1) , s(2) , . . . , s(m) } we can find
every subset of S d−1 that does not satisfy the condition in Lemma 4. By noting that any arbitrary
strategy s can be either closer, farther, or at the same distance from a consumer as a given s(i) ; we
see that each s(i) partitions S d−1 into 3l disjoint partitions based upon the distance of the strategies
                                            (i)    (i)        (i)        (i)
to each consumer ck . That is, X (i) = {X1 , X2 , . . . , X3l }, with Xj satisfying
                                                    (i)
                                       
                                       2 if ⟨s , ck ⟩ > ⟨s, ck ⟩
                                 jk = 1 if ⟨s(i) , ck ⟩ = ⟨s, ck ⟩
                                         0 if ⟨s(i) , ck ⟩ < ⟨s, ck ⟩,
                                       

                                 (i)
for all pure strategies s ∈ Xj , where jk is the k-th digit in the ternary representation of j. By
considering all m partitions created by the strategies in supp(P ), we can further partition the space
                                                                    Tm    (j)
into 3lm disjoint partitions Y = {Y1 , Y2 , . . . , Y3lm } with Yi = j=1 Xij where ij is the j-th digit
of the 3l -ary representation of i.
For every Y ∈ Y we have Es1 ∼P [u1 (s1 , s)] = Es1 ∼P [u1 (s1 , s′ )] for all s, s′ ∈ Y by construction.
Thus, we can find the set of all pure strategies D that dominate P by iterating over Y, testing a single
point in each partition, and taking unions:

                                                                     1             [
                Z = Y ∈ Y : s ∈ Y =⇒ Es1 ∼P [u1 (s1 , s)] <              , D=          Y.
                                                                     2
                                                                                         Y ∈Z

It follows from Lemma 4 that (P, P ) is a mixed NE if and only if D is empty.
Finally, we outline a method to find mixed NE. We first note that for every positive integer m, every
pure strategy s ∈ S d−1 defines a feasible set Fs of all mixed strategies with support over at most m
pure strategies that are not dominated by s, that is:
                               (        m              m
                                                                               )
                                      X               X                      1
                          Fs = P =         πi δs(i) :     πi u1 (s(i) , s) ≥     ,
                                       i=1            i=1
                                                                             2

where π is an m-dimensional probability vector. It follows from Lemma 4 that if P T
                                                                                  is mixed strategy
with support over at most m points then (P, P ) is a mixed NE if and only if P ∈ s∈S d−1 Fs . We
can frame finding such a strategy P as an optimization problem
                                   minimize      |P|
                                       P⊂P

                                   subject to P ∩ Fs ̸= ∅, s ∈ S d−1 ,
where P is the set of all mixed strategies with support over at most m pure strategies. An optimal
solution with more than one element in P indicates that there does not exist a mixed strategy with
support over m points or fewer, whereas if |P| = 1 then (P, P ) is a mixed strategy where P is the
singleton element in P.
This is an instance of the implicit hitting set problem. Hence, we can use the algorithm proposed
in Section 2.1 of Chandrasekaran et al. (2011) to solve the above optimization problem. Their


                                                       19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


algorithm assumes an oracle that, given a proposed subset P ⊆ P will return a subset Fs that is
not hit P ∩ Fs = ∅ or will certify P as a feasible solution to the above optimization problem. We
can easily achieve this by finding all dominating pure NE using our proposed method above for
each P ∈ P and taking the intersection of the resulting sets. If the intersection is empty then P is a
feasible solution, otherwise every element in the intersection represents a subset Fs that has not been
hit by P.

C    E XPERIMENTS
C.1 S ETUP
The LastFM dataset was preprocessed by Shakespeare et al. (2020). Original larger scale sweep was
executed with n ∈ {10, 25, 100, 500, 1500}, d ∈ {3, 10, 50, 100}, stepsize in {10−3 , 10−2 , 10−1 },
and τ ∈ {10−2 , 10−1 , 0.25, 0.5, 1.0}. We only used 2 random seeds for the recommender, and 3
random seeds for our LNE-finding algorithm (i.e., 6 runs in total per configuration). For the reported
results, stepsize sweep was restricted to {10−2 , 10−1 }; the number of steps was upper bounded by
50,000 (all runs have successfully converged to a fixed point as mentioned). While our code contains
an option to scale_lr_by_temperature (see the config.py file in the provided code),
which multiplies the stepsize by τ before its use, we did not use this option in the experiments.
The second-order Riemannian test (Definition 3) is implemented in manifold.py. Defining the
tangent space projection Πi := (I − si s⊤ i ), we consider a candidate strategy profile s ∈ (S
                                                                                                  d−1 n
                                                                                                     ) as
                                                                                            2
violating the
            √ second order test if any of  the Riemannian   gradients Π i ∇ si u i (s) had ℓ  -norm higher
than 10−5 · d, or the Riemannian Hessian Πi [∇2si ui (s)]Πi −⟨si , ∇si ui (s)⟩Πi had a strictly positive
eigenvalue (no tolerance used here).
The final MovieLens and LastFM experiments were run on 72 AWS machines, each with 4 CPU
cores, for 5 hours. Including preliminary and failed runs, we used over 50K CPU hours.
C.2 O PTIMIZER
The gradient ascent optimization technique (Singh et al., 2000; Balduzzi et al., 2018) we employ
is very similar to standard gradient descent algorithm from machine learning literature. Here we
provide a short description of the similarities and differences between the two.
The optimizer we use simultaneously runs n independent gradient descent optimizers, each following
the gradient of the utility ui (s) w.r.t. θi , i ∈ [n], as described around Equation (4) (recall si = θi/∥θi ∥).
θi,t+1 is obtained using θj,t for all j ̸= i, i.e., the locations of the other producers from the last
step. All n optimizers execute these steps at the same time, iterating until all of them converge. See
optimisation.py, particularly the optax_minimisation method, for more details.
C.3 A DDITIONAL PLOTS
Appendix C.3.1 contains plots where the second-order test confirmed and LNE. Appendix C.3.2
then offers comparison to a third ranking algorithm: standard matrix factorization (MF; Koren et al.,
2009), i.e., PMF with additional bias terms. The bias terms effect interpretation of τ values, and we
also ignore them when running the LNE-finding algorithm. This makes the comparison with PMF
and NMF difficult, which is why we excluded MF from the main text. Results in Appendix C.3.2
again contain runs where the second-order test did not rule out a LNE.
C.3.1 LNE CONFIRMED BY THE SECOND - ORDER TEST
As mentioned, the plots shown in the main body of the paper are for runs where the second-order
Riemannian test did not rule out that the found pure strategy profile is a LNE. Here we show exactly
the same plots with only the runs where the test confirmed a LNE. The difference is that here we
exclude the runs where the Riemannian Hessian had at least one zero eigenvalue associated with a
direction perpendicular to si , for at least one i ∈ [n]. As you see below, this had little effect on the
LastFM results, but has non-negligibly reduced the number of admitted runs for MovieLens.
C.3.2    M ATRIX FACTORIZATION (PMF WITH BIASES ) RESULTS


                                                      20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                            .                   dim 3                                                dim 50                     .                                                                .                  dim 3                                             dim 50                        .


     # clusters / # producers


                                                                                                                                                                            # clusters / # producers
                                    1.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                       1.0

                                    0.8                                                                                                                                                                0.8

                                    0.6                                                                                                                                                                0.6
                                                                                                                                                              nmf                                                                                                                                                                nmf
                                                                                                                                                              pmf                                                                                                                                                                pmf
                                    0.4                                                                                                                                                                0.4

                                    0.2                                                                                                                                                                0.2

                                    0.0                                                                                                                                                                0.0
                                                     1.0        1.0                      0.1               1.0             0.1            1.0                                                                        0.01   0.1    1.0     0.1   1.0            0.01        0.1       1.0   0.01     0.1      1.0
                                                                              temperature (τ )                                                                                                                                                   temperature (τ )



                                      Figure 8: A counterpart to Figure 4 with runs where LNE test was inconclusive excluded.


                                                .               dim 3                                                dim 50                          .                                                           .                dim 3                                               dim 50                            .
                                                                                                                                                                                                       1.0
                                    0.025
           ∆ medc maxi ri (c)


                                    0.020                                                                                                                                                              0.5


                                                                                                                                                                         ∆ % nearest
                                    0.015
                                                                                                                                                              nmf                                                                                                                                                                nmf
                                                                                                                                                                                                       0.0
                                                                                                                                                              pmf                                                                                                                                                                pmf
                                    0.010

                                    0.005                                                                                                                                                          −0.5

                                    0.000
                                                                                                                                                                                                   −1.0
                                                    1.0     b          1.0     b           0.1       1.0         b               0.1     1.0    b                                                                    1.0     b            1.0    b          0.1       1.0         b            0.1     1.0      b
                                                                                   temperature (τ )                                                                                                                                                  temperature (τ )



                                      Figure 9: A counterpart to Figure 5 with runs where LNE test was inconclusive excluded.


                                                                      dim 3                                                            dim 50                                                                                            dim 3                                                       dim 50
                                     1.00                                                                                                                                                              1.0                                                      nmf                                                              0.01
          ∆ % neighbors of gender


                                                                                                                                                                         ∆ medi medG∩N d(si , c)


                                     0.75                                                                                                                                                                                                                       pmf                                                              0.1
                                                                                                                                                                                                       0.8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1.0
                                     0.50
                                                                                                                                                                                                       0.6
                                     0.25
                                                                                                                                                                                                       0.4
                                     0.00
                                                                                                                                                                                                       0.2
                                    −0.25
                                                                                                                                                              0.01                                     0.0
                                    −0.50
                                                                                               nmf                                                            0.1
                                    −0.75                                                      pmf                                                            1.0                                  −0.2

                                                20         21    22      23         24   25                20         21         22       23        24   25                                                      20         21     22       23       24    25               20         21      22       23          24      25
                                                                 # neighbors                                                     # neighbors                                                                                       # neighbors                                                 # neighbors



                                    Figure 10: A counterpart to Figure 6 with runs where LNE test was inconclusive excluded.


                                            .                   dim 3                                                dim 50                     .                                                            .                     dim 3                                               dim 50                       .
 # clusters / # producers


                                    1.0                                                                                                                                                            1.0
                                                                                                                                                                       # clusters / # producers


                                    0.8                                                                                                                                                            0.8


                                    0.6                                                                                                                   mf                                       0.6                                                                                                                           mf
                                                                                                                                                          nmf                                                                                                                                                                    nmf
                                    0.4                                                                                                                   pmf                                      0.4                                                                                                                           pmf

                                    0.2                                                                                                                                                            0.2

                                    0.0                                                                                                                                                            0.0
                                           0.01 0.1 1.0 0.01 0.1 1.0 0.01 0.1 1.0                0.1 1.0 0.01 0.1 1.0 0.01 0.1 1.0                                                                           0.01 0.1 0.01 0.1 1.0 0.1 1.0                      0.1 1.0 0.01 0.1 1.0 0.01 0.1 1.0
                                                                              temperature (τ )                                                                                                                                                       temperature (τ )

                                                                               Figure 11: A counterpart to Figure 4 with added MF results.

                                            .                   dim 3                                                 dim 50                        .                                                        .                     dim 3                                               dim 50                       .
                                    0.04                                                                                                                                                               1.0
       ∆ medc maxi ri (c)


                                    0.03                                                                                                                                                               0.5
                                                                                                                                                                      ∆ % nearest


                                                                                                                                                              mf                                                                                                                                                                 mf
                                    0.02
                                                                                                                                                              nmf                                      0.0                                                                                                                       nmf
                                                                                                                                                              pmf                                                                                                                                                                pmf
                                    0.01
                                                                                                                                                                                                   −0.5

                                    0.00
                                                                                                                                                                                                   −1.0
                                          0.01 0.1 1.0 0.01 0.1 1.0 0.01 0.1 1.0 0.1 1.0 0.01 0.1 1.0 0.01 0.1 1.0                                                                                       0.01 0.1 1.0 0.01 0.1 1.0 0.01 0.1 1.0 0.1 1.0 0.01 0.1 1.0 0.01 0.1 1.0
                                                                                   temperature (τ )                                                                                                                                                  temperature (τ )

 Figure 12: A counterpart to Figure 5 with added MF results. Baselines omitted to reduce clutter.


                                                                                                                                                                     21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                              dim 3                                         dim 50                                                                          dim 3                                        dim 50
      1.00                                                                                                                           1.0                                          mf                                           0.01
                                                                                                                                                                                  nmf                                          0.1
      0.75                                                                                                                           0.8                                          pmf                                          1.0
                                                                                                          ∆ medi medG∩N d(si , c)


      0.50
                                                                                                                                     0.6
      0.25
                                                                                                                                     0.4
 ∆


      0.00
                                                                                                                                     0.2
     −0.25

                                                     mf                                           0.01                               0.0
     −0.50
                                                     nmf                                          0.1
     −0.75                                           pmf                                          1.0                               −0.2

             20   21   22         23       24   25         20   21   22         23      24   25                                            20   21   22         23      24   25         20   21   22         23      24   25
                            # neighbors                                   # neighbors                                                                     # neighbors                                  # neighbors


                                          Figure 13: A counterpart to Figure 6 with added MF results.


                                                                                                         22
