Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


TARGET- FREE LIGAND SCORING VIA
ONE - SHOT LEARNING

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                              A BSTRACT

         Scoring ligands in a library based on their structural similarity to a known hit
         compound is widely used in drug discovery following high-throughput screen-
         ing. However, such “similarity search” relies on the assumption that structurally
         similar compounds have similar activities, and will therefore only retrieve ligands
         with hit-like affinity, requiring resource-intensive tweaking by medicinal chemists
         to reach a more active lead compound. We propose a novel approach, One-Shot
         Ligand Scoring (OSLS), that is much more capable of directly retrieving lead-like
         compounds from a library using a novel one-shot learning technique. For this new
         task, we design a Siamese-inspired neural architecture using two Transformer en-
         coders without tied weights, a novel positional encoding-like mechanism, and a
         final prediction head. OSLS is able to score ligands by activity against a target
         without any target-specific knowledge beyond a single known activity value, a
         cost-effective approach to ligand-based or phenotypic drug discovery. We show
         that OSLS surpasses traditional similarity search as well as modern deep learn-
         ing baselines on a simulated ligand retrieval task. Furthermore, we demonstrate
         the applicability of our approach on various drug discovery tasks that also involve
         ligand scoring, including drug repositioning, precision patient-level drug efficacy
         prediction, and even molecular generative modeling.



1    I NTRODUCTION

Contemporary drug discovery is a costly and time-consuming process requiring billions of dollars
per new approved drug. A significant portion of the total development cost is incurred in preclini-
cal stages, where medicinal chemists identify one or more “hit” compounds from high-throughput
screens that have activity against the target of interest and retrieve structural analogs to these hits
from large molecular catalogs for further exploration and development, and eventually produce a
lead compound after much optimization (de Souza Neto et al., 2020; Hughes et al., 2011). Cur-
rently, the concept of chemical similarity is critical to the retrieval of these structural analogs through
pairwise similarity scoring between the hit compound and each compound in a library. Commonly
used similarity metrics include the Tanimoto similarity computed between binary fingerprints of two
molecules (Bajusz et al., 2015), as well other more specialized metrics and molecular featurizations
(Cereto-Massagué et al., 2015; Nikolova & Jaworska, 2003; Maziarka et al., 2020; Jaeger et al.,
2018; Coupry & Pogány, 2022; Gandini et al., 2022).
Retrieving structural analogs from a chemical library with such similarity scoring tends to yield com-
pounds whose activity is similar to that of the initial hit, based on the concept that chemically similar
compounds have similar activity (Johnson & Maggiora, 1990). However, hit compounds from ex-
perimental screens typically have low activities, e.g. binding affinities of 1 − 10 µM, compared
to the typical 1 − 10 nM goal of preclinical drug development, a thousand-fold difference (Freire,
2015; Hughes et al., 2011). Thus, retrieving library compounds based purely on their similarity to
an early-stage hit compound is not an optimal strategy, as this is expected to yield compounds with
hit-like activity instead of the desired highly active compounds. Compound scoring via similarity
is common for other related problems in drug discovery, such as drug repositioning (Jarada et al.,
2020) and lead optimization Hughes et al. (2011), which also suffer from the problem of measuring
similarity to a weakly active compound.


                                                    1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Here, we propose One-Shot Ligand Scoring (OSLS), an alternative to chemical similarity that pre-
dicts the activity of an experimentally uncharacterized query compound (e.g. a compound drawn
from a chemical library) to an unseen target based on a single context compound and its experimen-
tally known activity to that target (e.g. a hit from an experimental screen). Like standard chemical
similarity-based scoring, OSLS shares the advantage of needing no information about a target pro-
tein (Zheng et al., 2013; Vijayan et al., 2021)). However, OSLS is distinct from standard measures
of chemical similarity, because, by using a one-shot learning paradigm, it can assign the highest
scores to the most active compounds, instead of those most similar to a weakly active hit.
More particularly, we
       • introduce the novel formulation of ligand scoring as a one-shot regression problem, and
         argue for its utility over traditional similarity-based scoring
       • design a novel architecture, OSLS, which addresses this problem by using a Siamese-
         inspired neural architecture to extract target information from the known activity of a con-
         text compound and use it to directly predict the activity of a query compound
       • show that OSLS outperforms both similarity-based as well as modern deep learning scoring
         techniques in settings relevant to compound retrieval and the related tasks of drug reposi-
         tioning, patient-level drug efficacy prediction, and generative modeling.

2   R ELATED W ORK
In this work, we focus on cases where information about a targeted protein (e.g. amino acid sequence
or 3D structure) is not used for compound scoring — so-called “ligand-based” or “phenotypic” drug
discovery (Sharma et al., 2021; Swinney & Anthony, 2011; Zheng et al., 2013). In this setting, drug
discovery begins from one or a few existing compounds with some known activity, often obtained
from screening or known natural ligands. In this case, scoring of additional compounds is currently
done using either chemical similarity or N-shot learning approaches.

Chemical similarity. Chemical similarity is commonly used when compounds with a desired ac-
tivity are known, and involves computing the pairwise similarity between the known actives and
each compound to be scored. When using a highly active known compound, similarity acts as a
surrogate measure of activity (Johnson & Maggiora, 1990), although this approximation fails as
the known compound becomes less active. Computing similarity is commonly done with binary
fingerprints (e.g. circular fingerprints, Rogers & Hahn (2010)), although this approach will often
undesirably miss compounds with similar activity but different chemical scaffolds. For this reason,
many other chemical features have been suggested for representing molecules, including simple
molecular weight as well as more complex representations that capture information about molecular
topology and 3D shape/charge (Khan et al., 2016; Li et al., 2012; Kohlbacher et al., 2021; Kearnes
& Pande, 2016).
However, such approaches are, arguably, based more on chemical intuition than data, and choosing
which of hundreds of molecular descriptors to use adds another level of uncertainty. For this reason,
machine learning-based techniques have been proposed that derive chemical similarity in a data-
driven fashion and thus offer promise to improve quality of similarity measurement. In particular,
much work has been dedicated to learning molecular featurization in an unsupervised fashion, which
can later be used for downstream tasks such as similarity (Jaeger et al., 2018; Huang et al., 2021; Li
& Jiang, 2021; Morris et al., 2020). Due to their unsupervised nature, however, similarity measure-
ments between machine learning-derived embeddings are not necessarily meaningful for activity, as
structurally dissimilar molecules may have similar activities, and vice-versa. Because of this, more
direct N-shot learning approaches (Schimunek et al., 2021; Altae-Tran et al., 2017; Stanley et al.,
2021; Lee et al., 2022) have been proposed to leverage vast amounts of existing activity data toward
the scoring of new ligands against novel targets.

N-shot learning. N-shot learning techniques directly use existing compounds (the “context”, also
called the “support set”) to predict the activity of unknown compounds (the “query set”) without
relying on similarity as an imperfect surrogate of activity. The application of Siamese networks
to one-shot learning, a form of N-shot learning involving a single context example, was first intro-
duced in computer vision (Koch et al., 2015), and existing Siamese-based techniques, such as those


                                                  2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


that act on sentences (Mueller & Thyagarajan, 2016), may be applied to string-based molecular
representations. Schimunek et al. (2021) extend this technique to multiple context compounds for
few-shot learning, also a form of N-shot learning, using a Siamese network to encode both the query
and context molecules followed by a similarity function to perform classification. Altae-Tran et al.
(2017) introduce an LSTM-based architecture to iteratively update compound embeddings, which
are then used to make binary activity predictions. Li et al. (2019) classify two graphs, which may
be molecular graphs, as similar or dissimilar through a cross-graph attention mechanism. Finally,
Stanley et al. (2021) introduce a dataset for the few-shot classification task in drug discovery, and
run multiple baselines on the proposed set.
All these techniques, however, cannot predict how active a compound is, instead making only binary
predictions of activity at whatever threshold of true activity is chosen. This is especially relevant
when known actives are only of mild potency so the “active” threshold is low, e.g. hits following
a screen. In this case, binary methods cannot distinguish between mildly and highly active com-
pounds. Lee et al. (2022) propose to predict continuous binding affinity in a few-shot fashion using
attentive neural processes (ANPs), but their method requires multiple support examples and is not
applicable to our one-shot setting. Additionally, the support set is randomly drawn over the en-
tire activity range of known compounds, including highly active compounds, casting doubt on the
model’s utility in the case where one knows only a mildly active compound.


3   M ETHODOLOGY

We formulate the problem of compound scoring given a known active as a one-shot regression prob-
lem. We introduce OSLS, an architecture using two Siamese-like encoding networks with untied
weights, a positional encoding-like mechanism to represent activity values, and a feedforward pre-
diction head. The architecture is summarized in Figure 1.

Problem statement. We seek to score compounds via one-shot learning, meaning predicting, i.e.
scoring, the activity of a “query” compound against an unseen target given only a single “context”
compound and its activity against that target. Let m represent a molecule and πP (m) ∈ R its ex-
perimentally determined activity against a target P (e.g. binding affinity to a protein, or phenotypic
inhibitory concentration). Formally, we aim to predict the activity of a query molecule mq to P ,
πP (mq ), given a context molecule mc and its activity against P , πP (mc ). That is, we wish to learn
a function f (mq , mc , πP (mc )) ∈ R to approximate the true activity of the query molecule, πP (mq ).

Architecture. We employ two separate encoders, a context and a query encoder, that feed into
an activity prediction head. The context encoder, fc : (mc , πP (mc )) 7→ xc , learns to encode
information about the target into a real-valued vector xc using the context molecule and its known
activity against the target. The query encoder, fq : mq 7→ xq , learns to encode the query molecule
into a representation xq , that is useful for predicting its activity. As they are not designed to encode
the same information, fc and fq do not share weights, unlike previously proposed Siamese networks
(Mueller & Thyagarajan, 2016; Morris et al., 2020). The predictor network, g : xc ⊕ xq 7→ π̂P (mq ),
where ⊕ denotes vector concatenation, uses these two encodings to predict the activity of the query
molecule, π̂P (mq ) ∈ R.
We represent molecules as sequences of atom-level tokens of canonical SMILES strings (see Ta-
ble 3 for comparison across molecular representations). Both fc and fq are Transformer encoders
(Vaswani et al., 2017), which have shown recent success as a way to represent molecules Wang et al.
(2019); Li & Jiang (2021). Following Devlin et al. (2018), we also prepend a “classification token”
at the first position of each sequence, and take the hidden state of the Transformer at that position as
xc and xq after projection through a linear layer.
To encode scalar activity information with the Transformer, we propose a novel, learned linear
projection of the scalar that is summed with token embeddings before being fed to the multi-head
attention of the Transformer encoder. This projection has the same dimensionality as the embed-
dings, and is identical across each element of the input sequence. This simple approach to including
scalar activity information is similar to positional encoding, which can effectively pass contextual
information to the Transformer (Vaswani et al., 2017).



                                                   3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Training. The training dataset, D,                                                      A nity prediction for new molecule
consists of compounds and their affini-
ties to multiple protein targets, P. Let                                                                 Predictor
                                                                                                       (Feedforward)
MP represent all compound with activ-
ity data against a given target P ∈ P,
                                                                                                        Concatenate
then we define the training set as
        [
  D=        {(m, πP (m)) | m ∈ MP }                                             Transformer                                         Transformer
                                                                                  Encoder                                             Encoder
         P ∈P

where
         S
           represents repeated union op-            Known
                                                    a nity
                                                                    Linear
                                                                                   ⊕                                   Positional
                                                                                                                       Encoding        ⊕
erations. The testing set is constructed
in a similar way to the training set, but
                                                                   Positional
                                                                   Encoding        ⊕                                            SMILES embedding


with a separate set of targets, a so-called         experimental             SMILES embedding
                                                       result
“target split” (Feng et al., 2018).                                                           Molecule with                         New molecule,
                                                                                              known a nity                            unknown
                                                                                                                                       a nity
We train the model in an end-to-
end fashion with Mean Squared Er-      ffi
                                        ffi
                                        ffi   ffi


ror (MSE) loss between the pre- Figure 1: Architecture overview. The context encoder
dicted and true activity of mq , i.e. (left) receives the embedded SMILES tokens of the con-
MSE(πP (mq ), π̂P (mq )). Each train- text molecule summed with a sinusoidal positional en-
ing batch consists of a set of query coding and a linear projection of its known activity value.
molecules randomly selected without re- The query encoder (right), which has different weights,
placement from the entire training set. receives the embedded SMILES tokens of the query
For each query molecule mq , that is molecule summed with a positional encoding. A feed-
an element of some MP , a context forward predictor network receives the concatenated out-
molecule and its activity is randomly puts of each encoder and produces a final scalar activity
selected from all molecules with data prediction of the query molecule.
against the same target, (mc , πP (mc )),
where mc ∈ MP . When selecting the context compound, an additional constraint is placed on
πP (mc ) such that a ≤ πP (mc ) < b, where a and b are the lower and upper bound, respectively, of
the manually set context activity range. By constraining πP (mc ) but not πP (mq ), OSLS can learn
to score compounds with a wide range of activities using only weakly active compounds as context.

4      E XPERIMENTS
We test OSLS and baseline techniques on four applicable drug discovery tasks: (1) ranking and
classification of compounds from BindingDB (Liu et al., 2007) with varying context compound
affinities that are typical of screening results. (2) predicting the activities of anti-cancer drugs against
a wide array of tumor cell lines (Barretina et al., 2012) using the activity of a single drug against
each cell line as context for activity prediction of other drugs. (3) simulating a drug repositioning
task using the natural ligand estradiol and a set of FDA-approved drugs (Selleck), and testing for the
retrieval of diverse compound scaffolds that are already known to bind the target of estradiol. (4)
use of OSLS as an objective function to guide molecular generative modeling using a single known
ligand. Finally, we measure the impact of various ablations on the OSLS architecture.
Additional results from the adaptation of OSLS to the few-shot setting, following the experimental
setup of Lee et al. (2022), are reported in Appendix A. Dataset and preprocessing details are reported
in Appendix B, and details on the implementation of OSLS are reported in Appendix C.

4.1     BASELINES

We test OSLS against the following baselines, whenever applicable to a given task. Details on the
training and implementation of baselines are given in Appendix D.
      • OSLS-MLP. Similar architecture to OSLS except using Morgan fingerprints to represent
        molecules connected to a multilayer perceptron (MLP) instead of a Transformer. Loosely
        related to Koch et al. (2015), except we untie the two encoders and predict a continuous target.
        The fingerprint of the context compound is multiplied with its known activity value to encode
        context, a process inspired by POT-DMC (Godden et al., 2004).

                                                            4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


      • Tanimoto similarity. Molecular structure-based similarity measure based on vector similarity
        between two binary fingerprints. In this paper, we use Morgan fingerprints (Rogers & Hahn,
        2010) with a radius of 2. This measure of molecular similarity is commonly used in practice.
      • MaLSTM. Siamese neural network to embed molecular SMILES sequences using an LSTM
        network followed by a vector similarity measure (Mueller & Thyagarajan, 2016).
      • Graph Matching Network. Classifies if two graphs are similar by jointly reasoning using a
        cross-graph attention mechanism (Li et al., 2019).
      • MetaDTA. Applies attentive neural processes to the few-shot regression of continuous binding
        affinity values (Lee et al., 2022).
      • OpenEye Rapid Overlay of Chemical Structures (ROCS). Computes overlap between 3D
        molecular representations, using both pure 3D shape (“ShapeTanimoto”) and 3D shape com-
        bined with charge information (“TanimotoCombo”) (Kearnes & Pande, 2016).

4.2     C OMPOUND RANKING AND CLASSIFICATION

(a)                                                           (b)


                                         Random ranking                              Random classi cation


                        Typical hit a nity


Figure 2: Comparison of compound ranking and classification techniques at varying context
compound affinities. (a) mean Kendall’s tau correlation across 40 test targets between real and
predicted affinity among all compounds with data available against each target. Context compounds
are taken at random from the set of compounds with activity data against each target with an affinity
in the range specified on the x-axis. Marked is the most common range of hit affinities following
a HTS campaign (Freire, 2015; Hughes et al., 2011). (b) mean ROC-AUC of classification ability
across 40 test targets with the context compound affinity range on the x-axis, with true positives
          ffi   fi


being defined as compounds with < 10 nM affinity against their target, and true negatives otherwise.

We compare OSLS with baselines on scoring compounds from a library, while varying the affinity
of a context compound that is analogous to a hit from a high-throughput screen. We use a set of 40
unseen test targets from BindingDB, and aim to score all compounds that have experimental activity
data against each target. For each query compound, a context compound is taken at random from all
compounds against the same target within the defined affinity range (specified on the x-axis). For
all methods, we train a separate model for each context affinity range. After scoring, we measure
performance in ranking and classification, both common tasks in drug discovery.
Figure 2 left reports the mean rank correlation across all targets between true compound bind-
ing affinity and the score produced by each method. For the two similarity-based methods, Tan-
imoto similarity and MaLSTM, scoring was done to the context compound, i.e. the highest scored
molecules are those most similar to the context compound. As expected, the ability of these tech-
niques to rank compounds by their true affinity value declines rapidly as the context compound
becomes less potent, reaching random ranking around the micromolar range (103 -104 nM), which is
the typical top affinity obtained from a high-throughput screening campaign (Freire, 2015; Hughes
et al., 2011). In contrast, the performance of OSLS and OSLS-MLP is relatively strong, and strongest
for OSLS, throughout all context compound affinity ranges.
We also use the scores produced by each method in a classification task, where query molecules are
considered positives if the affinity to their respective target is < 10 nM, and negatives otherwise, to


                                                          5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


reflect the typical desired affinity of lead optimization projects (Hughes et al., 2011). Figure 2 right
shows the mean binary classification ability for each method across all test targets, as measured by
ROC-AUC. In addition to the previous baselines, we also include Graph Matching Network (GMN),
which is only applicable to the binary classification task. We trained and tested two different GMN
models, one with a positive and the other a negative context compound, so the reported performance
is identical across all affinity ranges that were included in each model’s training set, as we used the
same range for testing (< 10 and ≥ 10 nM for the positive and negative context model, respectively).
As shown, the performance of most methods drop as the context compound becomes less potent,
although OSLS mostly retains performance even as the context compound is no longer drawn from
the active range. Additionally, OSLS shows the highest ROC-AUC compared to baselines across
most context affinity ranges, especially the low nM ranges.
Besides OSLS and OSLS-MLP, no other baseline can take advantage of continuous activity values,
seemingly limiting their performance. Specifically, OSLS outperforms all baseline methods across
most context affinity ranges, especially at the most common and applicable low micromolar range.


4.3   S CORING ANTI - CANCER COMPOUNDS

Chemotherapy involves the targeting of
specific tumors with specialized drugs. Tu-
mors are often profiled by genetic sequenc-
ing and the subsequent identification of
cancer-causing mutations (Malone et al.,
2020), but it is often not clear which
drug will be active against a given muta-
tion (Kalamara et al., 2018; Tsimberidou,
2015). One alternative approach to tumor
profiling, that is already undertaken clin-
ically, involves screening a small set of
drugs against a patient-derived tumor cul-
ture, yielding continuous activity values for
each drug (Letai, 2017; Wong et al., 2021).
Most cancers involve very specific muta-
tions, but high-throughput screening (HTS)      Figure 3: Scoring drugs from the Cancer Cell Line
against any one mutation is often not eco-      Encyclopedia. The x-axis shows the mean Pearson’s
nomically or biologically feasible (Letai,      r correlation coefficient between real and predicted
2017). One-shot learning techniques, how-       drug activity, as measured by normalized IC50 values,
ever, can potentially extrapolate small sets    across a wide array of cancer cell lines. The y-axis
of clinically obtained drug data to much        shows the single context compound used for predic-
larger HTS-scale libraries, expanding both      tion, where its activity against each cell line informs
clinical therapeutic options and making vi-     the scoring of all other compounds against that line.
able the evaluation of many preclinical drug    Compounds are ordered by the correlation coefficient
candidates against highly specific tumors.      from OSLS, to show which compounds are most in-
                                                formative when supplied as context.
Towards this end, we evaluated the perfor-
mance of OSLS and OSLS-MLP in scoring
anti-tumor drugs against tumor cell lines from the Cancer Cell Line Encyclopedia (CCLE, Barretina
et al. (2012)). Figure 3 reports the mean correlation across all cell lines (x-axis) between the real and
predicted IC50 values of drugs with activity data against each line. We repeated the scoring using
different context drugs (y-axis), which were supplied to both methods along with their respective
activity values against each cell line. For each context drug, the reported correlation coefficient is
computed using activity values normalized to have a mean of 0 (for both real and predicted values) to
account for baseline differences in drug activity and capture only tumor-specific activity differences.
As shown, OSLS displays some level of predictive power across all but one context drug. OSLS-
MLP, however, has less or no predictive power for most context drugs. Models were trained on
BindingDB data only, and not the CCLE, suggesting that the observed predictive power of OSLS
would transfer to other compounds beyond those tested here, including other clinical drug options
or even preclinical candidates. Additionally, models were trained on binding affinity values, which,


                                                   6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


while presumably related to the present IC50 values, indicates the potential for transfer learning
across different activity types mediated by an underlying binding mechanism.
We only compared with one baseline on this task as many of our previously used baselines are not
applicable. For instance, similarity-based methods will yield identical similarity values between
the tested drugs regardless of the experimentally determined activity value, meaning they will have
no predictive power. Binary classification methods are also not applicable, because defining any
binary cutoff among the relatively smoothly distributed activity values is not necessarily meaningful,
and binary outputs would also not produce meaningful correlations to the continuous ground truth.
Therefore, only one-shot activity prediction methods were applicable to this task, and OSLS shows
far superior performance to OSLS-MLP, which makes close to random predictions. Our results
suggest that OSLS may be able to complement or replace existing tumor profiling techniques, and
significantly reduce the costs associated with scoring a large compound library against specific tumor
profiles, offering both clinical and preclinical utility.

4.4   S CORING FOR DRUG REPOSITIONING

Drug repositioning is the application of existing drugs to new indications, promising to avoid expen-
sive drug development and approval while still offering needed new treatments (Pushpakom et al.,
2019). Many computational techniques have been proposed for predicting the activity of existing
drugs against novel targets, including chemical similarity-based techniques (Jarada et al., 2020). We
simulated a drug repositioning task to the estrogen receptor (using models trained on BindingDB,
where the estrogen receptor was excluded from the training set) by scoring all FDA-approved drugs
by predicted activity using estradiol as the context compound, a natural ligand to the estrogen recep-
tor. We chose the estrogen receptor, which has many existing drugs, to compare the ability of each
technique to rank these drugs, which we knew beforehand, highly in comparison to all others.

Table 1: Drug repositioning to the estrogen receptor. Each technique was used to rank all 2,617
FDA-approved drugs using estradiol (a natural ligand to the estrogen receptor) as the context com-
pound. The corresponding ranking (out of 2,617) of each drug which is known to bind the estrogen
receptor (taken from Wishart et al. (2006)) is shown (lower is better).
                       Tanimoto           ROCS               ROCS
 Drug            OSLS similarity (TanimotoCombo) (ShapeCombo) MaLSTM OSLS-MLP
 Estrone           113      6                 4                 3            5           223
 Raloxifene         10    531               519               1281         1898          35
 Fulvestrant        25     12                18               1191          95           54
 Tamoxifen         214   1434              1527               1562         2493          198
 Bazedoxifene 1023        353               684               1380         1162          239
 Toremifene        887   1562              1527               1568         2576          562
 Ospemifene       1077   2283               941               1469         2277         1498

Table 1 reports the rankings produced by each technique of all estrogen-binding drugs (taken from
Wishart et al. (2006)) among 2,617 total FDA-approved drugs (obtained from Selleck). The steroidal
drugs estrone and fulvestrant are ranked highly by all methods, as they are structurally similar to
estradiol, which is also a steroid. For the other non-steroidal drugs, which are structurally very differ-
ent from estradiol, most similarity-based methods fail, while the novel one-shot scoring techniques
(OSLS and OSLS-MLP) rank these drugs relatively highly. These results suggest that one-shot learn-
ing methods are more capable of “scaffold hopping,” which is the ability to identify compounds that
are structurally distinct from a known compound but have similar activity.

4.5   G UIDING MOLECULAR GENERATION

Many generative models have been proposed to design novel compounds against a given target (e.g.
Jin et al. (2018); Luo et al. (2021); Jin et al. (2020); Xie et al. (2021); Zhou et al. (2019); Zang
& Wang (2020); Eckmann et al. (2022)). All generative models employ an objective function to
score suggested ligands, which, when attempting to generate binders against a target, is typically
docking software (Spiegel & Durrant, 2020; Eckmann et al., 2022) that requires target information.
When the target is unknown, in the case of phenotypic or ligand-based drug discovery, some or all
of these existing methods are not applicable. To the best of our knowledge, in the common case of


                                                    7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


(a)                                                        (b)
                                                                   Estradiol
                                                                    (known
                                                                     ligand)


          Estradiol (known ligand)


Figure 4: Molecular generation using OSLS as an objective function. (a) mean (solid line), mini-
mum, and maximum predicted binding affinity of 256 variational autoencoder-generated molecules
optimized with OSLS as an objective function (lower is better). The known affinity of estradiol, the
natural ligand being used as a context compound, is also shown. The x-axis shows the number of
gradient descent steps in the optimization process. (b) distribution of AutoDock-GPU scores among
all valid generated compounds (lower is better), with the docked score of estradiol also shown.

de novo drug design based on one or a small number of hits from phenotypic screening (Swinney &
Anthony, 2011), existing generative models cannot be applied, and is what we seek to address.
After training on BindingDB, we applied OSLS as an objective function in a variational autoen-
coder (VAE, Kingma & Welling (2013))-based generative model, using a single known compound
(estradiol, a natural ligand) and its measured affinity to the estrogen receptor (a well-studied and
disease-relevant target, which was excluded from the training set) as context, and seek to generate
new molecules with higher affinity to the target than estradiol. We slightly adapt OSLS to allow
end-to-end differentiation and combine it with a trained VAE, similarly to previously proposed gen-
erative models (Luo et al., 2021; Jin et al., 2018; Zang & Wang, 2020; Eckmann et al., 2022), and
then backpropagate the output affinity prediction to the latent space to generate new molecules with
higher predicted affinity (for more details about the training and method, see Appendix E).
Figure 4 left shows the mean, minimum, and maximum affinity prediction from OSLS among 256
molecules over 1,000 epochs of backpropagation. As shown, OSLS successfully guides generation
towards compounds with higher predicted affinity, with some even surpassing that of estradiol. To
further validate the generated compounds, Figure 4 right shows the distribution of generated com-
pound affinities predicted by AutoDock-GPU to the estrogen receptor (PDB ID 1ERR, details in
Appendix E) (Santos-Martins et al., 2021), a docking program that uses full target information. En-
couragingly, many generated compounds surpass the docking-predicted affinity of estradiol. Note
that docking, including AutoDock-GPU, is generally a poor predictor of actual affinity (Pantsar &
Poso, 2018), so is not necessarily more accurate than the predictions of OSLS itself. We included the
Tanimoto similarity baseline, which consists of a simple differentiable surrogate model of Tanimoto
similarity to estradiol, to approximate the typical similarity search-guided molecular generation of
medicinal chemists (see Appendix E for further details). As no other baseline was readily differen-
tiable, we did not include any beyond Tanimoto similarity.
Table 2 reports further met-         Table 2: Comparison of generated molecules. Quality metrics
rics of generated molecules,         (see Appendix E) of generated compounds with higher docked affin-
and compares with other              ity than estradiol. We report the best docked affinity as Kd in
generative models that               nanomoles/liter, the number of Butina clusters, and the diversity and
employ target informa-               novelty scores as described in Jin et al. (2020).
tion (Xie et al., 2021;
Olivecrona et al., 2017;             Method   Best (nM) (↓) # clusters (↑) Diversity (↑) Novelty (↑)
Eckmann et al., 2022). Out           REINVENT     0.98           57           0.866        0.98
of 256 molecules generated           MARS         17.3            4           0.893        1.00
by each method, only                 LIMO         0.31           57           0.874        1.00
molecules with a docked              Tanimoto      4.5           23           0.862        0.81
affinity better than that of         OSLS          2.4           42           0.862        1.00


                                                       8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


estradiol were included in metric calculations (full details on the metrics used are available in Ap-
pendix E). While molecules generated by OSLS are surpassed in most metrics by generative models
that harness target information, they are still of relatively high docked affinity. It is encouraging that
such compounds were generated using only a single context compound, suggesting that OSLS may
be used successfully for lead optimization in phenotypic drug discovery. In contrast to the Tanimoto
similarity baseline, OSLS generates a high structural diversity of molecules with desirable affinity,
which is of high utility for drug discovery.

4.6   A BLATION S TUDY

We report performance Table 3: Ablations. Blank entries represent no variation from the
metrics of model variations base model (top).
in Table 3. We measure the
average Kendall’s tau and        Molecule         Context       Projection Kendall’s
ROC-AUC (for the binary          representation   provided      type        tau        ROC-AUC
identification of < 10 nM        SMILES           Continuous    Linear      0.3198        0.7128
compounds) across 40 un-         SELFIES                                    0.2901        0.6820
seen targets in BindingDB,       SPE                                        0.2255        0.6524
using < 1 nM context                              Binary                    0.2107        0.6881
compounds.        We tested                       No context                0.3024        0.6842
SMILES, SELFIES (Krenn                                          Non-linear 0.3177         0.7087
et al., 2020b), and SMILES
Pair Encoding (SPE; Li & Fourches (2021)), which are string-based molecular representations.
“Continuous” means that a continuous activity value was provided as context, “Binary” that the
activity was thresholded at 10nM to either 1 or 0, and “No context” that no context was provided at
all. “Linear” and “Non-linear” (cubic) projections were also tested to encode scalar activity values.


5     D ISCUSSION AND C ONCLUSIONS

We present OSLS, a one-shot learning model for ligand scoring utilizing a Siamese-inspired neural
architecture with two Transformer encoders without tied weights, a novel positional encoding-like
mechanism, and a final prediction head. After training on BindingDB, a large dataset of drug-target
affinity data, we show that OSLS surpasses both traditional and recent baselines on a variety of
relevant tasks involving one-shot ligand scoring on unseen targets. Promisingly, OSLS is able to
correctly score compounds that are of higher activity that the provided context compound, which is
shown to be valuable in compound retrieval, drug repositioning, and generative tasks.
In contrast to previous work, we utilize continuous, rather than binary, activity values, which seems
to be beneficial even for binary classification tasks (Figure 2, Table 3). Continuous values are also
useful for ligand scoring following screening, where hits are active but of mild potency, in which
case binary methods cannot distinguish between mildly and highly active compounds. Finally, con-
tinuous values are highly applicable to some clinical and preclinical challenges, such as those in
cancer therapy, where how active a compound is can be highly relevant (Section 4.3).
Our work also differs from previous work in that we focus on one-shot, rather than few-shot, pre-
diction. The number of hit compounds obtained from a high-throughput screen (HTS) increases
with time and resources (Attene-Ramos et al., 2014), so being able to terminate screening after only
one identified hit (which would be used as the context compound for OSLS) would greatly reduce
costs. HTS is also usually followed by lower-throughput confirmatory assays, which in practice can
result in as a few as one active compound with a measured affinity (Zhu et al., 2013), meaning our
approach is of much broader applicability.
OSLS may also be applied to phenotypic drug discovery, where the target is unknown and hits are
determined by observing a cellular response. Even if there are multiple hits resulting from such a
screen, many will not mediate a response through the desired cellular mechanism of action, and so
scoring additional compounds based on these hits is not useful (Vincent et al., 2020). As typically
only one or a very small number of hits induce a response through the desired mechanism of action,
scoring of further active compounds using only a single hit (presumably, the hit with the desired
mechanism of action) gives maximum flexibility for and applicability to phenotypic drug discovery.


                                                    9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


6   R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT
Anonymized source code for the base OSLS model is provided in the supplementary materials,
as well as helper functions to load pretrained models and perform inference using raw SMILES
strings. Scripts are also provided to preprocess data from BindingDB and prepare it for training.
Descriptions of preprocessing steps undertaken for each dataset are provided in Appendix B. Im-
plementation details for OSLS are provided in Appendix C, and descriptions of how each baseline
was implemented are provided in Appendix D. Finally, implementation and baseline details for the
generative modeling experiments are provided in Appendix E.

R EFERENCES
Han Altae-Tran, Bharath Ramsundar, Aneesh S Pappu, and Vijay Pande. Low data drug discovery
  with one-shot learning. ACS central science, 3(4):283–293, 2017.
MA Attene-Ramos, CP Austin, and M Xia. Encyclopedia of toxicology, 2014.
Dávid Bajusz, Anita Rácz, and Károly Héberger. Why is tanimoto index an appropriate choice for
  fingerprint-based similarity calculations? Journal of cheminformatics, 7(1):1–13, 2015.
Jordi Barretina, Giordano Caponigro, Nicolas Stransky, Kavitha Venkatesan, Adam A Margolin,
  Sungjoon Kim, Christopher J Wilson, Joseph Lehár, Gregory V Kryukov, Dmitriy Sonkin, et al.
  The cancer cell line encyclopedia enables predictive modelling of anticancer drug sensitivity.
  Nature, 483(7391):603–607, 2012.
Darko Butina. Unsupervised data base clustering based on daylight’s fingerprint and tanimoto sim-
  ilarity: A fast and automated way to cluster small and large data sets. Journal of Chemical
  Information and Computer Sciences, 39(4):747–750, 1999.
Adrià Cereto-Massagué, Marı́a José Ojeda, Cristina Valls, Miquel Mulero, Santiago Garcia-Vallvé,
  and Gerard Pujadas. Molecular fingerprint similarity search in virtual screening. Methods, 71:
  58–63, 2015.
Damien E Coupry and Peter Pogány. Application of deep metric learning to molecular graph simi-
  larity. Journal of Cheminformatics, 14(1):1–12, 2022.
Lauro Ribeiro de Souza Neto, José Teófilo Moreira-Filho, Bruno Junior Neves, Rocı́o Lucı́a Beat-
  riz Riveros Maidana, Ana Carolina Ramos Guimarães, Nicholas Furnham, Carolina Horta An-
  drade, and Floriano Paes Silva Jr. In silico strategies to support fragment-to-lead optimization in
  drug discovery. Frontiers in chemistry, 8:93, 2020.
Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. Bert: Pre-training of deep
  bidirectional transformers for language understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.04805, 2018.
Peter Eckmann, Kunyang Sun, Bo Zhao, Mudong Feng, Michael K Gilson, and Rose Yu. Limo:
  Latent inceptionism for targeted molecule generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.09010, 2022.
Qingyuan Feng, Evgenia Dueva, Artem Cherkasov, and Martin Ester. Padme: A deep learning-based
  framework for drug-target interaction prediction. arXiv preprint arXiv:1807.09741, 2018.
Ernesto Freire. The binding thermodynamics of drug candidates. Thermodynamics and kinetics of
  drug binding, pp. 1–13, 2015.
Enrico Gandini, Gilles Marcou, Fanny Bonachera, Alexandre Varnek, Stefano Pieraccini, and Mau-
  rizio Sironi. Molecular similarity perception based on machine-learning models. International
  Journal of Molecular Sciences, 23(11):6114, 2022.
Jeffrey W Godden, Florence L Stahura, and Jürgen Bajorath. Pot-dmc: a virtual screening method
   for the identification of potent hits. Journal of medicinal chemistry, 47(23):5608–5611, 2004.
Paul C. D. Hawkins, A. Geoffrey Skillman, and Anthony Nicholls. Comparison of shape-matching
  and docking as virtual screening tools. Journal of Medicinal Chemistry, 50(1):74–82, December
  2006.


                                                 10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Paul C D Hawkins, A Geoffrey Skillman, Gregory L Warren, Benjamin A Ellingson, and Matthew T
  Stahl. Conformer generation with OMEGA: algorithm and validation using high quality structures
  from the protein databank and cambridge structural database. J. Chem. Inf. Model., 50(4):572–
  584, April 2010.
Kexin Huang, Cao Xiao, Lucas M Glass, and Jimeng Sun. Moltrans: Molecular interaction trans-
  former for drug–target interaction prediction. Bioinformatics, 37(6):830–836, 2021.
James P Hughes, Stephen Rees, S Barrett Kalindjian, and Karen L Philpott. Principles of early drug
  discovery. British journal of pharmacology, 162(6):1239–1249, 2011.
Sabrina Jaeger, Simone Fulle, and Samo Turk. Mol2vec: unsupervised machine learning approach
  with chemical intuition. Journal of chemical information and modeling, 58(1):27–35, 2018.
Eric Jang, Shixiang Gu, and Ben Poole. Categorical reparameterization with gumbel-softmax. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1611.01144, 2016.
Tamer N Jarada, Jon G Rokne, and Reda Alhajj. A review of computational drug repositioning:
  strategies, approaches, opportunities, challenges, and directions. Journal of cheminformatics, 12
  (1):1–23, 2020.
Wengong Jin, Regina Barzilay, and Tommi Jaakkola. Junction tree variational autoencoder for
 molecular graph generation. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 2323–2332.
 PMLR, 2018.
Wengong Jin, Regina Barzilay, and Tommi Jaakkola. Multi-objective molecule generation using
 interpretable substructures. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 4849–4859.
 PMLR, 2020.
Mark A Johnson and Gerald M Maggiora. Concepts and applications of molecular similarity. Wiley,
 1990.
Angeliki Kalamara, Luis Tobalina, and Julio Saez-Rodriguez. How to find the right drug for each
  patient? advances and challenges in pharmacogenomics. Current opinion in systems biology, 10:
  53–62, 2018.
Steven Kearnes and Vijay Pande. Rocs-derived features for virtual screening. Journal of computer-
  aided molecular design, 30(8):609–617, 2016. URL https://docs.eyesopen.com/
  applications/rocs/rocs/rocs_overview.html.
Asad U Khan et al. Descriptors and their selection methods in qsar analysis: paradigm for drug
  design. Drug discovery today, 21(8):1291–1302, 2016.
Diederik P Kingma and Max Welling.           Auto-encoding variational bayes.      arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1312.6114, 2013.
Gregory Koch, Richard Zemel, Ruslan Salakhutdinov, et al. Siamese neural networks for one-shot
  image recognition. In ICML deep learning workshop, volume 2, pp. 0. Lille, 2015.
Stefan M Kohlbacher, Thierry Langer, and Thomas Seidel. Qphar: quantitative pharmacophore
  activity relationship: method and validation. Journal of cheminformatics, 13(1):1–14, 2021.
Mario Krenn, Florian Häse, AkshatKumar Nigam, Pascal Friederich, and Alan Aspuru-Guzik. Self-
 referencing embedded strings (selfies): A 100% robust molecular string representation. Machine
 Learning: Science and Technology, 1(4):045024, 2020a.
Mario Krenn, Florian Häse, AkshatKumar Nigam, Pascal Friederich, and Alan Aspuru-Guzik. Self-
 referencing embedded strings (selfies): A 100% robust molecular string representation. Machine
 Learning: Science and Technology, 1(4):045024, 2020b.
Eunjoo Lee, Jiho Yoo, Huisun Lee, and Seunghoon Hong. Metadta: Meta-learning-based drug-
  target binding affinity prediction. In ICLR2022 Machine Learning for Drug Discovery, 2022.
Anthony Letai. Functional precision cancer medicine—moving beyond pure genomics. Nature
  medicine, 23(9):1028–1035, 2017.


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Juncai Li and Xiaofei Jiang. Mol-bert: An effective molecular representation with bert for molecular
  property prediction. Wireless Communications and Mobile Computing, 2021, 2021.
Xiaolin Li, Zunyao Wang, Hongling Liu, and Hongxia Yu. Quantitative structure–activity rela-
  tionship for prediction of the toxicity of phenols on photobacterium phosphoreum. Bulletin of
  environmental contamination and toxicology, 89(1):27–31, 2012.
Xinhao Li and Denis Fourches. Smiles pair encoding: a data-driven substructure tokenization al-
  gorithm for deep learning. Journal of Chemical Information and Modeling, 61(4):1560–1569,
  2021.
Yujia Li, Chenjie Gu, Thomas Dullien, Oriol Vinyals, and Pushmeet Kohli. Graph matching net-
  works for learning the similarity of graph structured objects. In International conference on
  machine learning, pp. 3835–3845. PMLR, 2019.
Tiqing Liu, Yuhmei Lin, Xin Wen, Robert N Jorissen, and Michael K Gilson. Bindingdb: a web-
  accessible database of experimentally determined protein–ligand binding affinities. Nucleic acids
  research, 35(suppl 1):D198–D201, 2007.
Youzhi Luo, Keqiang Yan, and Shuiwang Ji. Graphdf: A discrete flow model for molecular graph
  generation. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 7192–7203. PMLR, 2021.
Eoghan R Malone, Marc Oliva, Peter JB Sabatini, Tracy L Stockley, and Lillian L Siu. Molecular
  profiling for precision cancer therapies. Genome medicine, 12(1):1–19, 2020.
Łukasz Maziarka, Tomasz Danel, Sławomir Mucha, Krzysztof Rataj, Jacek Tabor, and Stanisław
  Jastrzebski. Molecule attention transformer. arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.08264, 2020.
J. E. J. Mills and P. M. Dean. Three-dimensional hydrogen-bond geometry and probability infor-
   mation from a crystal survey. Journal of Computer-Aided Molecular Design, 10(6):607–622,
   December 1996.
Paul Morris, Rachel St. Clair, William Edward Hahn, and Elan Barenholtz. Predicting binding from
  screening assays with transformer network embeddings. Journal of Chemical Information and
  Modeling, 60(9):4191–4199, 2020.
Jonas Mueller and Aditya Thyagarajan. Siamese recurrent architectures for learning sentence simi-
  larity. In Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence, volume 30, 2016.
Nina Nikolova and Joanna Jaworska. Approaches to measure chemical similarity–a review. QSAR
  & Combinatorial Science, 22(9-10):1006–1026, 2003.
Marcus Olivecrona, Thomas Blaschke, Ola Engkvist, and Hongming Chen. Molecular de-novo
 design through deep reinforcement learning. Journal of cheminformatics, 9(1):1–14, 2017.
Tatu Pantsar and Antti Poso. Binding affinity via docking: fact and fiction. Molecules, 23(8):1899,
  2018.
Sudeep Pushpakom, Francesco Iorio, Patrick A Eyers, K Jane Escott, Shirley Hopper, Andrew Wells,
  Andrew Doig, Tim Guilliams, Joanna Latimer, Christine McNamee, et al. Drug repurposing:
  progress, challenges and recommendations. Nature reviews Drug discovery, 18(1):41–58, 2019.
David Rogers and Mathew Hahn. Extended-connectivity fingerprints. Journal of chemical informa-
  tion and modeling, 50(5):742–754, 2010.
Diogo Santos-Martins, Leonardo Solis-Vasquez, Andreas F Tillack, Michel F Sanner, Andreas
  Koch, and Stefano Forli. Accelerating AutoDock4 with GPUs and gradient-based local search.
  Journal of Chemical Theory and Computation, 17(2):1060–1073, January 2021.
Johannes Schimunek, Lukas Friedrich, Daniel Kuhn, Friedrich Rippmann, Sepp Hochreiter, and
  Günter Klambauer. A generalized framework for embedding-based few-shot learning methods in
  drug discovery. ELLIS Machine Learning for Molecules workshop, 2021.
Selleck. Fda-approved drug library. URL https://www.selleckchem.com/screening/
  fda-approved-drug-library.html.


                                                12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Vidushi Sharma, Sharad Wakode, and Hirdesh Kumar. Structure-and ligand-based drug design: con-
  cepts, approaches, and challenges. Chemoinformatics and Bioinformatics in the Pharmaceutical
  Sciences, pp. 27–53, 2021.
Jacob O Spiegel and Jacob D Durrant. Autogrow4: an open-source genetic algorithm for de novo
  drug design and lead optimization. Journal of cheminformatics, 12(1):1–16, 2020.
Megan Stanley, John F Bronskill, Krzysztof Maziarz, Hubert Misztela, Jessica Lanini, Marwin
 Segler, Nadine Schneider, and Marc Brockschmidt. Fs-mol: A few-shot learning dataset of
 molecules. In Thirty-fifth Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems Datasets and
 Benchmarks Track (Round 2), 2021.
David C Swinney and Jason Anthony. How were new medicines discovered? Nature reviews Drug
  discovery, 10(7):507–519, 2011.
Apostolia-Maria Tsimberidou. Targeted therapy in cancer. Cancer chemotherapy and pharmacol-
  ogy, 76(6):1113–1132, 2015.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez,
  Łukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. Advances in neural informa-
  tion processing systems, 30, 2017.
RSK Vijayan, Jan Kihlberg, Jason B Cross, and Vasanthanathan Poongavanam. Enhancing preclin-
  ical drug discovery with artificial intelligence. Drug discovery today, 2021.
Fabien Vincent, Paula M Loria, Andrea D Weston, Claire M Steppan, Regis Doyonnas, Yue-Ming
  Wang, Kristin L Rockwell, and Marie-Claire Peakman. Hit triage and validation in phenotypic
  screening: considerations and strategies. Cell Chemical Biology, 27(11):1332–1346, 2020.
Sheng Wang, Yuzhi Guo, Yuhong Wang, Hongmao Sun, and Junzhou Huang. Smiles-bert: large
  scale unsupervised pre-training for molecular property prediction. In Proceedings of the 10th
  ACM international conference on bioinformatics, computational biology and health informatics,
  pp. 429–436, 2019.
David S Wishart, Craig Knox, An Chi Guo, Savita Shrivastava, Murtaza Hassanali, Paul Stothard,
  Zhan Chang, and Jennifer Woolsey. Drugbank: a comprehensive resource for in silico drug
  discovery and exploration. Nucleic acids research, 34(suppl 1):D668–D672, 2006.
Rachel LY Wong, Megan RE Wong, Chik Hong Kuick, Seyed Ehsan Saffari, Meng Kang
  Wong, Sheng Hui Tan, Khurshid Merchant, Kenneth TE Chang, Matan Thangavelu, Giridha-
  ran Periyasamy, et al. Integrated genomic profiling and drug screening of patient-derived cultures
  identifies individualized copy number-dependent susceptibilities involving pi3k pathway and 17q
  genes in neuroblastoma. Frontiers in oncology, pp. 4247, 2021.
Yutong Xie, Chence Shi, Hao Zhou, Yuwei Yang, Weinan Zhang, Yong Yu, and Lei Li. Mars:
  Markov molecular sampling for multi-objective drug discovery. arXiv preprint arXiv:2103.10432,
  2021.
Chengxi Zang and Fei Wang. Moflow: an invertible flow model for generating molecular graphs.
  In Proceedings of the 26th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery &
  Data Mining, pp. 617–626, 2020.
Wei Zheng, Natasha Thorne, and John C McKew. Phenotypic screens as a renewed approach for
 drug discovery. Drug discovery today, 18(21-22):1067–1073, 2013.
Zhenpeng Zhou, Steven Kearnes, Li Li, Richard N Zare, and Patrick Riley. Optimization of
  molecules via deep reinforcement learning. Scientific reports, 9(1):1–10, 2019.
Tian Zhu, Shuyi Cao, Pin-Chih Su, Ram Patel, Darshan Shah, Heta B Chokshi, Richard Szukala,
  Michael E Johnson, and Kirk E Hevener. Hit identification and optimization in virtual screening:
  Practical recommendations based on a critical literature analysis: Miniperspective. Journal of
  medicinal chemistry, 56(17):6560–6572, 2013.


                                                13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Table 4: Comparison of few-shot learning methods for continuous binding affinity prediction.
Results for all methods besides OSLS taken from Lee et al. (2022). While code was not made
                                                                                                2
                                                                                        p rm is
available, we attempted to as closely match the reported experimental setting as possible.
                                                                               2
reported for both a context set size of 10 and 20 ligands, and is defined as r · (1 − r − r02 ),
                                                                                            2

where r2 and r02 are Pearson’s correlation coefficient with and without intercept, respectively (Lee
et al., 2022).
                                           2                   2
                         Method           rm (10 ligands)     rm (20 ligands)
                         DeepDTA              0.299               0.360
                         MolTrans             0.363               0.410
                         MetaDTA(I)           0.468               0.383
                         MetaDTA(T)           0.374               0.433
                         OSLS                 0.523               0.543


A    F EW- SHOT LEARNING RESULTS

Although we focus on one-shot learning, few-shot learning is a related problem that is important in
the literature and finds applications in some forms of drug discovery. Few-shot learning involves
predicting the binding affinities of query ligands to a target not seen in training, using multiple
known support ligands and their affinities to the same target. We seek to reproduce the few-shot
binding affinity regression task previously described in the literature as closely as possible, using
data from a test split of BindingDB targets with more 20 compounds each, a support set randomly
drawn over the entire binding affinity range for a given target, and aim to predict the binding affinity
of randomly chosen query ligands from the same target (Lee et al., 2022).
To make OSLS compatible with few-shot learning, we encode each context compound and its affinity
using the context encoder, and then apply an additional “context attention” encoder over all encoded
context vectors that we average to produce a final context vector. This “context attention” module
is a Transformer encoder with 8 attention heads, 4 layers, and a final linear layer that takes each
context vector as a single element of the input sequence. We do not apply positional encoding, as
the ordering of each ligand in the sequence is not relevant. As shown in Table 4, OSLS produces
binding affinity predictions that are significantly more correlated to the true affinity than baseline
methods, for both a context set of size 10 and 20.

B    DATASET DETAILS

For training, we use BindingDB (Liu et al., 2007), a dataset of 2.6 million drug-target binding
affinities, for its high data quality and broad coverage across many protein targets. We exclude very
small or very large molecules, defined as less than 10 atoms or more than 70. We record affinities
in nanomolar units from the Kd column if available, and if not, Ki . If neither value is available,
we discard the molecule. When affinity is expressed as an upper or lower bound, we take the bound
itself as the known affinity. Then, we exclude all protein targets, and the compounds therein, if there
are less than 10 compounds with data against that target or if there are no compounds in any one
of the binding affinity ranges shown in Figure 2. Finally, we perform a target split, where we set
aside 40 targets for testing only, and train on the remaining targets, with target being defined by
protein sequence. We transform all binding affinity values using the base-10 logarithm, as binding
affinity often spans several orders of magnitude. All experimental settings involve compounds only
in the set-aside testing set of targets. While the train/test split is otherwise random, we make sure to
include the estrogen receptor in the test split, as Section 4.4 and 4.5 use the estrogen receptor in the
contained experiments.
The models trained on BindingDB were also tested on a number of different datasets. The Cancer
Cell Line Encyclopedia (Barretina et al., 2012) consists of interaction data of 24 drugs against a
wide array of 479 patient-derived cancer cell lines. For the results reported in Section 4.3, we use
the dataset reported in Table S11 of Barretina et al. (2012), and extract IC50 measurements for
each drug measured against each cell line. We exclude compounds with less than 10 or more than
70 atoms, and cell lines with less than 2 drugs with measured activity. For the results reported in


                                                  14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Section 4.4, we use the Selleck dataset of FDA-approved drugs (Selleck). For drugs that are reported
with a salt compound, we remove the salt from the SMILES string. We also exclude molecules based
on the same size constraints as above.

C    I MPLEMENTATION DETAILS

Hyperparameter tuning. We tuned hyperpameters of OSLS once for the task described in
Section 4.2 using a < 1 nM context compound, and used the same hyperparameters for all other
context affinity ranges and subsequent tasks. We measured model performance by Kendall’s tau
after 215 training steps. The following hyperparameters were entered into a grid search, and the
observed best value for each hyperparameter is bolded: learning rate={1e-4, 5e-4,
1e-5, 5e-5, 1e-6 5e-6}, batch size={512, 1024, 2048}, d model={256,
512}, n heads={8, 12, 16}, n layers={4, 6}

Training. We used an Adam optimizer with a base learning rate of 10−5 and 128 steps for learning
rate warmup, and then cosine annealed the learning rate to 0 over 215 steps. We applied dropout
(p = 0.1) over the scalar affinity projection, the token embeddings for both encoders, and at each
layer in the predictor network. All models were trained on a server using a single NVIDIA GTX
3080 GPU.

D    BASELINE DETAILS

OSLS-MLP. We implemented and trained a simpler but OSLS-like architecture to show the added
benefit of the more complex, Transformer-based OSLS model. This simpler model is loosely simi-
lar to Koch et al. (2015), except we untie the two encoders so that the context and query molecule
may be encoded differently (which, like OSLS, we call the context and query encoders), and per-
form regression instead of classification. In particular, the context must include a molecule rep-
resentation as well as activity information, but not the query, so using the same network to en-
code both would be non-optimal. To represent molecules, we use Morgan fingerprints with 1024
bits and a radius of 2, and both encoders as well as the predictor (the so-called “distance layer”
in Koch et al. (2015)) are feed-forward ReLU-activated networks with linear output. The dis-
tance layer consists of only a single linear layer, similarly to the previously proposed Siamese
network by Koch et al. (2015). For the context molecule, we multiply the binary fingerprint
vector of the compound with its activity value (the base-10 log of Kd or Ki ), so that each non-
zero element of the vector takes on the activity value. This is inspired by POT-DMC (Godden
et al., 2004), although we do not perform an additional element-wise normalization step. The
network is trained in a similar way to OSLS, with mean squared error loss between the real and
predicted binding affinity of the query molecule at the output of the distance layer. We trained
the model until convergence using the Adam optimizer. For hyperparameter optimization, we se-
lected the highest Kendall’s tau on the previously described ranking task with a context molecule of
< 1 nM affinity over a grid search of the following hyperparameters (the best hyperparameters
are bolded): encoder layers: {2, 3, 4}, encoder layer width: {1024},
batch size: {64, 128, 256}, learning rate: {1e-4, 1e-5, 1e-6}

MaLSTM. We implemented and trained the MaLSTM model (Mueller & Thyagarajan, 2016) to
predict binding similarity using the SMILES tokens of the context and the query molecules. As the
context and query encoders must share weights, we did not incorporate binding affinity information
for the context molecule, and we trained the model only to predict the similarity in binding affin-
ity between two molecules. To do this, we used single-layered LSTM blocks, as reported in the
original paper, that received learned embedded SMILES tokens as input. We computed similarity
using the last hidden state of both the query and context encoders (a and b, respectively), terminat-
ing at the end of each SMILES sequence, as defined by the exp of the L1 norm of the difference
between a and b: exp (||a − b||1 ). We used the mean squared error between the predicted simi-
larity and the true similarity, which we define as exp (−abs(πP (mc ) − πP (mq ))), where πP (mc )
and πP (mq ) are the true activity values of the context and query molecules, respectively, to the
target P . The selection of query and context molecules during training is identical to the process
described in Section 4.2. We trained the model until convergence using the Adam optimizer. Simi-


                                                 15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


larly to hyperparameter optimization for our model, we selected optimal hyperparameters based on
the highest Kendall’s tau on the previously described ranking task using a context ligand of < 1 nM,
and then used the same hyperparameters for all subsequent tasks. For hyperparameter optimization,
we performed a grid search over the following set of hyperparameters (the best hyperparameters
are bolded): batch size={256, 512, 1024}, embedding dim={64, 256, 512},
hidden dim={50, 100, 200, 500}, lr={1e-3, 1e-4, 1e-5}

Graph Matching Networks. We trained Graph Matching Networks for binary prediction
of molecular similarity using the implementation provided at https://github.com/
Lin-Yijie/Graph-Matching-Networks. For the binary classification task described in
Section 4.2, we trained and tested two separate models, one using a positive context molecule and
the other a negative. Specifically, while we used a similar context and query sampling procedure
as described in Section 4.2, we sampled the entire “active” range (< 10 nM) to generate context
molecules for training the first model, and the entire “negative” range (≥ 10 nM) for training
the second model. We did not provide the model with any continuous affinity data, as the model
is designed to operate only on two graphs with no additional information. As a training signal
for the first model, we assigned a “similar” label if the query molecule was active (as the query
and context molecules would both be active in that case), and otherwise “dissimilar”. For the
second model, we assigned a “similar” label if the query molecule was inactive, and “dissimilar”
otherwise. Molecules were represented as NetworkX graphs, with bond type represented as an
integer as an edge feature, and atom type as a one-hot encoded node feature. For the first model,
we reported ROC-AUC in a similar way as other baselines, but for the second model we reported
1 − AU C, as a dissimilar prediction to a non-active context molecule would actually indicate an
active query. We followed a similar hyperparameter optimization scheme as described previously,
except we used the highest ROC-AUC score instead of Kendall’s tau on the test set to evaluate
hyperparameter quality, as Graph Matching Networks are not applicable to ranking. We performed
a grid search over the following set of hyperparameters (the best hyperparameters are bolded):
graph representation dim={128, 256}, prop layers={5, 10}, lr={1e-3,
1e-4, 1e-5}, loss={margin, hamming}, batch size={10, 20, 40}

OpenEye Rapid Overlay of Chemical Structures (ROCS) OpenEye Scientific Software offers
Rapid Overlay of Chemical Structures (ROCS; Hawkins et al. (2006)), a program used here to de-
termine shape and electronic similarities between estradiol and drugs in the Selleck FDA-approved
drug database (Selleck). The similarity metrics used are ShapeCombo, which scores compounds
against estradiol with Gaussian spatial similarity estimations and TanimotoCombo, which combines
equal contributions of Gaussian spatial similarity estimations and the ImplicitMillsDean force field’s
(Mills & Dean, 1996) high-level chemical similarity estimations. To perform the ROCS analyses,
3D conformer generation of compounds in the Selleck database was required. The conformer gen-
eration was achieved using OpenEye’s OMEGA software (Hawkins et al., 2010), providing the
lowest-energy conformations which are then analyzed by ROCS. The result of ROCS analysis is
a scoring and ranking of Selleck database molecules by spatial and electronic similarity to estra-
diol. We only used ROCS as a baseline in the drug repositioning task, as conformer generation took
around a second per compound, which was too slow for the task in Section 4.2 that involved around
2 orders of magnitude more compounds.

E    G ENERATIVE MODELING
We selected a variational autoencoder (VAE, Kingma & Welling (2013)) as our generative model
due to its relatively easy training and ability to take advantage of differentiable objective functions.
We trained a simple feedforward VAE to reconstruct compounds from BindingDB (the same set as
used in other tasks) using byte-pair encoded SMILES tokens as a molecular representation. After
experimentation with other string-based molecular representations (raw SMILES tokens and SELF-
IES; Krenn et al. (2020a)), byte-pair encoding of SMILES strings (Li & Fourches, 2021) generated
the most reasonable molecular samples from sampling random locations in the latent space (i.e. the
fewest number of very large rings and uncommon atom and bond configurations). The byte pair-
encoded SMILES tokens for each molecule were embedded into 512 dimensions and then padded to
the maximum length, which was then flattened such that the input and output of the VAE had dimen-
sion max len · embedding dim. After the output of the VAE decoder, we unflattened the sequence


                                                  16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


into a max len × embedding dim matrix and applied softmax over each position in the sequence,
so that the summed probability of all possible tokens at each position in the sequence was 1. The
encoder and decoder of the VAE were mirrored, both having 3 1024-dimensional hidden layers with
ReLU activations and batch norm before the activation. We trained the VAE until convergence using
the Adam optimizer with a learning rate of 1e-4. The loss function was negative log-likelihood loss
between the true and reconstructed output plus a KL-divergence term on the latent space of 1024
dimensions. During training, we warmed up the weight of the KL-divergence loss starting from 0 to
1 at epoch 1,000 to avoid mode collapse.
Separately, we trained OSLS on BindingDB using the same hyperparameters as previously described
except using a random context compound from the entire binding affinity range, and with byte-
pair encoded SMILES instead of raw SMILES tokens so that the VAE and OSLS can be stacked,
following Eckmann et al. (2022). While the final trained model had worse performance than the
raw SMILES version (see Section 4.6), it was sufficient for this purpose. To make OSLS fully
differentiable so that it can be used as an objective function for the VAE, we applied Gumbel softmax
instead of regular softmax at the output of the VAE decoder, so that the output of the VAE was fully
discretized, but still allowed for differentiation through the “straight-through” technique, where the
output of Gumbel softmax is fully discretized in the forward pass but an approximate version is used
for the backward pass (Jang et al., 2016). With a set of discretized tokens, we were then able to
perform matrix multiplication on the one-hot encoded tokens (produced by Gumbel softmax) with
the weights of the embedding layer, which produces the same embeddings as the typical indexing-
based method, but in a differentiable manner. These embeddings were then fed into the encoders of
OSLS, and then the prediction head, making for a fully differentiable forward pass from VAE latent
space to output activity prediction. Similarly to Eckmann et al. (2022), we attached the input of the
differentiable OSLS architecture to the output of the VAE decoder, and propagated the gradients of
the OSLS output layer back to the latent space, altering the latent space in such a way as to generate
compounds with higher predicted activities.

Tanimoto similarity baseline. We trained a convolutional neural network to approximate Tani-
moto similarity between random compounds from the entire BindingDB dataset and estradiol, to
simulate a similarity-based molecular generation process. This surrogate model consisted of 3 1-D
convolutional layers, that take a sequence of 128-dim embedded SMILES byte-pair encoded tokens
as input, with a kernel size of 3 and stride of 1, ReLU activations, and a final 1-D max pooling layer.
The output of the convolutional layers was flattened, then fed to a 3-layer ReLU-activated feedfor-
ward network with batch normalization, which produced a final sigmoid-activated prediction of the
Tanimoto similarity. The network was trained until convergence using the Adam optimizer with a
learning rate of 1e-3 with mean squared error loss between real and predicted Tanimoto similarity to
estradiol, and the embedding layers were made differentiable, and hence able to be attached to the
VAE decoder, using the matrix multiplication trick described in the previous paragraph. There was a
strong correlation between the real and network-predicted Tanimoto similarity on a held-out test set
(r2 > 0.9), meaning the network was an effective surrogate model for Tanimoto similarity. As the
hyperparameters of OSLS were not optimized specifically for the generative task, and the trained
model already had close to optimal performance, no hyperparameter optimization was performed
for the Tanimoto surrogate model. Similarly to OSLS, we attached the Tanimoto surrogate model to
the output of the VAE decoder and backpropagated its output back to the latent space of the VAE so
that the generated molecules were of higher Tanimoto similarity to estradiol.

Other baselines. We compare the target-free generative models with REINVENT (Olive-
crona et al. (2017); https://github.com/MarcusOlivecrona/REINVENT), MARS (Xie
et al. (2021); https://github.com/bytedance/markov-molecular-sampling),
and LIMO (Eckmann et al. (2022); https://github.com/Rose-STL-Lab/LIMO), all re-
cently proposed generative models that can use full 3D target information. We ran each generative
model until 256 valid molecules were generated, and then computed metrics on those molecules.
We set the objective function for all models to be the docked energy to the estrogen receptor (as de-
scribed in the “Docking details” paragraph). Default hyperparameters were used for all models, and
pretrained models were used where applicable (the Prior of REINVENT, and the VAE of LIMO).

Metrics. We report the following metrics to evaluate the quality of generated molecules. For all
methods, we only report these metrics on valid SMILES strings.


                                                  17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


      • Best (nM) the lowest generated docked affinity value in nanomoles/liter.
      • # clusters the number of Butina clusters (Butina, 1999), where each cluster consists of
        molecules that have at least a 0.6 Tanimoto similarity to each other, computed using 1024-
        dimensional Morgan fingerprints with a radius of 2.
      • Diversity one minus the average pairwise Tanimoto similarity between molecules. We use
        the same number of molecules across all methods to compute this metric as scores may
        be different across sets of molecules with different sizes even if the overall number of
        compound scaffolds, which are most relevant to drug discovery, are the same.
      • Novelty the proportion of molecules that are less than 0.2 Tanimoto similarity to estradiol.

Docking details. We used AutoDock-GPU (Santos-Martins et al., 2021) to evaluate the molecules
from generative modeling. A grid file of PDB ID 1ERR was produced by AutoGrid4, using the same
binding site as estradiol. 10 random conformers of each ligand to score were then generated using
obabel 3.1.0, docked against the grid file using the default AutoDock-GPU parameters, and then the
best energy was taken from the 10 runs as the final docked energy.


                                                18
