D ISTRIBUTIONAL M ETA -G RADIENT R EINFORCEMENT
L EARNING
 Haiyan Yin, Shuicheng Yan & Zhongwen Xu∗
 Sea AI Lab



                                              A BSTRACT
            Meta-gradient reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms have substantially boosted
            the performance of RL agents by learning an adaptive return. All the existing al-
            gorithms adhere to the same reward learning principle, where the adaptive return
            is simply formulated in the form of expected cumulative rewards, upon which the
            policy and critic update rules are specified under well-adopted distance metrics.
            In this paper, we present a novel algorithm that builds on the success of meta-
            gradient RL algorithms and effectively improves such algorithms by following a
            simple recipe, i.e., going beyond the expected return to formulate and learn the
            return in a more expressive form, value distributions. To this end, we first for-
            mulate a distributional return that could effectively capture bootstrapping and dis-
            counting behaviors over distributions, to form an informative distributional return
            target in value update. Then we derive an efficient meta update rule to learn the
            adaptive distributional return with meta-gradients. For empirical evaluation, we
            first present an illustrative example on a toy two-color grid-world domain, which
            validates the benefit of learning distributional return over expectation; then we
            conduct extensive comparisons on a large-scale RL benchmark Atari 2600, where
            we confirm that our proposed method with distributional return works seamlessly
            well with the actor-critic framework and leads to state-of-the-art median human
            normalized score among meta-gradient RL literature.


1       I NTRODUCTION
Meta-gradient reinforcement learning (MGRL) (Xu et al., 2018b; Sutton, 2022) is a family of al-
gorithms that leverage the gradient of the gradient descent update to learn better objectives for
reinforcement learning (RL). The MGRL paradigm has achieved substantial performance break-
throughs and dominated the state-of-the-art model-free RL algorithms in various domains, such as
Atari (Xu et al., 2018b; Zahavy et al., 2020; Flennerhag et al., 2022), DMLab (Zahavy et al., 2020),
and DeepMind Control (Zahavy et al., 2020).
The major algorithmic research on MGRL has been developing towards more and more ambitious
targets. For example, it starts from learning two fundamental hyperparameters (i.e., discount factor
γ and bootstrapping factor λ) (Xu et al., 2018b), and then goes to self-tuning 20+ hyperparameters
in a high-performing RL agent (Zahavy et al., 2020). As a powerful tool for discovering RL seman-
tics from the data, MGRL has been utilized to discover intrinsic rewards (Zheng et al., 2018; 2020),
auxiliary tasks (Veeriah et al., 2019), options (Veeriah et al., 2021), etc. Recently, it has even been
used to tackle the more flexible form of parameterizing the objective, i.e. using black-box neural
networks to learn the objectives from the environment interactions and learning context (Xu et al.,
2020; Oh et al., 2020). However, MGRL research has been limited to scalar form, where either
meta-parameters are scalar ones (Xu et al., 2018b; Zahavy et al., 2020), or outputs of meta networks
are scalars (Xu et al., 2020). This is in line with the traditional definition of returns (Sutton & Barto,
1998), as an expected sum of discounted rewards. However, note that MGRL is not limited to pro-
viding RL objectives, while we could also meta-learn a broader concept, e.g., learning rate (Sutton,
1981; Baik et al., 2020; Pinion et al., 2021) and exploration (Gupta et al., 2018; Xu et al., 2018a).
In this work, we investigate an essential step of extending the algorithmic scope of MGRL to distri-
butional methods, where RL algorithms take away the expectations in Bellman updates and consider
    ∗
        Corresponding author: Zhongwen Xu


                                                     1
a richer formulation of value distributions (Bellemare et al., 2017). This is essential for RL updates
and even more critical for MGRL which enjoys multiple satisfying properties. Sparse signals are
hard to learn in RL, and the bi-level optimization nature of the MGRL makes it extremely diffi-
cult to propagate helpful signals to learn meta-parameters. By modeling value distributions, the
RL algorithm can naturally produce a rich set of predictions, which provides dense and informative
signals for meta-optimization. Moreover, some distributional RL methods come with new opti-
mization properties in the loss form (not available in conventional non-distributional RL methods),
e.g., with KL divergence between discrete distributions (Bellemare et al., 2017) or quantile regres-
sion (Dabney et al., 2018b). Despite the great accomplishment of distributional RL for non-meta
policy learning, the attempt to learn a distributional meta objective has not yet been made by any
prior MGRL methods.
This paper aims to develop a novel distributional meta-gradient RL algorithm that can discover
meaningful value distributions online. Furthermore, we aim to both methodologically establish a
novel distributional meta-gradient framework and find out the intriguing effect of applying distribu-
tional meta-gradient techniques on real-world problems, for which we conduct extensive evaluations
with a motivating toy domain as well as large-scale end-to-end policy training problems. The eval-
uation results well demonstrate the effectiveness of our method.
Overall, the contributions of our paper are as follows:

    (i) We present a novel meta-gradient variant of the RL method, which considers approximating
        the distributional return in its value update.
    (ii) Our proposed distributional meta-gradient algorithm is general and can be compatible with
         almost all the existing meta-gradient RL approaches.
 (iii) We conduct an extensive empirical study on a toy control domain and the large-scale bench-
       mark Atari 2600. Our results have demonstrated substantial improvements in our method over
       strong baseline methods on the major evaluation domains.

2     R ELATED W ORK

In recent decades, meta-learning, or learning-to-learn, has been explored extensively within the
machine learning community (Hospedales et al., 2022; Sutton, 2022), e.g., learning a neural net-
work update rule (Bengio et al., 1990), adapting the learning rate (Sutton, 1992; Schraudolph &
Giannakopoulos, 1999), and transferring domain-invariant knowledge (Thrun & Mitchell, 1995).
Notably, it has also driven many advances in the RL problems. One direction for such attempts is to
learn meta-optimizers (Andrychowicz et al., 2016; Wichrowska et al., 2017) or meta- policies (Duan
et al., 2016; Wang et al., 2017) parameterized by recurrent neural networks, which capture the high-
level time-dependent information as meta knowledge. Another direction is gradient-based meta-
learning, introduced in Model-Agnostic Meta-Learning (MAML) (Finn et al., 2017a), as well as
its followup works (Finn & Levine, 2018; Finn et al., 2017b; Grant et al., 2018; Al-Shedivat et al.,
2018). Those works focus on learning a good initialization of the model for one or few-shot multi-
task learning with meta-gradients.
In this paper, we consider solving meta-gradient RL problem from a fresh new angle, i.e., optimiz-
ing the adaptive return as distributions. Policy learning with distributional return has been con-
sidered in existing RL literature for off-policy learning only. All the existing methods fall into the
strand of DQN variants which replace the n-step return in DQN with distributions during Q-learning.
In (Bellemare et al., 2017), the return is formulated as a categorical distribution with fixed values
for the base, where the Bellman operator shifts the base values of the distribution, and the target
distribution is contracted and projected upon the fixed base. In (Dabney et al., 2018b), the return is
formulated as quantile distributions, where the algorithm tries to learn the values corresponding to
each quantile, alleviating the need for distribution projection or value range approximation. In (Dab-
ney et al., 2018a), the quantiles are approximated by mapping from values drawn from the random
distribution (proposals) into quantiles, resulting in an unlimited number of implicit distributions.
In (Wang et al., 2019), the proposals in implicit quantiles are replaced by the output of a learned
proposal network. In contrast to the aforementioned off-policy distributional RL methods, we tackle
a novel problem of learning adaptive distributional return in on-policy actor-critic algorithms with
meta-gradient.


                                                  2
Compared to existing meta-gradient RL methods with scalar return, our method applies a distribu-
tional return, which is advantageous as (1) it can offer a more informative target to approximate,
(2) it naturally provides a richer set of hyperparameters to be tuned with white-box meta-learning,
which offers more feedback in the meta-gradient, and (3) approximating such a distributional return
naturally results in meaningful auxiliary tasks to facilitate more efficient policy and value training.

3    P RELIMINARY
Quantile Distributional Value Update In this work, we consider learning the return as a quantile
distribution. One reason for us to choose quantile distribution rather than any other type of distri-
bution is, the Bellman operator for quantile distribution does not need to perform projection (lose
precision) or manually define the return boundaries, as C51 (Bellemare et al., 2017) does. Also, our
proposed method employs a deterministic prediction function for quantiles which could be conve-
niently trained, unlike the stochastic mappings employed by IQN (Dabney et al., 2018a), where the
stochasticity would bring the noise to the meta gradient and confuse the training of adaptive return.
We denote the distributional return function over each state s as Zθ (s), where θ is its parameter set.
With quantile, the distributional return can be approximated by a uniform mixture of N Dirac func-
                          PN
tions, i.e., Zθ (s) := N1 q=1 δθq (s), where θq is the parameter for the q-th Dirac function which can
be trained by quantile value update. For a given quantile distribution Z and a quantile τ , the value
of the quantile function is denoted as Fθ−1 (τ ). The quantile distribution can be trained by quan-
tile regression loss Lqrτ (·) which penalizes overestimation errors with weight τ and underestimation
errors with weight 1 − τ , where τ ∈ [0, 1]:
             Lqr

              τ (·) = EẐ∼Z ρτ (Ẑ − θ) ,       where ρτ (u) = u (τ − δ{u<0} ), ∀u ∈ R.             (1)
To smooth the quantile loss at zero, we could apply Huber loss over it, i.e.
                                       1 2
                                        2u ,                     if |u| ≤ k;
                       Lhuber
                         k     (u) =             1                                                       (2)
                                        k (|u| − 2 k),           otherwise.
Thus the Quantile Huber Loss can be derived as follows,
                                    qr
                                  J(τ,k) = |τ − δ{u<0} | · Lhuber
                                                            k     (u).                                   (3)

White-box Meta-Gradient RL White-box meta-gradient RL methods use a bi-level optimization
scheme to update important high-level parameters to characterize the return and the composed loss
function by meta gradient. We denote the high-level parameter set as η. In the prior work from (Xu
et al., 2018b), η = {γ, λ}; later, loss weights and importance sampling threshold have been added
to η. We denote the RL loss function as J (τ, θ, η). During bi-level optimization, the meta-gradient
methods first update the model parameter θ with the gradient f (·) w.r.t θ:
                                     ∂J (τ, θ, η)             ∂f (τ, θ, η)    ∂ 2 J (τ, θ, η)
                   f (τ, θ, η) = ζ                ,                        =ζ                 ,          (4)
                                         ∂θ                       ∂η              ∂θ ∂η
where ζ is the learning rate and the first-order gradient function f (·) is differentiable w.r.t η Then, an
alternative batch of transitions τ ′ is sampled to optimize the model in the second update stage, where
outer objective J ′ computed from the updated model parameters θ′ and a reference hyperparameters
set η ′ is optimized (e.g., default values for η ′ ) w.r.t η:
                                 ∂J ′ (τ ′ , θ′ , η ′ )   ∂J ′ (τ ′ , θ′ , η ′ ) ∂θ′
                                                        =                       ·    .                   (5)
                                        ∂η                      ∂θ′               ∂η
Since θ′ is differentiable w.r.t η, the meta gradient is computed as the gradient of the outer objective
J ′ (τ ′ , θ′ , η ′ ) w.r.t η. Thus meta-gradient RL enables the effective high-level parameters in learning-
to-learn to compute the adaptive return and/or the importance of loss function components.

4    D ISTRIBUTIONAL M ETA -G RADIENT RL A LGORITHM
Actor-Critic with Distributional λ-Return The principle of RL is to optimize the agent’s cumu-
lative rewards, also known as the return (denoted as G), from the sequence of experiences collected


                                                          3
from the environment, where the experience at time t id denoted as a tuple τt = (St , At , Rt , St+1 )
with St , At and Rt denoting the state, action, and reward for the state-action pair at step t, respec-
tively. In practice, the return can be formulated in various forms. One well-adopted form of return
is via bootstrapping. Let T denote the terminal step and γ the discount factor. An example n-step
return (Sutton & Barto, 1998) is defined as:
                    Gn-step (τt ) = Rt+1 + γRt+2 + γ 2 Rt+3 + ..., +γ n−1 v(St+n ),                  (6)
                            λ                                            λ
                          G (τt ) = Rt+1 + γ(1 − λ)v(St+1 ) + γλG (τt+1 ),                           (7)
where the return is the sum of n step rewards and the bootstrapped value for St+n . To better leverage
the return Gt derived over multiple steps, there is also a λ-return, or TD(λ) return, which measures
the return as the weighted TD error over all time steps (Sutton, 1988), where there is another high-
level parameter λ introduced to characterize the λ-return function. When λ = 0, it terminates the
bootstrapping from further steps, and when λ = 1, it promotes pure bootstrapping. White-box meta-
gradient RL methods attempt to meta-learn the crucial hyperparameters characterizing the λ-return
with a bi-level optimization regime.
We consider the training of actor-critic agents with the critic approximating a quantile distributional
return predicted by a value function Zθ (S), where S is a state, θ is the parameters of the value
function, and Zθ (S) follows the distributional Bellman optimality operator (Bellemare et al., 2017),
                                          D
                                 T Z(S) := R(S, A) + γ ES ′ ∼P (·|S,A) Z(S ′ ),                      (8)
            D
where U := V denotes equality of probability laws, i.e., the random variable U is distributed ac-
cording to the same law as V. Our proposed distributional adaptive return can naturally result in a
larger set of self-tuning hyperparameters. The critic is updated towards a canonical distributional
λ-return denoted as Γλt following a distributional TD(λ) algorithm,
                D
          Γλt := Rt+1 + γt+1 (1 − λt+1 ) Z(St+1 ) + γt+1 λt+1 Γλt+1 ,
                           ∞  Y k
                                                                                                     (9)
               D          X
              := Z(St ) +          γt+j λt+j    Rt+k+1 + γt+k+1 Z(St+k+1 ) − Z(St+k ) ,
                          k=0 j=1             |                       {z             }
                                                                         δt+k

where Γλt is essentially the sum of the predicted return distribution Z(St ) and the backpropagated
TD error over all the future steps δt+1:∞ , where the later could be computed iteratively and weighted
by the product of discounting factor and trace in their exponential forms. When training the actor-
critic with Γλt under a distributed regime like IMPALA (Espeholt et al., 2018) for efficient learning,
the training data would become off-policy and we need to perform off-policy correction to get the
unbiased gradient. Hence distributional λ-return with off-policy correction in the form of v-trace
could be defined iteratively as follows,
                    ∞             k
      D             X             Y                                              π(Am |Sm )
  Γλt := Z(St ) +         ct+k          γt+j ct+j δt+k ,   where cm = λm min c̄,               , (10)
                                  j=1
                                                                                 µ(Am |Sm )
                    k=0

where cm is the truncated importance sampling (IS) ratio with c̄ being the clipping threshold, and
π(·), µ(·) are the present and previous behavior policies, respectively. To update the distributional
actor-critic with off-policy correction, we optimize the following objective function:
             qr
                (sg Γλ (S) , Zθ (S)),

  LZ = J(τ,k)                                                       LH = H πθ (·|S) ,
              N
           1 X                                     π(A|S)
  AZ =           sg Γλ(q) (S) − Zθq (τ ) · min c̄,           ,           Lπ = −AZ (τ ) · log πθ (A|S),
           N q=1                                   µ(A|S)
   Lθ = wπ · Lπ + wH · LH + wZ · LZ ,                                                               (11)
where AZ denotes the advantage computed as the sum over quantile error of the distributional return,
Γλ(q) (S) denotes the q-th quantile in the distributional λ-return, LZ /Lπ /LH and wZ /wπ /wH are
functions and weights for the value/policy/entropy losses respectively, sg(·) is the stop-gradient
function and the first term in Lπ corresponds to the advantage.


                                                       4
Distributional Meta-Gradient Update Our proposed distributional Meta-Gradient RL algorithm
adopts a white-box bi-level optimization scheme to learn adaptive distributional return Γηt . We
denote the meta parameters characterizing the adaptive return Γλt and important weights in the actor-
critic loss function Lθ as a set η, where η = {λ, γ, α, wH , wπ , wZ }, where α is the weight for the
leaky-vtrace in STACX (Zahavy et al., 2020) to control the off-policy correction ratio. Formally, the
adaptive return can be formulated as follows,
                                                      n           ∞  Y
                                                                     k        o
                       D                                          X
                  Γηt := Rt+1 + γ(1 − λ) Z(St+1 ) + γλ Z(St+1 ) +      γλ δt+k ,
                                                                          k=1      j=1
                                                              |               {z                 }
                                                                             Γη
                                                                              t+1

                                                  ∞  Y
                                                     k
                        D                         X
                       := Rt+1 + γZ(St+1 ) + γλ               γλ δt+k .
                                                  k=1   j=1

In other words, we can consider a quantile-specific discounting and bootstrapping operator over the
distributions and vectorize the λ and γ in the set η. Furthermore, we can also specify a vectorial
quantile loss weight wZ . Thus, our method results in a much larger hyperparameter set compared
with STACX, i.e., |η| for DrMG, STACX and MG are 3 × nZ + 3, 7 × nblk , and 2, where nZ and
nblk represents the dimension of quantiles and the number of STACX’s multi-head blocks.
At the inner loop, the inner loss Lin                                                 ′
                                   θ (τ, θ, η) is first computed to update θ towards θ using the
gradient ∂Lin
            θ (τ, θ, η)/∂θ, where τ is a batch of data sampled to update the inner loss and η is
drawn from the meta parameters.
                               ∂Lin
                                  θ (τ, θ, η)           ∂LZ            ∂Lπ          ∂LH
                    f (τ ; θ; η) = −ζ           = −ζwZ        − ζwπ         − ζwH        ,                  (12)
                                     ∂θ                  ∂θ             ∂θ           ∂θ
where the gradient of the distributional value loss is derived as follows,
                                                     ∂Zθ (S)
                                     η
          ∂LZ (τ, θ, η) wZ Γ (S) − Zθ (S) ∂θ ,                    if |Γη (S) − Zθ (S)| ≤ k;
                        =                                                                                   (13)
               ∂θ          wZ Γη (τ )−Zθ (S) ∂Zθ (S) ,            otherwise.
                                   |Γη (τ )−Zθ (S)|  ∂θ

At the outer loop, we evaluate the high-level parameters η by sampling an alternative batch of tran-
sitions τ ′ and computing the outer loss Lout    ′ ′ ′             ′
                                            η (τ , θ , η ), where η corresponds to some reference
hyperparameters for η, e.g., the default values predefined like those in other algorithms. The meta
gradient to update the meta parameter η is defined as follows,
                       ∂Lout     ′ ′ ′
                           η (τ , θ , η )       ∂Lout    ′ ′ ′
                                                    η (τ , θ , η ) ∂θ
                                                                      ′
                                                                                              ∂ 2 Lin
                                                                                                   θ (τ, θ, η)
    f ′ (τ ′ , θ′ , η ′ ) = ζ ′           = ζ′            ′
                                                                        = f (τ ′ ; θ′ ; η ′ )                  ,
                               ∂η                      ∂θ          ∂η                              ∂θ ∂η
                                                                                                             (14)
where ζ ′ is the learning rate for the outer loss. The meta gradient evaluated at the outer loss interacts
                                     ′                                            ∂ 2 Lin
                                                                                       θ (τ,θ,η)
with meta parameters through ∂θ    ∂η , which could be further expanded as             ∂θ ∂η        based on the
chain rule. With the definition of the distributional return, meta-learning variants become learning
the bootstrapping or termination condition over the distributions, rather than scalars, which would
bring informative information for return approximation with a greater degree of adaptability. Our
proposed Distributional return Meta-Gradient algorithm is denoted as DrMG.

5      E XPERIMENTS
5.1      T WO C OLORS G RID -W ORLD

Settings We consider a 7 × 7 grid-world,
where the green-colored agent is assigned to
collect the key to open the door at the yellow-
colored goal. There are two types of keys; col-         Figure 1: Two colors grid-world environment and the
lecting one of them would get a reward of 0.7           reward curve for DrMG, MG and a vanilla distribu-
and the other 0.3. The agent receives a reward          tional method QR without meta-gradient.


                                                        5
of +1 upon successful navigation. After an episode terminates, we randomly generate locations for
both keys and the goal. We toggle the reward at every 1e5 steps to investigate the agent’s adaptation
ability. Thus a key-agnostic optimal agent could collect +1.5 − rpen ∗ T expected return, where rpen
and T are the step-wise penalty and episode horizon. We assume that the agent approximating the
distributional return should be able to encode the dynamics in its return so that it can adapt better
compared to the baseline agent approximating the scalar return.

Results We compare our proposed DrMG agent with a meta-gradient baseline algorithm MG as
well as a vanilla distributional algorithm QR, where QR is an IMPALA variant which updates a
non-adaptive distributional return Γλ . The results are shown in Figure 1. We configure DrMG,
MG, and QR agents by almost identical hyperparameter sets. Since the RL agents are unaware of
the reward toggling during policy training, their adaptation ability is characterized by their efficiency
in modeling/approximating the return during the training process. We notice that after the reward
toggle, DrMG achieves peaks with substantially higher return compared to that for MG and QR.
Furthermore, QR slightly outperforms MG, which shows that approximating distributional return
benefits the task adaptation.

5.2   ATARI 2600 200M

Settings We testify our method on Atari 2600 Benchmark (Bellemare et al., 2013) under the 200M
setting, where the setting aligns with prior works (Xu et al., 2018b; Zahavy et al., 2020). Our agent
is developed upon IMPALA (Espeholt et al., 2018), an efficient distributed actor-critic framework.
The actor-critic module employs a deep ResNet (He et al., 2016) as the backbone, which is a feed-
forward model without LSTM. The network takes 4 grayscale images with size 84×84 as input. The
backbone is connected to a policy-value head where the value head outputs distributional quantiles
with a dimension of N and the policy head outputs policy logits with a dimension of |A|. The
meta module is a joint set of scalars and vectors, with each vector entry representing a distributional
hyperparameter in η.
For training, we strictly follow the 200M regime without extra data or experience reuse. During
training, we sample two batches with identical batch sizes and use them to form two combinations
of inner data and outer data to compute the meta-gradient update loop twice. Each task runs with
identical hyperparameters and device configurations for hardware and software. We highlight that
DrMG brings very little computational overhead; namely, DrMG only brings |N − 1| ∗ 256 more
parameters compared to MG and it is more computationally efficient than STACX since STACX
introduces multiple policy-value heads as its auxiliary task components. All the games employ the
same wrapper, for which the action repeat is 4, stick action probability is 0, episodic life is false, and
the maximum episode length is 108,000. All the tasks adopt the ‘no-ops starts’ protocol, where at
the start of each episode, the agent randomly samples a period to take a dummy action ‘0’ up to 30
steps. We present the environment wrapper setting in Sec. A.1.2 and the detailed model/experiment
configurations in Sec. A.2. For comparison, we evaluate the performance on each game in terms of
                                                       Rours −R
human normalized score (HNS) defined as HNS = R                 rand , where Rours /R
                                                       human −Rrand                       rand /Rhuman
are the episode rewards for our/random/human expert policies.

Results For evaluation over the 57-task bench-
mark, we compute the median HNS for each
method. We consider the following five most re-
lated baselines: C51, QR-DQN, Implicit Quan-
tile Network (IQN), Self-Tuning Actor-Critic with
auXiliary tasks (STACX) and MG. The first three
are off-policy value-based methods which are DQN-
variants, while STACX and MG are white-box meta-
gradient RL baselines that are IMPALA-variants, the
same as DrMG. There is another recently published
meta-gradient RL work Bootstrapped Meta-Gradient
(BMG), which is excluded here for comparison be-
cause the work employs a different Atari 2600 bench-
mark with altered task and model settings, motivated Figure 2: The learning curve in terms of me-
                                                            dian HNS evaluated on DrMG and its baselines.

                                                    6
       (a) Breakout (fast)             (b) DemonAttack (fast)             (c) Gopher (medium)


    (d) Kangaroo (medium)              (e) Robotank (medium)           (f) SpaceInvaders (medium)


     (g) BeamRider (slow)               (h) Centipede (slow)                (i) Zaxxon (slow)

Figure 3: Reward learning curves for our method and meta-gradient RL baselines MG and STACX
evaluated on a representative set of Atari games. Overall, DrMG results in stable and efficient
progress in reward learning across all the fast / medium / slow groups. Its median HNS score on
Atari 2600 benchmark is 379%.

to solve orthogonal problems than our work. The detailed explanation is presented in Ap-
pendix A.1.2. We show the learning curves for median HNS in Figure 2. We do not present the
curve for STACX in Figure 2, because the performance of our carefully reimplemented STACX
drops quite a lot compared to the score in its original paper (even the reimplementation adopts an
identical framework, hyperparameters, and model architectures, due to the notorious reproduction
issue for Atari 2600 200M series of methods with missing official releases of the baselines experi-
mental code). Nevertheless, the learning curves for STACX on representative games can be found
in Figure 3.
From the median HNS curves shown in Figure 2, we can first observe that DrMG performs sub-
stantially better than the conventional distributional RL methods C51, QR-DQN and IQN, which
demonstrates updating the distributional return adaptively with meta-gradient and the actor-critic
framework is more effective than updating the distributional returns by off-policy DQN variants.
We also find that DrMG brings noticeable performance improvement over the strong white-box
meta-gradient RL method MG. The median HNS for DrMG is 379% and that reported in MG is
287%. These results show that optimizing the distributional return in our proposed λ-distributional
form is more efficient than learning the scalar return.
We present the learning curves of our method, MG and STACX on a set of representative Atari
games in Figure 3. For computational efficiency, the training adopts an early stopping policy, where
the training terminates after the agent surpasses a fixed HNS standard (450% in our evaluation) for
¿2M steps. We classify the games into three strands {fast, medium, slow}, based on the behav-
ior of the RL agents to hit the designated HNS standard, where fast={Breakout, DemonAttack},
medium={SpaceInvaders, Robotank, Gopher, Kangaroo} and slow = {BeamRider, Zaxxon, Cen-
tipede}. Games in fast, medium and slow groups consume < 10%, 30% − 60% and ∼200M frames


                                                 7
       (a) Breakout (fast)                (b) Krull (medium)             (c) SpaceInvaders (medium)

Figure 4: Ablation study results on comparing DrMG with a non-adaptive distributional actor-
critic baseline QR. Baselines learning with non-adaptive distributional return performs substantially
worse than DrMG.


to hit the HNS, respectively. We examine the fast group to show that learning the distributional
return in DrMG would not slow down the learning process compared to its counterparts learning
scalar return. On the classic Atari game Breakout, DrMG converges noticeably faster than MG and
STACX, and on DemonAttack, DrMG learns as fast as MG. It is also desirable to evaluate learning
efficiency for the games from the medium group since different methods behave very differently in
making progress in those tasks. From the results, we can see DrMG progresses significantly faster
than the other two methods in Robotank and Kangaroo. In Kangaroo, our method saves almost 1/3
and 1/2 frames compared to MG and STACX. In SpaceInvaders, the progress of DrMG is compa-
rable to the others. In the slow group, the RL algorithms strive to progress with slow learning paces.
All three games are challenging ones for our method as well as the other baselines to achieve high
HNS. So, their performance on them is crucial to derive the median HNS score, i.e., pulling back
anyone could potentially lower the median HNS. We can observe that DrMG leads to fairly stable
performance among those in slow group. In BeamRider, Centipede and Zaxxon, DrMG achieve
better asymptotic rewards than the baselines. It is also shown in Figure 3 that the performance of
STACX is not ideal, e.g., irregular performance in DemonAttack and Kangaroo.

5.3   A BLATION S TUDY

We perform ablation studies to investigate the effects of the following designs in our method: (i)
the adaptive distributional return vs. non-adaptive distributional return; (ii) λ-distributional return
vs. n-step distributional return; (iii) vector hyperparameter η vs. scalar η; (iv) adopting BMG’s
bootstrapped inner steps on top of our method, where the results of ablation study (iv) are presented
in appendix A.3 for detailed comparison/discussion.

Adaptive vs. non-adaptive distributional return We investigate the effects of adaptive/non-
adaptive distributional return by comparing DrMG with two ablated baselines. The meta param-
eter set is split into two groups η = {η0 , η1 } , where η0 = {λ, γ, α} and η1 = {wH , wπ , wZ }.
The first baseline only meta-update η1 , denoted as DrMG(η1 ) (complete version is denoted as


       (a) Breakout (fast)              (b) Robotank (medium)              (c) Kangaroo (medium)

Figure 5: Ablation study results on comparing the λ-return used in DrMG with an ablated baseline
DrMG+n-step which replaces the λ-distributional return with an n-step distributional return, where
we consider two cases n = 3 and n = 5.


                                                  8
       (a) Breakout (fast)            (b) SpaceInvaders (medium)              (c) Centipede (slow)

Figure 6: Ablation study results for comparing our proposed vector hyperparameter set η
(DrMG(η)) with a scalar set hyperparameters η̄ (DrMG(η̄)). DrMG(η̂) performs comparable to
DrMG(η) the fast and medium games and underperforms DrMG(η) in the slow game.
DrMG(η0 , η1 )). The second baseline is QR, a non-meta method equivalent to DrMG({}). We com-
pare them in Breakout, Krull, and SpaceInvaders. The results are shown in Figure 4. We first notice
that both versions of non-adaptive distributional λ-return work considerably well with the actor-
critic IMPALA framework (outperform their corresponding DQN variants by large margins). Using
QR can learn as smoothly as DrMG in Krull but for the other two domains, it underperforms DrMG,
which shows the effectiveness of using meta-gradient to optimize distributional return. DrMG(η1 )
outperforms QR in 2/3 games, but it underperforms DrMG(η0 , η1 ), which demonstrates the superi-
ority of meta-learning adaptive return in distributional meta-gradient algorithms.

λ-distributional return vs. n-step distributional return We investigate the effects of λ-/n-
step distributional return by comparing DrMG with a meta-gradient RL baseline that replaces
the λ-distributional return by an n-step return computed over the return distributions, denoted as
DrMG+n-step. We consider two values for n in evaluation, where n = 3 and n = 5, i.e., resulting
in baselines DrMG+3-step and DrMG+5-step. We adopt three domains, DemonAttack, SpaceIn-
vaders, and Centipede. The results are shown in Figure 5. We can observe that replacing λ-return
with n-step return substantially pulls down the rewards even in the fast game Breakout. This fur-
ther confirms that backpropagating the distributional TD errors from λ-return is highly efficient to
formulate the adaptive distributional return target.

Vector hyperparameters η vs. scalar hyperparameters η̄ We then investigate the effects of vec-
tor hyperparameters η vs. scalar hyperparameters η̄ by training DrMG with two kinds of adaptive
distributional return parameterizations. When using scalar hyperparameters η̄, the return for each
quantile defined in Γλ shares the same discounting factor γ, trace λ, as well as cost for the quantile
regression loss. When using a vector form of η, each quantile head enjoys a quantile-specific pa-
rameterization for the adaptive return. We evaluate DrMG(η) and DrMG(η̄) in Breakout, SpaceIn-
vaders and Centipede, where the baselines are most distinguishable with DrMG(η̄). The results
are presented in Figure 6. We observe that DrMG(η̂) performs fairly well in Breakout as well as
SpaceInvaders, where other ablated baselines easily fall in the latter case. However, for the slow
game Centipede, DrMG(η̄) noticeably underperforms its vector version DrMG(η̄).


6   C ONCLUSION

We present a meta-gradient algorithm with distributional return named DrMG, which employs a
critic that learns adaptive distributional return with parameters to be trained by meta-gradient derived
from a white-box bi-level optimization scheme. We demonstrate that the quantile distributional
return can seamlessly work with distributed actor-critic algorithms and learning such a distributional
adaptive distributional return can offer more meaningful signals to update the meta parameters.
We show DrMG is able to outperform its most related non-meta-learning baseline IMPALA and
several decent RL baselines on a motivating Two-Colors Grid-World domain and the challenging
video game benchmark Atari 2600. Our method is also very general and the distributional return
we introduce hereby can be adapted to work with alternative meta-gradient RL methods, with the
quantile distributional return being able to be flexibly replaced with other forms of distributions.
We leave the work of integrating more variants of actor-critic algorithms or distributional returns
in DrMG as our future work. It is also worth considering applying DrMG on more practical RL
domains, such as pure value-based RL, offline R, and continuous control domains.


                                                   9
E THICS AND R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT

Our work tackles synthetic digital game-playing applications and therefore we believe our work
is free from ethical problems. We present details on the distributional framework, Atari wrapper
settings, and model hyperparameters in Appendix. We also include the code for the two important
algorithmic components, networks, and the two-level meta-update step function in our work.

R EFERENCES
Maruan Al-Shedivat, Trapit Bansal, Yura Burda, Ilya Sutskever, Igor Mordatch, and Pieter Abbeel.
 Continuous adaptation via meta-learning in nonstationary and competitive environments. In 6th
 International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2018.

Marcin Andrychowicz, Misha Denil, Sergio Gomez, Matthew W Hoffman, David Pfau, Tom Schaul,
 Brendan Shillingford, and Nando De Freitas. Learning to learn by gradient descent by gradient
 descent. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 29: Annual Conference on Neu-
 ral Information Processing Systems (NIPS), pp. 3981–3989, 2016.

Sungyong Baik, Myungsub Choi, Janghoon Choi, Heewon Kim, and Kyoung Mu Lee. Meta-
  learning with adaptive hyperparameters. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Sys-
  tems 33: Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2020, virtual,
  2020.

M. G. Bellemare, Y. Naddaf, J. Veness, and M. Bowling. The arcade learning environment: An
 evaluation platform for general agents. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research, 47:253–279,
 2013.

Marc G. Bellemare, Will Dabney, and Rémi Munos. A distributional perspective on reinforcement
 learning. In Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML),
 volume 70, pp. 449–458, 2017.

Yoshua Bengio, Samy Bengio, and Jocelyn Cloutier. Learning a synaptic learning rule. Citeseer,
  1990.

Will Dabney, Georg Ostrovski, David Silver, and Rémi Munos. Implicit quantile networks for
 distributional reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the 35th International Conference on
 Machine Learning (ICML), volume 80, pp. 1104–1113, 2018a.

Will Dabney, Mark Rowland, Marc G. Bellemare, and Rémi Munos. Distributional reinforcement
 learning with quantile regression. In Proceedings of the Thirty-Second AAAI Conference on Artifi-
 cial Intelligence, (AAAI-18), the 30th innovative Applications of Artificial Intelligence (IAAI-18),
 and the 8th AAAI Symposium on Educational Advances in Artificial Intelligence (EAAI-18), pp.
 2892–2901, 2018b.

Yan Duan, John Schulman, Xi Chen, Peter L. Bartlett, Ilya Sutskever, and Pieter Abbeel. Rlˆ2: Fast
  reinforcement learning via slow reinforcement learning. CoRR, abs/1611.02779, 2016.

Lasse Espeholt, Hubert Soyer, Rémi Munos, Karen Simonyan, Volodymyr Mnih, Tom Ward, Yotam
  Doron, Vlad Firoiu, Tim Harley, Iain Dunning, Shane Legg, and Koray Kavukcuoglu. IMPALA:
  scalable distributed deep-rl with importance weighted actor-learner architectures. In Proceedings
  of the 35th International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), volume 80, pp. 1406–1415,
  2018.

Chelsea Finn and Sergey Levine. Meta-learning and universality: Deep representations and gradient
  descent can approximate any learning algorithm. In 6th International Conference on Learning
  Representations (ICLR), 2018.

Chelsea Finn, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. Model-agnostic meta-learning for fast adaptation
  of deep networks. In Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on Machine Learning
  (ICML), pp. 1126–1135, 2017a.


                                                 10
Chelsea Finn, Tianhe Yu, Tianhao Zhang, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. One-shot visual imita-
  tion learning via meta-learning. In 1st Annual Conference on Robot Learning (CoRL), volume 78
  of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 357–368, 2017b.
Sebastian Flennerhag, Yannick Schroecker, Tom Zahavy, Hado van Hasselt, David Silver, and Satin-
  der Singh. Bootstrapped meta-learning. In The 10th International Conference on Learning Rep-
  resentations (ICLR), 2022.
Erin Grant, Chelsea Finn, Sergey Levine, Trevor Darrell, and Thomas L. Griffiths. Recasting
  gradient-based meta-learning as hierarchical bayes. In 6th International Conference on Learn-
  ing Representations (ICLR), 2018.
Abhishek Gupta, Russell Mendonca, Yuxuan Liu, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. Meta-
  reinforcement learning of structured exploration strategies. In Advances in Neural Informa-
  tion Processing Systems 31: Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems,
  (NeurIPS), Montréal, Canada, pp. 5307–5316, 2018.
Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image
  recognition. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition
  (CVPR), pp. 770–778, 2016.
Timothy M. Hospedales, Antreas Antoniou, Paul Micaelli, and Amos J. Storkey. Meta-learning in
  neural networks: A survey. IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., 44(9):5149–5169, 2022.
Junhyuk Oh, Matteo Hessel, Wojciech M. Czarnecki, Zhongwen Xu, Hado van Hasselt, Satinder
  Singh, and David Silver. Discovering reinforcement learning algorithms. In Advances in Neu-
  ral Information Processing Systems 33: Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing
  Systems (NeurIPS), volume 33, pp. 1060–1070, 2020.
Austin Derrow Pinion, Jennifer She, David Wong, Oliver Lange, Todd Hester, Luis Perez, Marc
  Nunkesser, Seongjae Lee, Xueying Guo, Brett Wiltshire, Peter W. Battaglia, Vishal Gupta, Ang
  Li, Zhongwen Xu, Alvaro Sanchez-Gonzalez, Yujia Li, and Petar Velickovic. ETA prediction
  with graph neural networks in google maps. CoRR, abs/2108.11482, 2021.
Nicol N. Schraudolph and Xavier Giannakopoulos. Online independent component analysis with
  local learning rate adaptation. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 12: Annual
  Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS), pp. 789–795, 1999.
Richard Sutton. A history of meta-gradient: Gradient methods for meta-learning.             CoRR,
  abs/2202.09701, 2022.
Richard S. Sutton. Adaptation of learning rate parameters. Goal Seeking Components for Adaptive
  Intelligence: An Initial Assessment, by AG Barto and RS Sutton. Air Force Wright Aeronauti-
  cal Laboratories Technical Report AFWAL-TR-81-1070. Wright-Patterson Air Force Base, Ohio,
  45433, 1981.
Richard S. Sutton. Learning to predict by the methods of temporal differences. Machine Learning,
  3:9–44, 1988.
Richard S. Sutton. Adapting bias by gradient descent: An incremental version of delta-bar-delta. In
  Proceedings of the 10th National Conference on Artificial Intelligence, pp. 171–176, 1992.
Richard S. Sutton and Andrew G. Barto. Reinforcement learning - an introduction. Adaptive com-
  putation and machine learning. MIT Press, 1998.
Sebastian Thrun and Tom M. Mitchell. Learning one more thing. In Proceedings of the Fourteenth
  International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI), pp. 1217–1225, 1995.
Vivek Veeriah, Matteo Hessel, Zhongwen Xu, Janarthanan Rajendran, Richard L. Lewis, Junhyuk
  Oh, Hado van Hasselt, David Silver, and Satinder Singh. Discovery of useful questions as aux-
  iliary tasks. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 32: Annual Conference on
  Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), pp. 9306–9317, 2019.


                                                11
Vivek Veeriah, Tom Zahavy, Matteo Hessel, Zhongwen Xu, Junhyuk Oh, Iurii Kemaev, Hado P van
  Hasselt, David Silver, and Satinder Singh. Discovery of options via meta-learned subgoals. In Ad-
  vances in Neural Information Processing Systems 34: Annual Conference on Neural Information
  Processing Systems (NeurIPS), volume 34, pp. 29861–29873, 2021.
Jane Wang, Zeb Kurth-Nelson, Hubert Soyer, Joel Z. Leibo, Dhruva Tirumala, Rémi Munos, Charles
  Blundell, Dharshan Kumaran, and Matt M. Botvinick. Learning to reinforcement learn. In Pro-
  ceedings of the 39th Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, CogSci, 2017.
Yufei Wang, Qiwei Ye, and Tie-Yan Liu. Beyond exponentially discounted sum: Automatic learning
  of return function. CoRR, abs/1905.11591, 2019.
Olga Wichrowska, Niru Maheswaranathan, Matthew W. Hoffman, Sergio Gomez Colmenarejo,
  Misha Denil, Nando de Freitas, and Jascha Sohl-Dickstein. Learned optimizers that scale and
  generalize. In Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML),
  volume 70, pp. 3751–3760, 2017.
Tianbing Xu, Qiang Liu, Liang Zhao, and Jian Peng. Learning to explore via meta-policy gradi-
  ent. In Proceedings of the 35th International Conference on Machine Learning, (ICML), Stock-
  holmsmässan, volume 80, pp. 5459–5468. PMLR, 2018a.
Zhongwen Xu, Hado P van Hasselt, and David Silver. Meta-gradient reinforcement learning. In Ad-
  vances in Neural Information Processing Systems 31: Annual Conference on Neural Information
  Processing Systems (NeurIPS), volume 31, pp. 2396–2407, 2018b.
Zhongwen Xu, Hado Philip van Hasselt, Matteo Hessel, Junhyuk Oh, Satinder Singh, and David
  Silver. Meta-gradient reinforcement learning with an objective discovered online. In Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems 33: Annual Conference on Neural Information Process-
  ing Systems (NeurIPS), volume 33, pp. 15254–15264, 2020.
Tom Zahavy, Zhongwen Xu, Vivek Veeriah, Matteo Hessel, Junhyuk Oh, Hado van Hasselt, David
  Silver, and Satinder Singh. A self-tuning actor-critic algorithm. In Advances in Neural Infor-
  mation Processing Systems 33: Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems
  (NeurIPS), volume 33, pp. 20913–20924, 2020.
Zeyu Zheng, Junhyuk Oh, and Satinder Singh. On learning intrinsic rewards for policy gradient
  methods. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 31: Annual Conference on
  Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), pp. 4649–4659, 2018.
Zeyu Zheng, Junhyuk Oh, Matteo Hessel, Zhongwen Xu, Manuel Kroiss, Hado van Hasselt, David
  Silver, and Satinder Singh. What can learned intrinsic rewards capture? In Proceedings of the 37th
  International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), volume 119, pp. 11436–11446, 2020.


                                                12
