Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


B INDING L ANGUAGE M ODELS IN S YMBOLIC L ANGUAGES
 Zhoujun Cheng∗∗♠♡ Tianbao Xie∗♠ Peng Shi△ Chengzu Li♠ Rahul Nadkarni♣
 Yushi Hu♣ Caiming Xiong♥ Dragomir Radev⋆ Mari Ostendorf♣
 Luke Zettlemoyer♣♦ Noah A. Smith♣♢ Tao Yu♠♣
 ♠
   The University of Hong Kong ♡ Shanghai Jiao Tong University ♣ University of Washington
 ♢
   Allen Institute for AI △ University of Waterloo ♥ Salesforce Research ⋆ Yale University ♦ Meta AI



                                                 A BSTRACT

             Though end-to-end neural approaches have recently been dominating NLP tasks
             in both performance and ease-of-use, they lack interpretability and robustness.
             We propose B INDER, a training-free neural-symbolic framework that maps the
             task input to a program, which (1) allows binding a unified API of language
             model (LM) functionalities to a programming language (e.g., SQL, Python) to
             extend its grammar coverage and thus tackle more diverse questions, (2) adopts an
             LM as both the program parser and the underlying model called by the API during
             execution, and (3) requires only a few in-context exemplar annotations. Specifically,
             we employ GPT-3 Codex as the LM. In the parsing stage, with only a few in-
             context exemplars, Codex is able to identify the part of the task input that cannot
             be answerable by the original programming language, correctly generate API calls
             to prompt Codex to solve the unanswerable part, and identify where to place the
             API calls while being compatible with the original grammar. In the execution stage,
             Codex can perform versatile functionalities (e.g., commonsense QA, information
             extraction) given proper prompts in the API calls. B INDER achieves state-of-the-art
             results on W IKI TABLE Q UESTIONS and TAB FACT datasets, with explicit output
             programs that benefit human debugging. Note that previous best systems are all
             finetuned on tens of thousands of task-specific samples, while B INDER only uses
             dozens of annotations as in-context exemplars without any training. Our code is
             available at https://github.com/hkunlp/binder1 .


1       I NTRODUCTION

Performance on natural language processing tasks is dominated by neural end-to-end systems that
directly map inputs to outputs (Devlin et al., 2019; Liu et al., 2019; Lewis et al., 2020; Raffel et al.,
2020, i.a.). These end-to-end approaches are flexible and easy-to-use while lacking interpretability
and robustness. This stands in contrast to symbolic approaches that produce explicit intermediate
representations such as logical forms, reasoning paths, or program code, which might then be executed
to derive a final output (Zettlemoyer & Collins, 2005; Gulwani et al., 2017; Chen et al., 2019b, i.a.).
The intermediate form produced by these the resulting execution makes them more robust to input
changes. However, their semantic coverage is limited by the affordances of the grammar of the
selected symbolic language (e.g., not being able to handle “North America?” in Fig. 1), leading
to failures on real-world diverse questions, and the intermediate form annotations require expert
knowledge and researcher labour.
A few works (Andreas et al., 2016; Gupta et al., 2019; Khot et al., 2021; Zhu et al., 2022, i.a.) have
been proposed to combine neural modules and symbolic languages (neural-symbolic) to leverage
advantages of both approaches. However, they require the elaborate human design of the symbolic
language and the calibration of corresponding neural modules to tackle problems in a specific domain
with large training data. More specifically, most of these works propose a task-specific symbolic
language and corresponding modules that cover only limited semantic phenomena in a specific task
and domain. Therefore, new languages and neural modules have to be introduced when adapting them
    ∗
         Equal contribution. Authors in alphabetical order. Work mainly done at the University of Hong Kong.
    1
        More resources at https://lm-code-binder.github.io/.


                                                        1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                                        Binder program: SQL/Python binding LM API calls

                                                                                        Binder-Python
           Which is the best-selling shirt made in               GPT-3                   df = df.sort_values('Sales',ascending=False)
                                                                                                                                                   execute    Program
                                                                 Codex     prompt
                                                                                                                                                             Interpreter
           North America and with no chemicals?                    …                     df = df[ƒ(“North America?”; Made_in) == ‘yes’]                                         Polo
                                                                           Binder
    Details
                                                                           parsing Binder-SQL
    ● 100% cotton                                                                      SELECT Shirt FROM T
    ● 220GSM (6.5 oz)                                                                  WHERE ƒ(“No chemicals?”; Shirt) =‘yes’
    ● Natural stretch for       Shirt     Made_in Sales Price
      comfortable fit…          Polo       U.S.    500   $29.8                           AND ƒ(“North America?”; Made_in) =‘yes’                       SELECT Shirt FROM T
    ● …..
       Details                                                                                                                                         WHERE No_Chemicals =‘yes’
                              Luckyland    U.S.    900   $19.8                         ORDER BY Sales DESC LIMIT 1                                     AND North_America =‘yes’
        ● 90% cotton,
                     …
            10% polyester    Timber Bay Mexico     400   $25.9                                                                                         ORDER BY Sales DESC LIMIT 1
        ● …
              ……               Office     Turkey   600   $31.8
                                                                                         Made_in              GPT-3                North_America
                                                                                           Shirt                                    no_chemicals
                                                                                           U.S.    prompt     Codex      predict
                                                                                                                                       yes
                                                                 Q: “Is it North            Polo                …                       yes
                                                                                           U.S.                                        yes
                                                                    Q: “Is it no
                                                                  America?”
                                                                   chemicals?”
                                                                                   +     Luckyland
                                                                                         Mexico
                                                                                                                                         no
                                                                                                                                       yes
                                                                                        Timber Bay                                       no
                                                                                         Turkey                                        no
                                                                                           Office                                        no
   unstructured knowledge    structured knowledge base
                                                                                              Utilize GPT-3 Codex’s knowledge/abilities


Figure 1: An overview of the B INDER pipeline of two stages: parsing and execution. (1) In the
parsing stage, the language model (LM) maps the input to a B INDER program given the question and
(optional) knowledge sources. The expressions with blue background in the program are API calls
to acquire external results. (2) In the execution stage, an LM serves to realize the API calls given
the prompt and the return values feed back into the original programming language. A deterministic
program interpreter executes the program without API calls to derive the final answer.

to new tasks and domains. Their coverage is still restricted by the customized symbolic language and
neural modules. Moreover, they call for various and large training data to ensure all modules are well
trained. Therefore, we expect a neural-symbolic system that supports flexible neural module calls that
will enable higher coverage for the symbolic language, while only requiring few annotations.
We propose B INDER, a training-free neural-symbolic framework that maps task inputs to an executable
program in a programming language (e.g., SQL, Python) bound with a unified API to call language
models (LMs; Brown et al., 2020; Chen et al., 2021) to perform versatile functionalities, i.e. a B INDER
program(e.g., Binder-SQL, Binder-Python in Fig. 1), with only a few input-B INDER program annotations
as in-context exemplars. More specifically, B INDER first prompts Codex, a code-pretrained of GPT-3,
to parse a question input into a B INDER program, in which Codex has to decide (1) which parts
in the input can be converted to the target programming language (question parts highlighted in
grey in Fig. 1), (2) the corresponding task API calls (e.g., f (“North America?”; Made_in)) to prompt
Codex to resolve the other parts, and (3) where to insert the API calls in the B INDER program. Next,
B INDER prompts Codex again to generate answers to the task API calls (given the generated task
prompts), integrates the generated results back to the programming language. Specifically as in Fig. 1,
the prompt (e.g., “North America?") and data (e.g., column M ade_in) in API calls are fed into
Codex, and the output is a new column answering the prompt based on the input data (i.e., yes/no of
whether a country in M ade_in column is from North America). Finally, the program with standard
programming languages is executed the derive the final answer.
In summary, B INDER enables flexible functionality integration to the programming language to
improve its coverage and requires only a few annotations. B INDER program replaces custom
neural modules and task-specific languages with a unified prompting API call to Codex and general
programming languages, respectively, to handle much more diverse task inputs in open domains
without complex language and neural module design. B INDER is built on the advances of in-context
learning with language models and does not require any training and large-scale annotations.
We demonstrate the effectiveness of the B INDER framework on W IKI TABLE Q UESTIONS (W IKI TQ;
Pasupat & Liang, 2015) TAB FACT (Chen et al., 2019a), two structured knowledge grounding datasets
that require complex reasoning on the tables. Using Codex (Chen et al., 2021) as the LM, B INDER
achieves state-of-the-art results on W IKI TQ and TAB FACT. Note that the previous state-of-the-art
methods all require fine-tuning on more than 10K annotated training examples or even massive
amounts of task-related pretraining data, while our method requires only a dozen or so annotations
without training. In further analysis, we find that B INDER provides the greatest performance gain
on the questions that the original language grammar (SQL and Python) cannot support, indicating
that B INDER effectively improves programming language coverage. We also demonstrate B INDER
can be applied on multi-modal knowledge sources (text, table, images, and combined) with M UL -
TI M ODAL QA dataset (Talmor et al., 2021). Moreover, we show that B INDER , compared with
end-to-end approaches, is more interpretable when debugging the model, more scalable to very large
inputs, and more robust to noisy inputs.


                                                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


2     A PPROACH

Task Definition Given an NLP task that accepts a natural language question/statement Q and
optional context(s) D (e.g., passages, tables, images, or a combination of the above) as inputs, the
goal is to output an answer A based on the inputs to respond to Q correctly. For example, in passage
question answering, Q is a question about the passage(s) D; in table fact verification, Q is a statement
about the table(s) D.

2.1   B INDER F RAMEWORK

Overview The B INDER framework to solve NLP tasks is defined as follows: given a natural
language input Q and optional context(s) D as the input, an executable B INDER program Z is
generated. Finally, the output answer A is derived by executing Z with a B INDER interpreter.

B INDER Parsing In the parsing stage, the input natural language Q is parsed into a B INDER
program Z. A B INDER program is an expression in a symbolic language that optionally includes API
calls where the core symbolic language fails to provide a desired functionality. We define the API
call in the program as function f (Q̂ ; D̂) that accepts a question Q̂ to be answered, and the context
D̂ to be queried on. Here Q̂ is the unanswerable part of Q with the programming language only
and D̂ is the relevant contexts in D to answer Q̂. For example, “North America?” in Fig 1 is a Q̂,
and its corresponding contexts D̂ to answer Q̂ is the column Made_in. Note Q̂ = Q or D̂ = D is
also valid (if Q̂ = Q and D̂ = D, the program is equivalent to solving the problem with an LM in
end-to-end manner). The output of an API call f (Q̂ ; D̂) is the answer to Q̂, and it is represented as a
variable compatible with the symbolic language grammar so that the program can be executed.

B INDER Execution In the execution stage, the program Z is executed by a B INDER interpreter to
derive the answer A. The B INDER interpreter consists of a standard symbolic language interpreter and
the model(s) realizing the API calls. The execution phase includes lexical analysis, syntax analysis,
and program evaluation. In lexical and syntax analysis, f (Q̂ ; D̂) is added as a new identifier in the
grammar, and the program is parsed as an abstract syntax tree (AST) based on this extended grammar.
In program evaluation, the API calls are evaluated by calling the underlying neural models. The
API call output is saved as a variable compatible with the standard symbolic language grammar,
and thus the program can be finally executed by an off-the-shelf symbolic language interpreter to
derive the output. Specifically, B INDER extends the symbolic language production rules to facilitate
parsing the B INDER program’s AST. The AST is evaluated in bottom-up order so that nested API
calls are also supported, which allows different degrees of decomposition and free combination of
language models for the complex question. We provide more details about the grammar extension
and a B INDER program AST in Appendix A.4.

2.2   I N - CONTEXT L EARNING FOR B INDER

Much recent work uses large language models for in-context learning (Brown et al., 2020; Chen
et al., 2021; Chowdhery et al., 2022b). Compared with fine-tuning, in-context learning (1) only
takes a few annotations/demonstrations as a prompt, and (2) performs inference without training the
model parameters, which are both longstanding issues of conventional semantic parsing. We base our
experiments for B INDER on Codex, a code-pretrained version of GPT-3, which has been shown to
perform proficiently on code generation tasks (Rajkumar et al., 2022; Chen et al., 2022) and even
some weakly-related tasks like dialogue state tracking (Hu et al., 2022). We use Codex as both the
semantic parser and the model to perform API call functionalities.
In the parsing stage, it is challenging to generate B INDER programs because their grammar is different
from the original programming language grammar due to the inserted API calls. Thus, we take
advantage of the few-shot generalization ability of Codex and find that it can learn the modified
grammar effectively with only a small number of in-context examples. In the execution stage, Codex
as the underlying LM serves to give the output to the API calls by concatenating the API call input,
Q̂ and D̂ as the language model prompt (the prompt style is described in Section 3.1). The Codex
output result(s) are stored as variables in the standard programming language so that a programming


                                                   3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


language interpreter can execute on the combination of these variables and the rest part of the
program.
Specifically, we apply in-context learning for B INDER in the following manner: the inputs are k
in-context exemplars of {(Qi , Di , Zi )}ki=1 and the inference example (Q, D). The k examples should
balance the trade-off between the diversity of question types and the model’s maximum input capacity,
which can either be manually selected (fixed) or automatically retrieved (dynamic) according to the
inference example. The model outputs are n candidate B INDER programs Z = {Z1 , ..., Zn } that
aim to solve the inference question Q. Next, the programs Z are executed by the B INDER interpreter
producing n answers A = {A1 , ..., An }. Finally, the output answer A is derived via a majority
voting strategy over the set of produced answers A (the voting method is similar to the one used by
MBR-EXEC (Shi et al., 2022), which we elaborate on in Appendix A.3). The values of k and n are
hyperparameters in the process above.


2.3   B INDER I MPLEMENTATION

In this section, we describe our implementation of B INDER with SQL and Python over structured
knowledge as a demonstration. As B INDER is designed to be extensible to various programming
languages and API call functionalities, we introduce a pipeline for users to quickly adapt B INDER to
a new domain in Appendix D.
We implement two APIs — fcol (Q̂ ; D̂) and fval (Q̂ ; D̂), where D̂ = {c1 , ..., c|D̂| } is a (sub-)table
of a set of table columns, and c = {vi , ..., v|c| } is a column filled with cell values. Based on Q̂, fcol
maps D̂ into a column, and fval maps D̂ into a value. Since both return types, i.e., column and value,
are compatible with the grammars of SQL and Python (with the Pandas package), fcol and fval APIs
are inserted to replace the columns and values to form a valid B INDER program.
Take the question “which is the best-selling shirt made in North America and with no chemicals?" in
Fig 1 as an example. The country names in the Made_in column do not provide enough information
on their own to indicate what their continents are, and thus pure SQL cannot solve it (with this table’s
data). However, it is easy for a (large) language model to answer whether a country is from North
America, which is represented by the fcol (“North America?”;Made_in) expression in the position of a
column name in standard SQL. Similarly, the expression fcol (“No chemicals?”;Shirt) calls a (large)
language model to identify whether the shirts consist of no chemicals (i.e., pure cotton in this case)
based on the textual details in the Shirt column.
When a (sub-)question is too complex or infeasible to be solved by creating an intermediate new
column with fcol , we turn to fval to directly derive the answer. For example, given the question
“which shirt is the most suitable for a formal event?” on the table in Fig 1, it is hard to map Shirt to a
new column of “formality value” followed by a SQL “ORDER BY” clause. Thus, the expression will
be fval (“The most formal?”;Shirt), that outputs a value as the answer. fval looks more like end-to-end
QA, with two important differences: (1) it can be integrated into more compositional SQL queries
using its result as a value, (2) it inputs the sub-table instead of the whole table which can mitigate the
challenge of input capacity.


3     E XPERIMENTS

3.1   E XPERIMENT S ETUP

Datasets We evaluate our method on three knowledge grounding datasets which were all previously
dominated by end-to-end methods: W IKI TQ (Pasupat & Liang, 2015) and TAB FACT (Chen et al.,
2019a). W IKI TQ requires complex table reasoning skills to answer the questions. Furthermore,
according to SQUALL (Shi et al., 2020b), about 20% of W IKI TQ questions are not answerable
by pure SQL, either because of the need for extra knowledge or the limited coverage of the SQL
grammar, both of which are issues that B INDER is designed to address. TAB FACT is a binary fact
verification benchmark over small tables, on which end-to-end methods have a large advantage but
offer no interpretability.


                                                    4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


      Method                         Dev.   Test            Method                            Test
                        Finetuned                                          Finetuned
      T5-3B (Xie et al., 2022)       51.9   50.6            SASP† (Ou & Liu, 2022)            77.0
      Tapex (Liu et al., 2021)       60.4   59.1            BART-Large (Lewis et al., 2020)   82.5
      TaCube (Zhou et al., 2022)     61.1   61.3            T5-3B (Xie et al., 2022)          85.4
                                                            Tapex (Liu et al., 2021)          85.9
      OmniTab (Jiang et al., 2022)    -     63.3
                                                                     Without Finetuning
                 Without Finetuning                         Codex end-to-end QA               72.6
      Codex end-to-end QA           50.5    48.7
                                                            Codex SQL†                        80.7
      Codex SQL†                    60.2    61.1            Codex B INDER † (Ours)            85.1
      Codex B INDER † (Ours)        65.0    64.6                  with few-shot retriever     86.0

Table 1: W IKI TQ execution accuracy on de- Table 2: TAB FACT accuracy on the official small
velopment and test sets. † denotes a symbolic test set. † denotes a symbolic method that outputs
method that outputs intermediate languages.   intermediate languages.

Evaluation The evaluation metrics are execution accuracy (EA) for W IKI TQ and TAB FACT
following common practice for these datasets. Program executions are likely to be semantically
correct but fail to match the gold answer exactly – for example, SQL outputs 1/0 for yes/no questions.
Though this is considered correct according to human evaluation, it is regarded as incorrect by the
exact match evaluator. Thus, we add a pre-matching check for these semantically correct cases in
W IKI TQ to the official evaluator. For a fair comparison, we compute the outputs of all baseline
methods and re-evaluate them using the same evaluator. We provide more details on the evaluator in
Appendix A.5, and list the results with the official evaluator for all baselines and our method in C.2.

Baselines We compare our method to a series of strong published methods on these datasets,
including Tapex (Liu et al., 2021), OmniTab (Jiang et al., 2022), TaCube (Zhou et al., 2022), T5-
3B (Xie et al., 2022; Raffel et al., 2020), and SASP (Ou & Liu, 2022). These baselines are fine-tuned
on the full-size training set, and many of them (Liu et al., 2021; Zhou et al., 2022) are even further
pretrained on a domain-relevant corpus of extra data which is specific to the target domain and task,
while B INDER is training-free and only requires a few in-context exemplar annotations.
To further demonstrate the effectiveness of B INDER, we also evaluate Codex with additional inference
modes including: (1) end-to-end QA, i.e., directly outputting the answer based on the input question
and table; and (2) semantic parsing with the standard SQL language. Due to page limits, we refer
readers interested in these baselines to their respective papers for details (Liu et al., 2021; Jiang et al.,
2022; Zhou et al., 2022; Xie et al., 2022; Raffel et al., 2020; Ou & Liu, 2022), and we present a
complete list and evaluation results of more previous systems on these datasets in Appendix C.1.

Implementation Details We use the OpenAI Codex (code-davinci-002) API2 model in our exper-
iments as both the parser to generate programs and as the underlying model for API calls during
the execution of each program. We annotate 14 in-context exemplars with B INDER programs for
each dataset, which are selected considering the diversity of question types in demonstrations and the
maximum token limit for Codex (8, 000 tokens). The prompt format mainly follows (Rajkumar et al.,
2022), which inputs the table schema and the first three table rows. The detailed prompt templates
we use for each dataset are listed in Appendix A.1. On TAB FACT, we further annotate a pool of
200 examples with B INDER programs from the training set using vote-k selective annotation (Su
et al., 2022), and use them by retrieving relevant few-shot examples for each inference example
via maximum inner-product similarity of the SentenceBert (Clark et al., 2019) embeddings of the
questions. The Codex hyperparameters for parsing and execution are provided in Appendix A.2.
Empirically, it takes about 6 hours on average to evaluate 1, 000 examples (i.e., generate and execute
20 programs per example) given that Codex allows 200 queries per minute. We evaluate on the
official small test set (2, 000 samples) of TAB FACT considering the time cost.

3.2     M AIN R ESULTS

W IKI TQ All results on the W IKI TQ dataset are shown in Table 1. Our Codex B INDER outperforms
listed strong baseline systems by a large margin, surpassing the previous state-of-the-art by absolute
   2
       https://beta.openai.com/


                                                     5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


           Method                       Program-unsolvable      Program-solvable     Overall
           T5-3B (Xie et al., 2022)            37.6                   56.0            51.9
           Tapex (Liu et al., 2021)            33.6                   68.0            60.4
           TaCube (Zhou et al., 2022)          34.9                   68.5            61.1
           Codex end-to-end QA                 40.3                   53.4            50.5
                  w/o table inputs             14.2                   11.9            12.4
           Codex SQL                           31.2                   68.4            60.2
           Codex B INDER (Ours)                 41.3                   71.8            65.0

Table 3: Decomposition of execution accuracy on W IKI TQ development set. The questions annotated
with SQL by SQUALL (Shi et al., 2020b) dataset are denoted program-solvable, and the rest are
program-unsolvable. OmniTab (Jiang et al., 2022) didn’t provide its result on the development set.
1.3%. Note that all baseline methods require access to the full training dataset and further fine-tuning,
while our method can achieve state-of-the-art performance with only 14 example annotations. Codex
B INDER improves over semantic parsing with standard SQL by 3.5% on the test set, indicating
B INDER indeed mitigates the coverage limitations of the original language. Furthermore, both Codex
B INDER and Codex SQL deliver dramatic advantages (15.9% and 12.4%) over end-to-end QA,
showing that semantic parsing with Codex is a better default choice when it comes to structured
knowledge grounding and code-related tasks. A fine-grained analysis on why B INDER outperforms
end-to-end QA and pure SQL is provided in Section 4.1.

TAB FACT Table 2 presents the results on TAB FACT’s official small test set. Codex B INDER
substantially surpasses the previous best symbolic method SASP by 8.1%. Note symbolic methods
usually fall behind end-to-end manners in fact verification (binary classification) since the answer
space is small. When retrieving a few relevant questions from the annotated pool of 200 exam-
ples, our method achieves new state-of-the-art results, outperforming the previous best fine-tuned
method. However, the improvement provided by retrieving a few similar examples is comparatively
small (0.9%). Effective sample selection methods for in-context learning remain an open challenge.
Within the Codex few-shot setting (no few-shot retriever), B INDER shows a large advantage over
standard SQL (4.4%) and end-to-end QA (12.5%), indicating the necessity of B INDER framework.
Besides the performance gain, B INDER has the additional advantages of (1) interpretability that
benefits human debugging and (2) robustness that makes it stable to large or noisy inputs. We
elaborate on these in Sections 4.2 and 4.3.

4     A NALYSIS
4.1   A BLATION S TUDY

Binding neural module API calls into a programming language can help solve queries that are
unsolvable in that language alone. Therefore, we are particularly interested in the performance
of B INDER on the unsolvable questions. According to SQUALL (Shi et al., 2020b), about 20%
of W IKI TQ questions cannot be annotated in SQL; we call these program-unsolvable, and refer
to the annotated ones as program-solvable. As presented in Table 3, Codex B INDER significantly
outperforms Codex SQL by 10.1% on program-unsolvable questions, aligned with the motivation
of our design. Our method even performs better than all end-to-end QA methods on the program-
unsolvable part, which are supposed to be more robust to this subset of the examples. We note that
while SQL performs well on about 31.2% of unsolvable questions, many are spurious programs that
derive the correct answer by accident. B INDER largely mitigates this phenomenon. We randomly
pick 100 correct predictions in program-unsolvable set shared by SQL and B INDER and find that
B INDER has a much lower spurious rate than SQL (12% vs. 33%). One thing to note is that B INDER
also achieves a higher score than SQL on program-solvable. We find that this is because some tables
are manually cleaned (e.g., extracting numerical parts from the text) to run the annotated SQLs by
SQUALL, which means there also exist unsolvable questions even in the program-solvable subset.
We elaborate on our manual statistics about the proportion of W IKI TQ that can be solved with SQL
in Appendix C.4. We also present to what extent Codex itself can answer the question only using its
internal knowledge. Codex can only answer a few W IKI TQ questions (12.4%) correctly, indicating it
is not pretrained to overfit to the downstream dataset questions.


                                                   6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


            Error Type             Description                                           Proportion(%)
            Syntax error           Incorrect program syntax (invalid grammar)                 5%
            Semantic error         Incorrect program semantics                               64%
                   Token           Incorrect or missing column/value/operator                   10%
                   Structure       Incorrect program structure (valid grammar)                  22%
                   B INDER usage   Missing B INDER API usage                                    32%
            Incorrect execution    Incorrect execution answer with the correct program       15%
            False negative         Incorrect annotations or misjudge in evaluator            16%

        Table 4: Error types of 100 samples from W IKI TQ development set of B INDER (SQL).

          System                                 Program                                       Answer
          End-to-end QA                             –                                           1967
                          SELECT year FROM t WHERE win_team=’kansas state’ AND
          SQL                           win_team - los_team > 10                              <empty>

                          SELECT year FROM t WHERE win_team=’kansas state’ AND
          B INDER          f("Points?";win_team) - f("Points?";los_team) > 10                 <empty>


Table 5: An example from W IKI TQ development set. The query is “When was the first game that
kansas state won by double digits?" and the gold answer is 1926. The incorrect segment(s) of each
output are marked in red. See Appendix E for full context of this example.

4.2     I NTERPRETABILITY

An important advantage B INDER provides is the improvement in interpretability over the end-to-
end approaches, where the explicit program can assist human debugging and error analysis. We
sample 100 error cases from W IKI TQ dev set (approximately 10% of all incorrect examples) of the
Codex B INDER (on SQL) for error analysis. We classify errors into syntax error, semantic error,
incorrect execution, and false negative, as listed in Table 4. More details about the classification and
example demonstrations are listed in Appendix E. For W IKI TQ, the errors mainly lie in the B INDER
usage (32%) and structure errors (22%) of semantic errors, and incorrect execution (15%). This
indicates that 32% of incorrect examples can be further corrected if B INDER is used and 15% can be
corrected through better execution, e.g., by leveraging more powerful LMs, using better in-context
learning methods, and annotating more exemplars.
We also use an example to show the advantages of using B INDER for debugging and interpreting
results. As shown in the example in Table 5, the result from the end-to-end system is 1967, which
is incorrect but provides no clue to the reason behind this prediction. The result from B INDER is
incorrect, since the program uses the incorrect value and operator regarding the win_team column
from the table (should be “LIKE "%kansas state%"”), and it can be potentially fixed in the future
by adding similar in-context exemplars or fuzzy match postprocessing. For standard SQL, though
we find the direct subtraction of win_team − los_team is incorrect (contain non-numerical text), it
cannot be fixed for its limited grammar coverage. Thus, in this example, B INDER enables finding the
source of the error (an advantage over the end-to-end approach) while also being expressive enough
for users to find a way to fix it (an advantage over a pure symbolic system), making B INDER fit for
debugging and enabling interpretability of a system that uses it. We leave it to future work to develop
more systematic evaluation methods that consider ease of debugging by estimating human effort to
correct system errors.

4.3     ROBUSTNESS

4.3.1     S CALABILITY

A great advantage of B INDER over end-to-end QA is the scalability, i.e., parsing and executing the
symbolic language is always practical even when the knowledge source is too large (e.g., company
databases, domain knowledge graphs) to fit into the model input capacity or memory, while end-to-
end QA fails or degrades since it requires the whole table as input to predict the answer. We expand
tables with 100, 200, and 500 rows from a W IKI TQ development subset (random 150 samples)
by prompting Codex to populate the original table with content-consistent rows, and then have
two annotators annotate question-answer pairs manually. When the table is too large for Codex’s
maximum token limit (8, 000 tokens), we truncate table rows until it fits. As shown in Figure 2, Codex


                                                        7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 2: Execution accuracy on W IKI TQ with Figure 3: Execution accuracy on W IKI TQ with
very large tables (original, 100, 200, 500 rows). noisy content in tables.
                                                       Method                                  F1     EM
      Method                 Program-unsolvable                            Finetuned
      Codex Python                  30.7               Implicit-Decomp (Talmor et al., 2021)   55.5   48.8
                                                       PReasM-Large (Yoran et al., 2022)       65.5   59.0
      Codex B INDER (Ours)          34.4
                                                                        Without Finetuning
                                                       Codex end-to-end QA                     55.4   48.0
Table 6: W IKI TQ accuracy on program-                 Codex B INDER (Ours)                    57.1   51.0
unsolvable subset using Python as the program-             with oracle retriever               64.5   58.1
ming language.
                                                    Table 7: MMQA F1/EM on development set.
end-to-end QA performance drops dramatically as table size increases, while B INDER consistently
outperforms it with only slight performance decreases. Note that the input of B INDER is only three
table rows for all table sizes.

4.3.2     N OISY C ONTENT
End-to-end methods are more brittle to noisy inputs, especially when there exists distractors that are
similar to the question-relevant (gold) contents. We build a noisy W IKI TQ development subset (ran-
dom 150 samples) with distractors in three steps: (1) the gold table cells and columns are found using
a heuristic fuzzy match, (2) replace 15% cells in gold columns with either text that has the smallest
edit distance to the gold cell string in the WordNet corpus or number that equals to the gold cell value
±1, (3) have one annotator check that question-answer pairs are valid after content disturbance. As
shown in Figure 3, B INDER is stable confronting distractors (1.3% ↓), while end-to-end QA is more
likely to be confused by similar text and numbers (6.7% ↓).

4.4     B INDER E XTENSION

B INDER with Python We design B INDER to be easily extensible to various programming languages.
Thus, we explore using Python (with the Pandas package) as the B INDER language on W IKI TQ.
Similar to SQL, B INDER with Python is implemented by incorporating the f (· ; ·) neural API into
it. Since the neural API also calls language models with Python, we just use the original Python
interpreter to execute our B INDER with Python. We evaluated it on the program-unsolvable subset of
W IKI TQ to test whether our method improves Python’s capability. Though this subset is split based
on SQL, Python shares some similar weaknesses with SQL, such as in cases with external knowledge
requirements and unsupported functionality. As shown in Table 6, B INDER with Python effectively
improves the Python coverage on the difficult subset. The gap between Python and SQL performance
on W IKI TQ may lie in the properties of each programming language, as suggested by Guo et al.
(2020). We conjecture that Codex is more familiar with semantic parsing to SQL for tabular data,
while Python is not as commonly used in this context.

MultiModal Application We further explore applying B INDER on the multi-modal dataset M UL -
TI M ODAL QA (MMQA) across text, tables, and images. To input images into the LM program
generation, images are converted into textual image captions with a vision-text pretrained model
OFA (Wang et al., 2022) in advance. For table-related questions, the B INDER program is based


                                                   8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


on SQL. For non-table questions, a program with fval is generated with the targeted passage or
image title(s). We follow Yoran et al. (2022) to retrieve the question-relevant passages and images
in preprocessing. As far as we know, we are the first to demonstrate that multi-modal QA across
text, tables, and images can be handled with interpretable and executable programs. As listed in
Table 7, under the Codex few-shot setting, B INDER achieves better performance than end-to-end QA
and the fine-tuned baseline Implicit-Decomp, showing the feasibility of B INDER on multi-modal
knowledge sources. With the oracle retriever that assumes gold passages and images are given for
each question, B INDER can achieve comparable performance with the state-of-the-art, showing the
potential of B INDER approach in the future.

5    R ELATED W ORK
Semantic Parsing Semantic parsing (Zelle & Mooney, 1996; Zettlemoyer & Collins, 2005) has
been a mainstay of symbolic methods that produce an executable program given natural language
input, generate intermediate structures that assist problem-solving, and improve interpretability over
the neural methods which generate solution directly that came later. Structured knowledge grounding
tasks mainly adopt semantic parsing since symbolic languages like SQL, SPARQL can be executed
on them (Berant et al., 2013; Liang et al., 2017; Yin & Neubig, 2017; Zhong et al., 2018; Yu et al.,
2018; Shaw et al., 2021; Scholak et al., 2021). Beyond structured knowledge, Chen et al. (2019b) and
Thorne et al. (2021) design domain-specific languages executable on text. Recently, Chen et al. (2021)
propose a generative pre-trained language model for code generation that require no additional human
annotation. Many works propose methods based on this model and achieve great success (Rajkumar
et al., 2022; Shi et al., 2022). However, the semantic parsing method is restricted by its grammar
coverage, unable to solve problems requiring external knowledge or functions.

Neural-Symbolic Methods Some works integrate neural modules with symbolic languages for
the advantage of both approaches, i.e., good performance and interpretability. Andreas et al. (2016);
Hu et al. (2017); Das et al. (2018) and Gupta et al. (2019) generate programs that are further softly
executed by the corresponding neural modules. Khot et al. (2021) propose text module networks
to solve complex tasks by decomposing them into simpler ones solvable by existing QA models
and a symbolic calculator. BREAK (Wolfson et al., 2020) proposes a meaningful representation,
QDMR, that decomposes the question into multiple steps. However, they require the elaborate design
of functions to be used in corresponding task and the calibration of corresponding neural modules
which require complicated training steps and large training data (normally tens of thousands) to tackle
problems in a specific domain.
Compared with these methods, B INDER is expressive and flexible to handle real-world diverse
questions since it is able to make proper API calls to enhance its functionalities. Moreover, B INDER is
training-free and requires only dozens of annotations based on certain symbolic language to perform
on a domain specific task while maintaining: excellent performance, ability in scaling on input,
interpretabilityand robustness over noisy content.

6    C ONCLUSION
We propose B INDER, a training-free neural-symbolic framework that maps the task input to a program
that allows binding a unified LM API for additional functionalities. B INDER aims to combine the
strengths of end-to-end approaches (high coverage) and symbolic approaches (high interpretability).
Using Codex as the LM, B INDER achieves state-of-the-art performance on W IKI TQ and TAB FACT
with only dozens of in-context demonstrations and no additional training. In contrast, the best existing
systems are finetuned on thousands of task-specific training samples and may require further domain-
specific pertaining. We also perform a series of analyses of B INDER, decomposing performance
gains, examining robustness to large or noisy inputs, applying it to multi-modal knowledge sources,
and extending it to the Python language. We regard B INDER as a new, language model-focused
attempt to integrate two widely-adopted paradigms in NLP: end-to-end and symbolic approaches.
With the recent powerful large language models, it has become feasible that B INDER programs are
generated and executed correctly in a training-free manner. In the future, we believe B INDER can be
extended to many more scenarios with the appropriate programming language and functionalities,
and we hope it can inspire more creative ideas on balancing model capability and interpretability.


                                                   9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


7       R EPRODUCIBILITY
B INDER experiments are mainly based on OpenAI Codex (code-davinci-002) API3 . We provide (1)
the input prompt templates we use in Appendix A.1, (2) Codex hyper-parameters for each dataset we
adopt in Appendix A.2, (3) more implementation details in Appendix A. Besides, we also upload our
source code in the materials making our results easy to be reproduced.


    3
        https://beta.openai.com/


                                               10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


R EFERENCES
Rishabh Agarwal, Chen Liang, Dale Schuurmans, and Mohammad Norouzi. Learning to generalize
  from sparse and underspecified rewards. In International conference on machine learning, pp.
  130–140. PMLR, 2019.
Jacob Andreas, Marcus Rohrbach, Trevor Darrell, and Dan Klein. Neural module networks. In
  Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 39–48, 2016.
Jonathan Berant, Andrew Chou, Roy Frostig, and Percy Liang. Semantic parsing on Freebase from
  question-answer pairs. In Proc. of EMNLP, 2013. URL https://aclanthology.org/
  D13-1160.
Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhari-
  wal, Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Sandhini Agarwal,
  Ariel Herbert-Voss, Gretchen Krueger, Tom Henighan, Rewon Child, Aditya Ramesh, Daniel
  Ziegler, Jeffrey Wu, Clemens Winter, Chris Hesse, Mark Chen, Eric Sigler, Mateusz Litwin,
  Scott Gray, Benjamin Chess, Jack Clark, Christopher Berner, Sam McCandlish, Alec Rad-
  ford, Ilya Sutskever, and Dario Amodei. Language models are few-shot learners. In Proc.
  of NeurIPS, 2020. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2020/file/
  1457c0d6bfcb4967418bfb8ac142f64a-Paper.pdf.
Bei Chen, Fengji Zhang, Anh Nguyen, Daoguang Zan, Zeqi Lin, Jian-Guang Lou, and Weizhu Chen.
  Codet: Code generation with generated tests. arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.10397, 2022.
Mark Chen, Jerry Tworek, Heewoo Jun, Qiming Yuan, Henrique Ponde de Oliveira Pinto, Jared
 Kaplan, Harri Edwards, Yuri Burda, Nicholas Joseph, Greg Brockman, et al. Evaluating large
 language models trained on code. arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.03374, 2021.
Wenhu Chen, Hongmin Wang, Jianshu Chen, Yunkai Zhang, Hong Wang, Shiyang Li, Xiyou Zhou,
 and William Yang Wang. Tabfact: A large-scale dataset for table-based fact verification. arXiv
 preprint arXiv:1909.02164, 2019a.
Xinyun Chen, Chen Liang, Adams Wei Yu, Denny Zhou, Dawn Song, and Quoc V Le. Neural
  symbolic reader: Scalable integration of distributed and symbolic representations for reading
  comprehension. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2019b.
Aakanksha Chowdhery, Sharan Narang, Jacob Devlin, Maarten Bosma, Gaurav Mishra, Adam
  Roberts, Paul Barham, Hyung Won Chung, Charles Sutton, Sebastian Gehrmann, et al. Palm:
  Scaling language modeling with pathways. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.02311, 2022a.
Aakanksha Chowdhery, Sharan Narang, Jacob Devlin, Maarten Bosma, Gaurav Mishra, Adam
  Roberts, Paul Barham, Hyung Won Chung, Charles Sutton, Sebastian Gehrmann, et al. Palm:
  Scaling language modeling with pathways. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.02311, 2022b.
Hyung Won Chung, Le Hou, Shayne Longpre, Barret Zoph, Yi Tay, William Fedus, Eric Li, Xuezhi
 Wang, Mostafa Dehghani, Siddhartha Brahma, et al. Scaling instruction-finetuned language models.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.11416, 2022.
Elizabeth Clark, Asli Celikyilmaz, and Noah A. Smith. Sentence mover’s similarity: Automatic eval-
  uation for multi-sentence texts. In Proc. of ACL, July 2019. URL https://aclanthology.
  org/P19-1264/.
Abhishek Das, Georgia Gkioxari, Stefan Lee, Devi Parikh, and Dhruv Batra. Neural modular control
  for embodied question answering. In Conference on Robot Learning, pp. 53–62. PMLR, 2018.
Pradeep Dasigi, Matt Gardner, Shikhar Murty, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Eduard Hovy. Iterative
  search for weakly supervised semantic parsing. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of the
  North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language
  Technologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers), pp. 2669–2680, 2019.
Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. BERT: Pre-training of
  deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding. In Proc. of NAACL, 2019. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/810.04805.


                                               11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Julian Eisenschlos, Syrine Krichene, and Thomas Mueller. Understanding tables with intermediate
  pre-training. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2020, pp.
  281–296, 2020.
Sumit Gulwani, Oleksandr Polozov, Rishabh Singh, et al. Program synthesis. Foundations and
  Trends® in Programming Languages, 4(1-2):1–119, 2017.
Jiaqi Guo, Qian Liu, Jian-Guang Lou, Zhenwen Li, Xueqing Liu, Tao Xie, and Ting Liu. Benchmark-
   ing meaning representations in neural semantic parsing. In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on
   Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), pp. 1520–1540, 2020.
Jiaqi Guo, Jian-Guang Lou, Ting Liu, and Dongmei Zhang. Weakly supervised semantic pars-
   ing by learning from mistakes. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguis-
   tics: EMNLP 2021, pp. 2603–2617, Punta Cana, Dominican Republic, November 2021. As-
   sociation for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2021.findings-emnlp.222. URL
   https://aclanthology.org/2021.findings-emnlp.222.
Nitish Gupta, Kevin Lin, Dan Roth, Sameer Singh, and Matt Gardner. Neural module networks for
  reasoning over text. arXiv preprint arXiv:1912.04971, 2019.
Jonathan Herzig, P. Nowak, Thomas Müller, Francesco Piccinno, and Julian Martin Eisenschlos.
  Tapas: Weakly supervised table parsing via pre-training. In Proceedings of ACL, 2020.
Jordan Hoffmann, Sebastian Borgeaud, Arthur Mensch, Elena Buchatskaya, Trevor Cai, Eliza
  Rutherford, Diego de Las Casas, Lisa Anne Hendricks, Johannes Welbl, Aidan Clark, et al.
  Training compute-optimal large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.15556, 2022.
Ronghang Hu, Jacob Andreas, Marcus Rohrbach, Trevor Darrell, and Kate Saenko. Learning to
  reason: End-to-end module networks for visual question answering. In Proceedings of the IEEE
  international conference on computer vision, pp. 804–813, 2017.
Yushi Hu, Chia-Hsuan Lee, Tianbao Xie, Tao Yu, Noah A Smith, and Mari Ostendorf. In-context
  learning for few-shot dialogue state tracking. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.08568, 2022.
Zhengbao Jiang, Yi Mao, Pengcheng He, Graham Neubig, and Weizhu Chen. Omnitab: Pretraining
  with natural and synthetic data for few-shot table-based question answering. In Proceedings of the
  2022 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics:
  Human Language Technologies, pp. 932–942, 2022.
Tushar Khot, Daniel Khashabi, Kyle Richardson, Peter Clark, and Ashish Sabharwal. Text modular
  networks: Learning to decompose tasks in the language of existing models. In Proceedings of the
  2021 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics:
  Human Language Technologies, pp. 1264–1279, 2021.
Takeshi Kojima, Shixiang Shane Gu, Machel Reid, Yutaka Matsuo, and Yusuke Iwasawa. Large
  language models are zero-shot reasoners. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.11916, 2022.
Mike Lewis, Yinhan Liu, Naman Goyal, Marjan Ghazvininejad, Abdelrahman Mohamed, Omer Levy,
 Veselin Stoyanov, and Luke Zettlemoyer. BART: Denoising sequence-to-sequence pre-training for
 natural language generation, translation, and comprehension. In Proc. of ACL, July 2020. URL
 https://arxiv.org/abs/1910.13461.
Chen Liang, Jonathan Berant, Quoc Le, Kenneth D. Forbus, and Ni Lao. Neural symbolic machines:
  Learning semantic parsers on Freebase with weak supervision. In Proceedings of the 55th
  Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers),
  pp. 23–33, Vancouver, Canada, July 2017. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi:
  10.18653/v1/P17-1003. URL https://aclanthology.org/P17-1003.
Chen Liang, Mohammad Norouzi, Jonathan Berant, Quoc V Le, and Ni Lao. Memory augmented
  policy optimization for program synthesis and semantic parsing. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 31, 2018.
Qian Liu, Bei Chen, Jiaqi Guo, Zeqi Lin, and Jian guang Lou. Tapex: Table pre-training via learning
  a neural sql executor, 2021.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Yinhan Liu, Myle Ott, Naman Goyal, Jingfei Du, Mandar Joshi, Danqi Chen, Omer Levy, Mike
  Lewis, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Veselin Stoyanov. Roberta: A robustly optimized bert pretraining
  approach. arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.11692, 2019.
Arvind Neelakantan, Quoc V Le, and Ilya Sutskever. Neural programmer: Inducing latent programs
  with gradient descent. arXiv preprint arXiv:1511.04834, 2015.
Suixin Ou and Yongmei Liu. Learning to generate programs for table fact verification via structure-
  aware semantic parsing. In Proceedings of the 60th Annual Meeting of the Association for
  Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 7624–7638, Dublin, Ireland, May
  2022. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2022.acl-long.525. URL
  https://aclanthology.org/2022.acl-long.525.
Panupong Pasupat and Percy Liang. Compositional semantic parsing on semi-structured tables.
  In Proceedings of the 53rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics
  and the 7th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (Volume 1: Long
  Papers), pp. 1470–1480, Beijing, China, July 2015. Association for Computational Linguistics.
  doi: 10.3115/v1/P15-1142. URL https://aclanthology.org/P15-1142.
Colin Raffel, Noam Shazeer, Adam Roberts, Katherine Lee, Sharan Narang, Michael Matena, Yanqi
  Zhou, Wei Li, and Peter J. Liu. Exploring the limits of transfer learning with a unified text-to-text
  transformer. JLMR, 21, 2020. URL http://jmlr.org/papers/v21/20-074.html.
Nitarshan Rajkumar, Raymond Li, and Dzmitry Bahdanau. Evaluating the text-to-sql capabilities of
  large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.00498, 2022.
Torsten Scholak, Nathan Schucher, and Dzmitry Bahdanau. PICARD: Parsing incrementally for con-
  strained auto-regressive decoding from language models. In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference on
  Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pp. 9895–9901, Online and Punta Cana, Do-
  minican Republic, November 2021. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/
  2021.emnlp-main.779. URL https://aclanthology.org/2021.emnlp-main.779.
Peter Shaw, Ming-Wei Chang, Panupong Pasupat, and Kristina Toutanova. Compositional gen-
  eralization and natural language variation: Can a semantic parsing approach handle both? In
  Proceedings of the 59th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics and the
  11th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (Volume 1: Long Papers),
  Online, August 2021. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Freda Shi, Daniel Fried, Marjan Ghazvininejad, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Sida I Wang. Natural language
  to code translation with execution. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.11454, 2022.
Qi Shi, Yu Zhang, Qingyu Yin, and Ting Liu. Learn to combine linguistic and symbolic informa-
  tion for table-based fact verification. In Proceedings of the 28th International Conference on
  Computational Linguistics, pp. 5335–5346, 2020a.
Tianze Shi, Chen Zhao, Jordan Boyd-Graber, Hal Daumé III, and Lillian Lee. On the potential of
  lexico-logical alignments for semantic parsing to sql queries. In Findings of the Association for
  Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2020, pp. 1849–1864, 2020b.
Hongjin Su, Jungo Kasai, Chen Henry Wu, Weijia Shi, Tianlu Wang, Jiayi Xin, Rui Zhang, Mari
  Ostendorf, Luke Zettlemoyer, Noah A Smith, et al. Selective annotation makes language models
  better few-shot learners. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.01975, 2022.
Alon Talmor, Ori Yoran, Amnon Catav, Dan Lahav, Yizhong Wang, Akari Asai, Gabriel Ilharco,
  Hannaneh Hajishirzi, and Jonathan Berant. Multimodalqa: Complex question answering over text,
  tables and images. arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.06039, 2021.
James Thorne, Majid Yazdani, Marzieh Saeidi, Fabrizio Silvestri, Sebastian Riedel, and Alon Halevy.
  Database reasoning over text. arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.01074, 2021.
Bailin Wang, Ivan Titov, and Mirella Lapata. Learning semantic parsers from denotations with latent
  structured alignments and abstract programs. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical
  Methods in Natural Language Processing and the 9th International Joint Conference on Natural
  Language Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP), pp. 3774–3785, 2019.


                                                  13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Peng Wang, An Yang, Rui Men, Junyang Lin, Shuai Bai, Zhikang Li, Jianxin Ma, Chang Zhou,
  Jingren Zhou, and Hongxia Yang. Unifying architectures, tasks, and modalities through a simple
  sequence-to-sequence learning framework. arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.03052, 2022.
Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Ed Chi, Quoc Le, and Denny
  Zhou. Chain of thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2201.11903, 2022.
Tomer Wolfson, Mor Geva, Ankit Gupta, Matt Gardner, Yoav Goldberg, Daniel Deutch, and Jonathan
  Berant. Break it down: A question understanding benchmark. Transactions of the Association for
  Computational Linguistics, 2020.
Tianbao Xie, Chen Henry Wu, Peng Shi, Ruiqi Zhong, Torsten Scholak, Michihiro Yasunaga, Chien-
  Sheng Wu, Ming Zhong, Pengcheng Yin, Sida I. Wang, Victor Zhong, Bailin Wang, Chengzu Li,
  Connor Boyle, Ansong Ni, Ziyu Yao, Dragomir Radev, Caiming Xiong, Lingpeng Kong, Rui Zhang,
  Noah A. Smith, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Tao Yu. Unifiedskg: Unifying and multi-tasking structured
  knowledge grounding with text-to-text language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.05966, 2022.
Xiaoyu Yang, Feng Nie, Yufei Feng, Quan Liu, Zhigang Chen, and Xiaodan Zhu. Program enhanced
  fact verification with verbalization and graph attention network. In Proceedings of the 2020
  Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), pp. 7810–7825,
  2020.
Pengcheng Yin and Graham Neubig. A syntactic neural model for general-purpose code generation. In
  Proceedings of the 55th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume
  1: Long Papers), pp. 440–450, Vancouver, Canada, July 2017. Association for Computational
  Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/P17-1041. URL https://aclanthology.org/P17-1041.
Pengcheng Yin, Graham Neubig, Wen-tau Yih, and Sebastian Riedel. TaBERT: Pretraining for
  joint understanding of textual and tabular data. In Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the
  Association for Computational Linguistics. Association for Computational Linguistics, July 2020.
Ori Yoran, Alon Talmor, and Jonathan Berant. Turning tables: Generating examples from semi-
  structured tables for endowing language models with reasoning skills. In Proceedings of the 60th
  Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp.
  6016–6031, Dublin, Ireland, May 2022. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/
  v1/2022.acl-long.416. URL https://aclanthology.org/2022.acl-long.416.
Tao Yu, Rui Zhang, Kai Yang, Michihiro Yasunaga, Dongxu Wang, Zifan Li, James Ma, Irene Li,
  Qingning Yao, Shanelle Roman, et al. Spider: A large-scale human-labeled dataset for complex
  and cross-domain semantic parsing and text-to-sql task. In Proceedings of the 2018 Conference on
  Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pp. 3911–3921, 2018.
Tao Yu, Chien-Sheng Wu, Xi Victoria Lin, Yi Chern Tan, Xinyi Yang, Dragomir Radev, Caiming
  Xiong, et al. Grappa: Grammar-augmented pre-training for table semantic parsing. In International
  Conference on Learning Representations, 2020.
John M. Zelle and Raymond J. Mooney. Learning to parse database queries using inductive logic
  programming. In AAAI 1996, pp. 1050–1055, 1996.
Luke S. Zettlemoyer and Michael Collins. Learning to map sentences to logical form: Structured
  classification with probabilistic categorial grammars. UAI, 2005.
Yuchen Zhang, Panupong Pasupat, and Percy Liang. Macro grammars and holistic triggering for
  efficient semantic parsing. In Proceedings of the 2017 Conference on Empirical Methods in
  Natural Language Processing, pp. 1214–1223, 2017.
Victor Zhong, Caiming Xiong, and Richard Socher. Seq2sql: Generating structured queries from
  natural language using reinforcement learning. 2018.
Wanjun Zhong, Duyu Tang, Zhangyin Feng, Nan Duan, Ming Zhou, Ming Gong, Linjun Shou,
 Daxin Jiang, Jiahai Wang, and Jian Yin. Logicalfactchecker: Leveraging logical operations for
 fact checking with graph module network. In Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the
 Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 6053–6065, 2020.


                                                14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Fan Zhou, Mengkang Hu, Haoyu Dong, Zhoujun Cheng, Shi Han, and Dongmei Zhang. Tacube:
  Pre-computing data cubes for answering numerical-reasoning questions over tabular data. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2205.12682, 2022.
Zhaocheng Zhu, Mikhail Galkin, Zuobai Zhang, and Jian Tang. Neural-symbolic models for logical
  queries on knowledge graphs. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.10128, 2022.


                                               15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Appendices
A     M ORE I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS

We present more details in our implementation of Codex B INDER for interested readers.

A.1   C ODEX I NPUT P ROMPTS

We list prompts we use in main experiments for B INDER for each dataset. As shown, the prompt
starts with an instruction describing the task, followed by a few examples for in-context learning. We
follow Rajkumar et al. (2022) table prompt format: (1) “CREATE TABLE” schema; (2) the first three
rows of the table; (3) the question Q and parsed logic form B INDER program. Besides, we also add
row_id and lower case all table contents, which we find will improve the Codex parsing performance.
For the sample to be inferenced, we empty the B INDER program to let Codex generate it, and input
the full table to provide more information. If the full table is too large, we will shrink number of
in-context shots until the table fits within the Codex max token limits.

## WikiTQ
Generate SQL given the question and table to answer
the question correctly.
...

CREATE TABLE Electoral district of Lachlan(
    row_id int,
    member text,
    party text,
    term text)
/*
3 example rows:
SELECT * FROM w LIMIT 3;
row_id member party term
0 john ryan none 1859-1864
1 james martin none 1864-1869
2 james watson none 1869-1880
*/
Q: of the members of the third incarnation of the lachlan,
    who served the longest?
Binder: SELECT member FROM w ORDER BY
    f("How long does it last?"; term) DESC LIMIT 1


## TabFact
Generate SQL given the statement and table to verify
the statement correctly.
...
CREATE TABLE british records in athletics(
    row_id int,
    event text,
    data text,
    athlete text,
    date text,
    place text)
/*
3 example rows:
SELECT * FROM w LIMIT 3;
row_id event data athlete date place
0 5 km t19:29 andi drake 1990-05-27 00:00:00 søfteland , norway


                                                 16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


1 5 miles 32:38 + ian mccombie 1985-03-23 00:00:00
york , united kingdom
2 10 km 40:17 chris maddocks 1989-04-30 00:00:00
burrator , united kingdom
*/
Q: there be 8 different event that take place within
    the united kingdom
Binder: SELECT (SELECT COUNT(place) FROM w WHERE
    f("Is it in united kingdom?"; place) = ’yes’) = 8


## MMQA
Generate SQL given the question, table, passages, image captions
to answer the question correctly.
...
CREATE TABLE 2018 Warrington Wolves season(
    row_id int,
    player text,
    signed from text,
    contract length text,
    announced text)
/*
3 example rows:
SELECT * FROM w LIMIT 3;
row_id player signed from contract length announced
0 sitaleki akauola penrith panthers 2 2017-08-01
1 bryson goodwin south sydney rabbitohs 2 2017-10-01
2 tyrone roberts gold coast titans 3 2017-10-01
*/
CREATE TABLE Images(
    row_id int,
    gold coast titans text)
/*
All rows of the table:
SELECT * FROM w;
row_id gold coast titans
0 a logo for the golden knights is painted on the beach.
*/
Q: What player was transferred from the team that has crossed
    swords on its logo to the Warrington Wolves in the 2018 season?
Binder: SELECT player FROM w WHERE
    f("Has crossed swords on its logo?"; ‘signed from‘) = ’yes’


In end-to-end QA setting, the prompt is almost the same, except the full table contents are used in all
the in-context examples to since in most cases QA must see the complete table to answer the question
correctly. We empirically find that full table input to Codex is a necessity for end-to-end QA, but
only a small bonus for semantic parsing.
In the ablation study experiments, the prompt is also almost the same, except that under the very
large table scalability setting, we truncate number of table rows instead of in-context shots to fit in
Codex max token limits, in order to simulate a realistic situation where only parts of the table can be
input into the model.


A.2   C ODEX H YPER - PARAMETERS

In both two phases of our Codex B INDER pipeline, parsing and execution, the Codex api is called.
We set the Codex in-context learning hyper-parameters as shown in Table 8.


                                                  17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                          Parsing                        Execution
           Hyper-parameter
                               W IKI TQ   TAB FACT    MMQA    W IKI TQ   TAB FACT    MMQA
           temperature            0.4       0.6        0.4       0.0        0.0        0.0
           top_p                  1.0       1.0        1.0       1.0        1.0        1.0
           max_output_tokens     512        512        512     1024        1024       1024
           sampling_n             20         50         20        1          1          1
           stop_tokens           \n\n       \n\n       \n\n     \n\n        \n\n      \n\n
           num_shots              14         14         18        8          8          8

Table 8: Codex hyper-parameters we set in main experiments. Codex is used in two phases: Parsing
and Execution.


Parsing In parsing phase, i.e. parsing questions into programming languages, we annotate a
dozens or so examples from training set or modified examples from development set as in-context
demonstrations for each dataset. temperature is to control randomness of generations. We find 0.4 is
a suitable trade-off between fidelity and diversity of generated programs in most cases. sampling_n
is number of generations (programs) per sample. We heuristically set sampling_n as 20 in W IKI TQ
and MMQA to balance the time cost in execution and the potential performance gain over majority
voting. For TAB FACT, we increase temperature to 0.6 and 50, as we empirically find that for binary
classification tasks (or tasks with a small output space), more generations with more diversity can
better determine the final answer.

Execution As mentioned in Section 2, the executor will call model(s) with various functionalities.
In experiments, we use Codex as the underlining model for all the neural modules since Codex itself
is a very powerful large language model which can realize most functions on texts and codes. For
images, they are preprocessed into text via image captioning by OFA (Wang et al., 2022). Note that
on MMQA, replacing Codex (with image captions) with a specific VQA model is likely to improve
the performance on images because image captioning is question-agnostic while VQA model can
predict the answer based on the question.
We let Codex output only one answer with temperature 0.0 per input instead of multiple answers
followed by a majority vote considering the time cost. An interesting thing is that even when
temperature is 0.0, the Codex outputs may be different in two inferences. OpenAI team said the
randomness inherent to GPU computations, and generally the outputs will be the consistent in most
cases, which is aligned with our observations.
We also find it better to give Codex some in-context demonstrations for the neural module functionality.
50 samples are annotated as a small retrieve pool (shared across datasets) for mapping a column
to a new one according to the question, i.e., fm API in B INDER grammar. A simple BLEU score
retriever will retrieve 8 similar items from the pool as in-context demonstrations for each coming
sample. Below are several examples demonstrating the formats of neural module functionality prompt.
The output (sub-)table contains a new mapped column named after the query, which will be further
merged into the original table. Note it is important to formulate the output also as a (sub-)table,
otherwise if Codex outputs a list of answers, it will be confused which row it is generating answer for
and perform very poorly.

## 1
Give a database as shown below:
Table: Highest mountain peaks of California
/*
row_id prominence
0       10080 ft; 3072 m
1       1677 ft; 511 m
2       7196 ft; 2193 m
3       2894 ft; 882 m
4       9832 ft; 2997 m
5       2563 ft; 781 m
*/
Q: Answer question "What is the value of in feet?" row by row.
QA map@ output:


                                                     18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


/*
row_id     prominence                  What is the value of in feet?
0          10080 ft; 3072 m            10080
1          1677 ft; 511 m              1677
2          7196 ft; 2193 m             7196
3          2894 ft; 882 m              2894
4          9832 ft; 2997 m             9832
5          2563 ft; 781 m              2563
*/


## 2
Give a database as shown below:
Table: 2010-11 UAB Blazers men’s basketball team
/*
row_id hometown
0       chicago, il, u.s.
1       oklahoma city, ok, u.s.
2       montgomery, al, u.s.
3       greenville, ms, u.s.
4       birmingham, al, u.s.
*/
Q: Answer question "Is it from alabama?" row by row.
QA map@ output:
/*
row_id hometown                 Is it from alabama?
0       chicago, il, u.s.       no
1       oklahoma city, ok, u.s. no
2       montgomery, al, u.s.    yes
3       greenville, ms, u.s.    no
4.      birmingham, al, u.s.    yes
*/


## 3
Give a database as shown below:
Table: 1963 International Gold Cup
/*
row_id driver
0       jim clark
1       richie ginther
2       graham hill
3       jack brabham
4       tony maggs
*/
Q: Answer question "What is his/her country?" row by row.
QA map@ output:
/*
row_id driver            What is his/her country?
0       jim clark        scotland
1       richie ginther   united states
2       graham hill      england
3       jack brabham     australia
4       tony maggs       south africa
*/


                                               19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A.3       M AJORITY VOTE S TRATEGY

Majority vote is widely used to ensemble multiple candidate answers. A simple implementation of
majority vote is to select the answer that appears most often in candidates as the final answer. For
example, given a candidate answer pool C with n answers, the output answer aout is derived by:
                               aout = arg max(count(a)), a ∈ set(C)                               (1)
                                                                                  a
where count(·) function counts the number of occurrences of the input answer in C, and set(·)
function de-duplicates the input list. In our case, n programs are generated per sample, and their
execution results compose the candidate answer pool.
In experiments, we adopt two variants of majority vote strategies. The first one we call answer-biased.
In TAB FACT, we conjecture that it is difficult to validate a statement of multiple sub-statements as
entailed (i.e., answer 1) with SQL program, since a minor error in program will cause the execution
to output refuted (i.e., answer 0). In other words, we value it when an answer 1 occurs because it
indicates the statement has a high probability of being entailed. Thus, we re-weight answers by
assigning four votes for an answer 1, and one vote for an answer 0. The second is program-biased.
We assign larger weights to B INDER language when it occurs in the generated programs because
B INDER consists of small portion in few-shot prompt, and thus more generations will be in standard
programming language. Specifically, we re-weight B INDER program with ten votes, and the others
with one vote in W IKI TQ and MMQA.


A.4       B INDER G RAMMAR A DAPTION TO SQL


  Question                                                          AST                       SQL                                  Production Rule Extension
     Which is the best-selling solid-color Shirt made in America?
                                                                    SELECT       FROM        WHERE         ORDER BY       LIMIT    Object Identifier   => Table | … | API Column
  SQL
      SELECT Shirt                                                   Shirt        T           AND         Sales   DESC         1
      FROM T                                                                                                                       API Column          => Column | fcol(Q; D)
      WHERE f(Solid-Color?; Shirt) = ‘yes’                                               =            =
         AND f(North America?; Made_in) = ‘yes’                                                                                    Function            => Aggregate | … | fval(Q; D)
      ORDER BY Sales DESC LIMIT 1                                   f(Solid-Color?;     yes f(North America?;            yes
                                                                      Shirt)                   Made_in)


Figure 4: An illustration of B INDER program AST and extension to SQL grammar. The blue types in
the production rule are extended by B INDER.


B INDER extends the production rules of the programming language to ensure the return values of
API calls can be compatible with its original grammar. Take SQL as an example, in Figure 4, two
APIs fcol and fval are added as identifiers in the production rules to fit in as a column and a value in
SQL. The AST of the shown B INDER program is quite similar to standard SQL’s AST, except that
API calls are placed in the column position.


A.5       E VALUATOR

Program executions are naturally more difficult to match gold answers exactly when the answer is not
a span in the input knowledge source, while end-to-end models may match this pattern by finetuning
or infer phrases from the question. However, we find that in W IKI TQ, some error cases of program
execution outputs are correct according to humans. These cases mainly fall into two types. The first
is A or B choice question, e.g.,, “Are there at least 13 different components on the chart?" in Table 9.
The SQL program SELECT COUNT(component) > 13, returns 1 to indicate “yes” and 0 for
“no”. Generally in A or B problem, we match 1 with A and 0 with B. The second is number with unit
question, e.g.,, “what is the difference in years between constituency 1 and 2” in Table 9, where the
gold answer contains unit years in it, while it is almost impossible for programs to derive years, and 4
is also a reasonable correct answer in this case. Therefore, we add pre-matching logics upon W IKI TQ
official evaluator for these two problems. Besides, we also normalize the dates with Recognizers
package in Python. Table 9 gives some examples to show the differences of three W IKI TQ evaluators.
For fair comparison, all previous baselines are re-evaluated with the semantic-match evaluator in
experiments.


                                                                                                     20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


    Example                                            EM(TaPEx string match)   EM(W IKI TQ official)   EM(Semantic match)
    (Normalization)
    Question: What was the same problem that                     ×                       ✓                      ✓
               Bernard Collomb had as Innes Ireland?
    Gold Answer: oil pressure
    Pred Answer: oil pressure (56 laps)
    (Float Precision)
    Question: What is the difference between the                 ×                       ✓                      ✓
               qualifying time in 1967 and 1965?
    Gold Answer: 7.45
    Pred Answer: 7.449999999999989
    (A or B Choice)
    Question: Are there at least 13                              ×                       ×                      ✓
               different components on the chart?
    Gold Answer: Yes
    Pred Answer: 1
    (Number with Units)
    Question: What is the difference in years                    ×                       ×                      ✓
               between constiuency 1 and 2?
    Gold Answer: 4 years
    Pred Answer: 4


Table 9: Examples to illustrate differences among three exact match evaluators on W IKI TQ. In
experiments, we evaluate all baselines and our method with semantic-match evaluator.


Figure 5: Comparison of the B INDER method(ours) with other large language model usage paradigms:
End-to-End, Chain-of-Thought, and Semantic Parsing/Code Generation.


B      C OMPARISON WITH OTHER LARGE LANGUAGE MODEL USAGE PARADIGMS
Besides our work, some other works also focus on how to leverage large language models in creative
ways to achieve better performance on downstream tasks and see improvements with proper designs.
We compare our Binder method with the three previous paradigms of large language model usage:
End-End, Chain-of-Thought, and Semantic Parsing/Code Generation.

End-to-End End-to-End method (Brown et al., 2020; Hoffmann et al., 2022, i.a.) aims to use large
language models to generate final answers directly, often done by providing a task description and/or
a few examples for in-context learning. Despite being effective enough to reach state-of-the-art or
comparable performance in a large number of benchmarks, it suffers from being uninterpretable and
lacking in robustness.

Chain-of-thought Chain-of-thought methods (Wei et al., 2022; Chowdhery et al., 2022a; Kojima
et al., 2022; Chung et al., 2022, i.a.) improve the ability of large language models to perform
complex reasoning by generating a series of intermediate reasoning steps. While achieving great
success in various benchmarks, as a model-generated natural language, chain-of-thought suffers from
unreliability and uncontrollability.


                                                               21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Semantic Parsing/Code Generation Semantic Parsing/Code Generation methods (Chen et al.,
2021; Rajkumar et al., 2022; Shi et al., 2022) aim to parse the question into a pre-defined pro-
gram(SQL, Python, etc.), then execute it through the corresponding interpreter. It gains advantages
in interpretability and robustness compared with End-to-End and Chain-of-Thought methods, but
still suffers from the fixed grammar of the pre-defined programming language, making it inherently
limited in coverage (Shi et al., 2020b).

B INDER B INDER is a neural-symbolic paradigm that aims at mapping the question to a program
that allows binding a unified LM API for additional functionalities. This keeps the interpretability
and robustness of the semantic parsing method while unlocking the grammar’s limitations on its
coverage.

C     M ORE E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS
C.1   R ESULTS OF M ORE P REVIOUS S YSTEMS

Due to page limits, we didn’t list the complete previous systems in main results of W IKI TQ and
TAB FACT. In this section, we present comparisons between more previous methods and ours, as
shown in Table 10 and Table 11.

       Method                        Dev    Test
                        Finetuned
       Pasupat & Liang (2015)        37.0   37.1
       Neelakantan et al. (2015)     34.1   34.2
       Zhang et al. (2017)           40.6   43.7         Method                             Small Test
       Liang et al. (2018)           42.7   43.8                            Finetuned
       Dasigi et al. (2019)          43.1   44.3         Chen et al. (2019a)†                 68.1
       Agarwal et al. (2019)         43.2   44.1         Zhong et al. (2020)†                 74.3
       Wang et al. (2019)            43.7   44.5         Shi et al. (2020a)†                  74.2
       Herzig et al. (2020)            -    48.8         Yang et al. (2020)†                  76.2
       Xie et al. (2022)¶            51.9   50.6         Ou & Liu (2022)†                     77.0
       Yin et al. (2020)             53.0   52.3         Liu et al. (2021) (BART-Large)       82.5
       Yu et al. (2020)              51.9   52.7         Eisenschlos et al. (2020)            83.9
       Guo et al. (2021)             53.6   52.3         Xie et al. (2022)                    85.4
       Liu et al. (2021)¶            60.4   59.1         Liu et al. (2021) (Tapex)            85.9
       Zhou et al. (2022)¶           61.1   61.3                       Without Finetuning
       Jiang et al. (2022)¶            -    63.3         Codex end-to-end QA                  72.6
                    Without Finetuning                   Codex SQL†                           80.7
       Codex end-to-end QA¶          50.5   48.7         Codex B INDER † (Ours)                85.1
       Codex SQL¶†                   60.2   61.1               with few-shot retriever         86.0
       Codex B INDER † (Ours)       65.3    65.2
                                                Table 11: TAB FACT accuracy on small test set of
Table 10: W IKI TQ execution accuracy of more more previous systems. † means symbolic method
previous systems. ¶ means the result has been that outputs intermediate languages.
re-evaluated by the semantic-match evaluator in
Table 9. † means symbolic method that outputs
intermediate languages.


C.2   R ESULTS WITH W IKI TQ O FFICIAL E VALUATORS

We list B INDER performance evaluated under W IKI TQ official evaluator in Table 12. As shown,
there exist performance drops compared with semantic-match evaluator. The symbolic methods with
SQL and B INDER see larger drops (about 2.5%) than end-to-end methods (about 1%) because the A
or B choice questions and number with units answers (illustrated in Table 9) are judged as incorrect.

C.3   A BLATION S TUDY OF #M AJORITY VOTE C ANDIDATES

In this section, we give an empirical study of how number of generations (i.e., candidate B INDER
programs) affects majority voting performance. As shown in Figure 6 and Figure 7, increasing the


                                                   22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                               Method                         Dev    Test
                                                 Finetuned
                               T5-3B (Xie et al., 2022)       51.6   50.3
                               Tapex (Liu et al., 2021)       60.1   58.5
                               TaCube (Zhou et al., 2022)     60.9   60.8
                               OmniTab (Jiang et al., 2022)    -     62.9
                                           Without Finetuning
                               Codex end-to-end QA            49.3   47.6
                               Codex SQL†                     57.6   55.1
                               Codex B INDER † (Ours)         62.6   61.9

Table 12: W IKI TQ execution accuracy using its official evaluator, with a normalizer to recognize
date.



#candidates of majority vote effectively improves the performance on W IKI TQ and TAB FACT. Em-
pirically, TAB FACT requires more candidates to determine entailed or refuted. We haven’t conducted
experiments on W IKI TQ with more than 20 candidate programs now, which may potentially lift the
current best performance a bit.


  66                                                 87



  65                                                 86


  64
                                                     85

  63
                                                     84

  62

                                                     83
  61

                                                     82
  60


  59                                                 81
        1        5        10       15        20           1     5    10     20   30   40   50    60


 Figure 6: W IKI TQ execution accuracy on dev Figure 7: TAB FACT execution accuracy on small
 set with different numbers of generations (x-axis) test set with different numbers of generations (x-
 used in majority vote.                             axis) used in majority vote.


C.4    W IKI TQ SQL U NSOLVABLE P ROPORTION BY O UR S TATISTICS

In Table 3, the decomposition of execution accuracy on W IKI TQ development set, we can see the
B INDER method also gain advantage on Program-solvable subset (and pure SQL method still able
to have a certain performance on Program-unsolvable part). It is surprisingly since this part could
already be solved by SQL (according to notation from SQUALL dataset), and thus our approach
does not theoretically improve the performance of this part. Further, we found this is because in
SQUALL, authors normalized part of the table before doing the SQL annotation, and they also
missed some samples that could be solved after normalizing the table. In turn, there is a significant
portion of the data marked by SQUALL, and when we use the original table rather than the table
modified by the authors, we find that it belongs to the part that cannot be resolved by the program, so
that B INDER could gain some advantage on it. The same is true for the part that is not marked by
SQUALL. We re-executed the SQL annotation of the SQUALL dataset on the tables we normalized
for each sample, check and re-judged whether the sample was a Program-solvable sample by whether
the execution result matched the previous one, and obtained the new split of 1251 (44.19%) and 1580
(55.81%) for Program-unsolvable and Program-solvable set, respectively.(Previous split according
to SQUALL is of 625 (22.08%) and 2206 (77.92%) examples. This reduces table content noise by
artificially cleaning the table, but also underestimates the challenges posed by in-the-wild data.) The
new split will be released in our code for future more fine-grained analysis or exploration.


                                                  23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


       Automated

       Human labor


      (1)                     (2)                         (3)                          (4)                            (5)                    Good performance
                                  Annotate Binder               Generate Binder         Apply the underlying models
       Select a programming                                                                                                 Execute Binder   Interpretability
                                     programs                      programs                to the neural modules
             language                                                                                                          programs
                              (a dozen or so is enough)           with Codex              (a LLM may be enough)                              Scalability


                              Figure 8: A pipeline to extend B INDER to a new domain.


D     P IPELINE TO E XTEND B INDER
In this section, we introduce a pipeline with Codex to extend B INDER to a new domain with new the
programming language and neural modules. Figure 8 illustrates the pipeline:

      (1) A programming language is selected as the intermediate representation according to the
          domain. For example, SQL fits table domain, SPARQL, Cypher fit knowledge graph domain,
          and general-purpose languages like Python, Lisp, and Java are more likely to be adapted to
          various domains.
      (2) Before parsing the text into B INDER programs, in-context examples are required to help
          Codex learn this task and the grammar adaption (inserted neural modules) from the original
          language. Empirically, since Codex has been heavily pretrained on code, a dozen of B INDER
          program annotations are enough. Besides, annotating a pool of more examples (e.g., 100)
          and retrieving in-context examples for each inference sample has been proved to be a
          effective way to improve parsing accuracy, as we applied in TAB FACT.
      (3) Generate the B INDER programs with Codex given the in-context examples and the inference
          query. Codex hyper-parameters can be adjusted based on the task.
      (4) Bind models with the neural module functionalities in B INDER program. In this paper,
          we set Codex as the only underlying model for all functionalities like commonsense QA,
          information extraction because large language models (LLM) are powerful and easy-to-use.
          If a single LLM is not enough to realize the required functionalities, e.g., VQA, bind the
          API with a specialized VQA model given the inputs are images.
      (5) Execute the B INDER programs with the deterministic language executor and neural models.

E     E RROR A NALYSIS
E.1    E RROR TYPES

We divide the error type into:

      (1) Syntax error: prediction not satisfied with the syntax of B INDER program.
      (2) Semantic error:
        • Column: choose the wrong column, or miss the restriction from certain column.
        • Value: use the wrong value, or obfuscate the fuzzy match with the exact match.
        • Operator: use wrong operator or miss the restriction of operators.
        • Structure: The query produced an overall structural error. Either the overall meaning of the
          query is misinterpreted; or the query only considers the question and is not applicable to
          this table at all.
        • B INDER usage: missing the usage of B INDER when needed, or the command inside the
          B INDER cell is improper or ambiguous to execute.
      (3) Incorrect execution: The predicted program is correct, but the final result are wrong because
          some wrong mid-term answers are predicted in the execution process(error in information
          extraction, error in handling the corner cases value etc.).
      (4) False negative: the annotation of the gold answer is wrong; or the prediction is actually
          right while the executor misjudges it as wrong due to limited ability.


                                                                                  24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                      row_id   year        site     winning team        losing team      series
                         0     1902     lawrence      kansas 16        kansas state 0    ku 1–0
                         1     1903     lawrence      kansas 34        kansas state 0    ku 2–0
                         2     1904     manhattan     kansas 41        kansas state 4    ku 3–0
                         3     1905     lawrence      kansas 28        kansas state 0    ku 4–0
                         4     1906     manhattan   kansas state 6        kansas 4       ku 4–1
                         5     1907     lawrence      kansas 29       kansas state 10    ku 5–1
                        ...
                        21     1924     manhattan    kansas state 6     kansas 0        ku 17–2–3
                        22     1925     lawrence    kansas state 14     kansas 7        ku 17–3–3
                        23     1926     manhattan   kansas state 27     kansas 0        ku 17–4–3
                        24     1927     lawrence    kansas state 13     kansas 2        ku 17–5–3
                        25     1928     manhattan      kansas 7       kansas state 0    ku 18–5–3
                        ...

Table 13: The table of W IKI TQ nt-1239 with title "Kansas–Kansas State football rivalry". We use
it for demonstration of interpretibility. Removed rows unimportant to get the answer. The query is
When was the first game that kansas state won by double digits? and the gold answer is 1926.


E.2       E RROR EXAMPLE

The context(table, query, answer) of W IKI TQ nt-1239 is shown in Table 13.

F       A NNOTATION I NTERFACE
We build an annotation interface allowing real-time executions with huggingface spaces4 . Currently,
SQL and B INDER with SQL are supported. We will release the source code which hopefully may
benefit annotations of tasks requiring symbolic languages in the community, e.g., semantic parsing
and code generation. Figure 9 and 10 demonstrate our interface.


    4
        https://huggingface.co/spaces


                                                         25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                   Figure 9: An example from W IKI TQ annotation interface.


                                               26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                  Figure 10: An example from TAB FACT annotation interface.


                                               27
