Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


T HE ROLE OF C OVERAGE IN O NLINE R EINFORCEMENT
L EARNING
 Tengyang Xie∗                       Dylan J. Foster∗                            Yu Bai
 UIUC                                Microsoft Research                          Salesforce Research
 tx10@illinois.edu                   dylanfoster@microsoft.com                   yu.bai@salesforce.com


 Nan Jiang                                                  Sham M. Kakade
 UIUC                                                       Harvard University
 nanjiang@illinois.edu                                      sham@seas.harvard.edu


                                                 A BSTRACT
             Coverage conditions—which assert that the data logging distribution adequately
             covers the state space—play a fundamental role in determining the sample complex-
             ity of offline reinforcement learning. While such conditions might seem irrelevant
             to online reinforcement learning at first glance, we establish a new connection by
             showing—somewhat surprisingly—that the mere existence of a data distribution
             with good coverage can enable sample-efficient online RL. Concretely, we show that
             coverability—that is, existence of a data distribution that satisfies a ubiquitous cover-
             age condition called concentrability—can be viewed as a structural property of the
             underlying MDP, and can be exploited by standard algorithms for sample-efficient
             exploration, even when the agent does not know said distribution. We complement
             this result by proving that several weaker notions of coverage, despite being sufficient
             for offline RL, are insufficient for online RL. We also show that existing complexity
             measures for online RL, including Bellman rank and Bellman-Eluder dimension,
             fail to optimally capture coverability, and propose a new complexity measure, the
             sequential extrapolation coefficient, to provide a unification.


1       I NTRODUCTION
The last decade has seen development of reinforcement learning algorithms with strong empirical per-
formance in domains including robotics (Kober et al., 2013; Lillicrap et al., 2015), dialogue systems (Li
et al., 2016), and personalization (Agarwal et al., 2016; Tewari and Murphy, 2017). While there is great
interest in applying these techniques to real-world decision making applications, the number of samples
(steps of interaction) required to do so is often prohibitive, with state-of-the-art algorithms requiring mil-
lions of samples to reach human-level performance in challenging domains. Developing algorithms with
improved sample efficiency, which entails efficiently generalizing across high-dimensional states and ac-
tions while taking advantage of problem structure as modeled practitioners, remains a major challenge.
Investigation into design and analysis of algorithms for sample-efficient reinforcement learning has
largely focused on two distinct problem formulations:
• Online reinforcement learning, where the learner can repeatedly interact with the environment by
  executing a policy and observing the resulting trajectory.
• Offline reinforcement learning, where the learner has access to logged transitions and rewards
  gathered from a fixed behavioral policy (e.g., historical data or expert demonstrations), but cannot
  directly interact with the underlying environment.
While these formulations share a common goal (learning a near-optimal policy), the algorithms used to
achieve this goal and conditions under which it can be achieved are seemingly quite different. Focusing
on value function approximation, sample-efficient algorithms for online reinforcement learning require
both (a) representation conditions, which assert that the function approximator is flexible enough to
represent value functions for the underlying MDP (optimal or otherwise), and (b) exploration conditions
    ∗
        Equal contribution


                                                        1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


(or, structural conditions) which limit the amount of exploration required to learn a near-optimal policy—
typically by enabling extrapolation across states or limiting the number of effective state distributions
(Russo and Van Roy, 2013; Jiang et al., 2017; Sun et al., 2019; Wang et al., 2020b; Du et al., 2021;
Jin et al., 2021a; Foster et al., 2021). Algorithms for offline reinforcement learning typically require
similar representation conditions. However, since data is collected passively from a fixed logging
policy/distribution rather than actively, the exploration conditions used in online RL are replaced with
coverage conditions, which assert that the data collection distribution provides sufficient coverage over
the state space (Antos et al., 2008; Chen and Jiang, 2019; Xie and Jiang, 2020; 2021; Jin et al., 2021b;
Rashidinejad et al., 2021; Foster et al., 2022; Zhan et al., 2022). The aim for both lines of research (online
and offline) is to identify the weakest possible conditions under which learning is possible, and design
algorithms that take advantage of these conditions. The two lines have largely evolved in parallel, and
it is natural to wonder whether there are deeper connections. Since the conditions for sample-efficient
online RL and offline RL mainly differ via exploration versus coverage, this leads us to ask:
          If an MDP admits a data distribution with favorable coverage for offline RL, what
                  does this imply about our ability to perform online RL efficiently?
Beyond intrinsic theoretical value, this question is motivated by the observation that many real-
world applications lie on a spectrum between online and offline. It is common for the learner to
have access to logged/offline data, yet also have the ability to actively interact with the underlying
environment, possibly subject to limitations such as an exploration budget (Kalashnikov et al., 2018).
Building a theory of real-world RL that can lead to algorithm design insights for such settings requires
understanding the interplay between online and offline RL.

1.1   O UR R ESULTS
We investigate connections between coverage conditions in offline RL and exploration in online RL
by focusing on the concentrability coefficient, the most ubiquitous notion of coverage in offline RL.
Concentrability quantifies the extent to which the data collection distribution uniformly covers the
state-action distribution induced by any policy. We introduce a new structural property, coverability,
which reflects the best concentrability coefficient that can be achieved by any data distribution,
possibly designed by an oracle with knowledge of the underlying MDP. Our main results are as follows:
1. We show (Section 3) that coverability (that is, mere existence of a distribution with good concen-
   trability) is sufficient for sample-efficient online exploration, even when the learner has no prior
   knowledge of this distribution. This result requires no additional assumptions on the underly-
   ing MDP beyond standard Bellman completeness, and—perhaps surprisingly—is achieved using
   standard algorithms (Jin et al., 2021a), albeit with analysis ideas that go beyond existing techniques.
2. We show (Section 4) that several weaker notions of coverage in offline RL, including single-policy
   concentrability (Jin et al., 2021b; Rashidinejad et al., 2021) and conditions based on Bellman
   residuals (Chen and Jiang, 2019; Xie et al., 2021a), are insufficient for sample-efficient online
   exploration. This shows that in general, coverage in offline reinforcement learning and exploration
   in online RL not compatible, and highlights the need for additional investigation going forward.
Our results serve as a starting point for systematic study of connections between online and offline
learnability in RL. To this end, we provide several secondary results:
1. We show (Section 5) that existing complexity measures for online RL, including Bellman rank and
   Bellman-Eluder dimension, do not optimally capture coverability, and provide a new complexity
   measure, the sequential extrapolation coefficient, which unifies these notions.
2. We establish (Appendix C) connections between coverability and reinforcement learning with
   exogenous noise, with applications to learning in exogenous block MDPs (Efroni et al., 2021; 2022a).
3. We give algorithms for reward-free exploration (Jin et al., 2020a; Chen et al., 2022) under
   coverability (Appendix G).
While our results primarily concern analysis of existing algorithms rather than algorithm design, they
highlight a number of exciting directions for future research, and we are optimistic that the notion
of coverability can guide the design of practical algorithms going forward.
Notation. For an integer n ∈ N, we let [n] denote the set {1,...,n}. For a set X , we let ∆(X ) denote the
set of all probability distributions over X . We adopt standard big-oh notation, and write f = O(g)
                                                                                                  e     to
denote that f = O(g·max{1,polylog(g)}) and a ≲ b as shorthand for a = O(b).


                                                      2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


2       BACKGROUND : O NLINE /O FFLINE RL, C OVERAGE , AND C OVERABILITY
Markov decision processes. We consider an episodic reinforcement learning setting. Formally,
a Markov decision process M = (X ,A,P,R,H,x1 ) consists of a (potentially large) state space X ,
action space A, horizon H, probability transition function P = {Ph }H      h=1 , where Ph : X ×A → ∆(X ),
reward function R = {Rh }H    h=1 , where R  h : X ×A   →  [0,1], and deterministic  initial state x1 ∈ X .1 A
                                                                                             H
(randomized) policy is a sequence of per-timestep functions π = {πh : X → ∆(A)}h=1 . The policy
induces a distribution over trajectories (x1 ,a1 ,r1 ),...,(xH ,aH ,rH ) via the following process. For
h = 1,...,H: ah ∼ π(· | xh ), rh = Rh (xh ,ah ), and xh+1 ∼ Ph (· | xh ,ah ). For notational convenience,
we use xH+1 to denote a deterministic terminal state with zero reward. We let Eπ [·] and Pπ [·] denote
expectation and probability under this process, respectively.
                                                        PH
The Q-function for policy π is Qπh (x, a) := Eπ            h′ =h rh | xh = x, ah = a , the value function
                                                                   ′

for π is Vhπ (x) := Ea∼πh (·|x) [Qπh (x, a)], and the expected reward for π is J(π) := V1π (x1 ). We
let π ⋆ denote the optimal (deterministic) policy, which maximizes Qπh (x,a) for all (x,a) ∈ X × A
                                       ⋆                 ⋆
simultaneously; we define Vh⋆ = Vhπ and Q⋆h = Qπh . We define the occupancy measure for policy π
via dπh (x,a) := Pπ [xh = x,ah = a] and dπh (x) := Pπ [xh = x]. We let Th denote the Bellman operator for
                                                                          ′ ′
                                                   ′ ∼P (x,a) [maxa′ f (x ,a )] for f : X ×A → R. We also
layer h, defined via [Th f ](x,a) = Rh (x,a)+ExP        h
assume that rewards are normalized such that h∈[H] rh ∈ [0,1] . To simplify technical presentation,
we assume that X and A are countable; we anticipate that this assumption can be removed.

Online Reinforcement Learning. Our main results concern online reinforcement learning in an
episodic framework, where the learner repeatedly interacts with an unknown MDP by executing a
policy and observing the resulting trajectory, with the goal of maximizing total reward.
Formally, the protocol proceeds in T rounds, where at each round t = 1,...,T , the learner: i) Selects a
policy π (t) = πh(t) h∈[H] to execute in the (unknown) underlying MDP M ⋆ ; ii) Observe the resulting
trajectory (x(t) (t)
             1 ,a1 P ,r1(t) ),...,(x(t) (t) (t)
                                    H ,aH ,rH ). The learner’s goal is to minimize their cumulative regret,
defined via Reg := t∈[T ] J(π ⋆ )−J(π (t) ).
To achieve sample-efficient online reinforcement learning guarantees that do not depend on the size of
the state space, one typically appeals to value function approximation methods that take advantage of a
function class F ⊂ (X ×A → R) that attempts to model the value functions for the underlying MDP
M ⋆ (optimal or otherwise). An active line of research provides structural conditions under which such
approaches succeed (Russo and Van Roy, 2013; Jiang et al., 2017; Sun et al., 2019; Wang et al., 2020b;
Du et al., 2021; Jin et al., 2021a; Foster et al., 2021), based on assumptions that control the interplay
between the function approximator F and the dynamics of the MDP M ⋆ . These results require (i)
representation conditions, which require that F is flexible enough to model value functions of interest
(e.g., Q⋆ ∈ F or Th Fh+1 ⊆ Fh ) and (ii) exploration conditions, which either explicitly or implicitly
limit the amount of exploration required for a deliberate algorithm to learn a near-optimal policy. This
is typically accomplished by either enabling extrapolation from states already visited, or by limiting
the number of effective state distributions that can be encountered.

Offline Reinforcement Learning and Coverage Conditions. Our aim is to investigate parallels
between online and offline reinforcement learning. In offline reinforcement learning, the learner cannot
actively execute policies in the underlying MDP M ⋆ . Instead, for each layer h, they receive a dataset
Dh of n tuples (xh ,ah ,rh ,xh+1 ) with rh = Rh (xh ,ah ), xh+1 ∼ Ph (· | xh ,ah ), and (xh ,ah ) ∼ µh i.i.d.,
where µh ∈ ∆(X ×A) is the data collection distribution; we define µ = {µh }h∈[H] . The goal of the
                                                         b, that is: J(π ⋆ )−J(b
learner is to use this data to learn an ε-optimal policy π                     π ) ≤ ε.
Algorithms for offline reinforcement learning require representation conditions similar to those re-
quired for online RL. However, since it is not possible to actively explore the underlying MDP, one
dispenses with exploration conditions and instead considers coverage conditions, which require that
each data distribution µh sufficiently covers the state space. As an example, consider Fitted Q-Iteration
(FQI), one of the most well-studied offline reinforcement learning algorithms (Munos, 2007; Munos
and Szepesvári, 2008; Chen and Jiang, 2019). The algorithm, which uses least-squares to approxi-
mate Bellman backups, is known to succeed under (i) a representation condition known as Bellman
completeness (or “completeness”), which requires that Th f ∈ Fh for all f ∈ Fh+1 , and (ii) a coverage
condition called concentrability. To state, the result, recall that ∥x∥∞ := maxi |xi | for x ∈ Rd .
    1
        While our results assume that the initial state is fixed for simplicity, this assumption is straightforward to relax.


                                                               3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                                                                  H
Definition 1 (Concentrability). The concentrability coefficient for a data distribution µ = {µh }h=1
and policy class Π is given by Cconc (µ) := supπ∈Π,h∈[H] ∥dπh /µh ∥∞ .
Concentrability requires that the data distribution uniformly covers all possible induced state dis-
tributions. With concentrability2 and completeness, FQI can learn an ε-optimal policy using
poly(Cconc (µ),log|F|,H,ε−1 ) samples. Importantly, this result scales only with the concentrability
coefficient Cconc (µ) and the capacity log|F| for the function class, and has no explicit dependence on
the size of the state space. There is a vast literature which provides algorithms with similar, often more
refined guarantees (Chen and Jiang, 2019; Xie and Jiang, 2020; 2021; Jin et al., 2021b; Rashidinejad
et al., 2021; Foster et al., 2022; Zhan et al., 2022).

The Coverability Coefficient. Having seen that access to a data distribution µ with low concen-
trability Cconc (µ) is sufficient for sample-efficient offline RL, we now ask what existence of such a
distribution implies about our ability to perform online RL. To this end, we introduce a new structural
parameter, the coverability coefficient, whose value reflects the best concentrability coefficient that can
be achieved with oracle knowledge of the underlying MDP M ⋆ .
Definition 2 (Coverability). The coverability coefficient Ccov > 0 for a policy class Π is given by
Ccov := inf µ1 ,...,µH ∈∆(X ×A) {Cconc (µ)} .
Coverability is an intrinsic structural property of the MDP M ⋆ which implicitly restricts the complexity
of the set of possible state distributions. While it is always the case that Ccov ≤ |X |·|A|, the coefficient
can be significantly smaller (in particular, independent of |X |) for benign MDPs such as block MDPs
and MDPs with low-rank structure (Chen and Jiang, 2019, Prop 5); see Appendix C for details.
With this definition in mind, we ask: If the MDP M ⋆ satisfies low coverability, is sample-efficient
online reinforcement learning possible? Note that if the learner were given access to data from the
distribution µ that achieves the value of Ccov , it would be possible to simply appeal to offline RL
methods such as FQI, but since the learner has no prior knowledge of µ, this question is non-trivial,
and requires deliberate exploration.

3    C OVERABILITY I MPLIES S AMPLE -E FFICIENT O NLINE E XPLORATION
We now present our main result, which shows that low coverability is sufficient for sample-efficient
online exploration. We first describe the algorithm and regret bound, then sketch the proof and give intu-
ition (Section 3.1). We conclude (Section 3.2) by applying the main result to give regret bounds for learn-
ing in exogenous block MDPs (Efroni et al., 2021), highlighting structural properties of coverability.

Function approximation. We work with a value function class F = F1 × ··· × FH , where
Fh ⊂ (X × A → [0, 1]), with the goal of modeling value functions for the underlying MDP. We
adopt the convention that fH+1 = 0, and for each f ∈ F, we let πf denote the greedy policy with
πf,h (x) := argmaxa∈A fh (x,a), and we use fh (x,πh ) := Ea∼πh (·|x) [fh (x,a)] for any πh . We take our
policy class to be the induced class Π := {πf | f ∈ F} for the remainder of the paper unless otherwise
stated. We make the following standard completeness assumption, which requires that the value
function class is closed under Bellman backups (Wang et al., 2020b; Jin et al., 2020b; Wang et al.,
2021b; Jin et al., 2021a).
Assumption 1 (Completeness). For all h ∈ [H], we have Th fh+1 ∈ Fh for all fh+1 ∈ Fh+1 .
Completeness implies that F is realizable (that is, Q⋆ ∈ F), but is a stronger assumption in general.
We assume for simplicity that |F| < ∞, and our results scale with log|F|; this can be extended to
infinite classes via covering numbers using a standard analysis.

Algorithm and main result. Our result is based on a new analysis of the G OLF algorithm of Jin et al.
(2021a), which is presented in Algorithm 1 of Appendix D for completeness. G OLF is based on the
principle of optimism in the face of uncertainty. At each round, the algorithm restricts to a confidence
set F (t) ⊆ F with the property that Q⋆ ∈ F (t) , and chooses π (t) = πf (t) based on the value function
f (t) ∈ F (t) with the most optimistic estimate f1 (x1 ,πf,1 (x1 )) for the total reward. The confidence sets
F (t) are based on an empirical proxy to squared Bellman error, and are constructed in a global fashion
that entails optimizing over fh for all layers h ∈ [H] simultaneously (Zanette et al., 2020a).
   2
     Specifically, FQI requires concentrability with Π chosen to be the set of all admissible policies (see, e.g., Chen
and Jiang, 2019). Other algorithms (Xie and Jiang, 2020) can leverage concentrability w.r.t smaller policy classes.


                                                          4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Note that while G OLF was originally introduced to provide regret bounds based on the notion of
Bellman-Eluder dimension, we show (Section 5) that coverability cannot be (optimally) captured by
this complexity measure, necessitating a new analysis. Our main result, Theorem 1, shows that G OLF
attains low regret for online reinforcement learning whenever the coverability coefficient is small.
Theorem 1 (Coverability implies sample-efficient online RL). Under Assumption 1, there exists an
absolute constant c such that for any δ ∈ (0,1] and T ∈ N+ , if we choose
                                                                      p       β = c · log(T H|F |/δ) in
Algorithm 1, then with probability at least 1−δ, we have Reg ≤ O(H Ccov T log(T H|F |/δ)log(T )),
where Ccov is the coverability coefficient (Definition 2).

Beyond the coverability parameter Ccov , the regret bound in Theorem 1 depends only on standard
problem parameters (the horizon H and function class capacity log|F|). Hence, this result shows that
coverability, along with completeness, is sufficient for sample-efficient online RL. Additional features
of Theorem 1 are as follows.
• While coverability implies that there exists a distribution µ for which the concentrability coefficient
  Cconc is bounded, Algorithm 1 has no prior knowledge of this distribution. We find the fact that the
  G OLF algorithm—which does not involve explicitly searching such a distribution—succeeds under
  this condition to be somewhat surprising (recall that given sample access to µ, one can simply run FQI).
  Our proof shows that despite the fact that G OLF does not explicitly reason about µ, coverability implic-
  itly restricts the set of possible state distributions, and limits the extent to which the algorithm can be
  “surprised” by substantially new distributions. We anticipate that this analysis will find broader use.
• Ignoring
    p       factors logarithmic in T , H, and δ −1 , the regret bound in Theorem 1 scales as
  H Ccov T log|F|, which is optimal for contextual bandits (where Ccov = |A| and H = 2),3 and
  hence cannot be improved in general (Agarwal et al., 2012). The dependence on H matches the
  regret bound for G OLF based on Bellman-Eluder dimension (Jin et al., 2021a).
• G OLF uses confidence sets based on squared Bellman error, but there are similar algorithms which
  instead work with average Bellman error (Jiang et al., 2017; Du et al., 2021) and, as a result, require
  only realizability rather than completeness (Assumption 1). While existing complexity measures such
  as Bellman rank and Bellman-Eluder dimension can be used to analyze both types of algorithm, and
  our results critically use the non-negativity of squared Bellman error, which facilitates certain “change-
  of-measure” arguments. Consequently, it is unclear whether the completeness assumption can be
  removed (i.e., whether coverability and realizability alone suffice for sample-efficient online RL).
On the algorithmic side, our results give guarantees for PAC RL via online-to-batch conversion, which
we state here for completeness. We also provide an extension to reward-free exploration in Appendix G.
Corollary 2. Under Assumption 1, there exists an absolute constant c such that for any δ ∈ (0,1] and
T ∈ N+ , if we choose β = c·log(T H|F |/δ) in Algorithm                                 1−δ, the policy
                                                      p 1, then with probability at least
                             4     ⋆
π̄ output by Algorithm 1 has J(π )−J(π̄) ≤ O H Ccov log(         T H|F |/δ)log(T )/T .

3.1      P ROOF S KETCH FOR T HEOREM 1: W HY IS C OVERABILITY S UFFICIENT ?
We now sketch the main ideas behind the proof of Theorem 1, highlighting the role of coverability in
limiting the complexity of exploration.

Regret decomposition and change of measure. For each t, we define δh(t) (·, ·) := fh(t) (·, ·) −
     (t)
(Th fh+1 )(·,·), which may be viewed as a “test function” at level h induced by f (t) ∈ F. We adopt the
                   π (t)
                                                  Pt−1 (i)
shorthand d(t)                      e(t)
             h ≡ dh , and we define dh (x,a) :=     i=1 dh (x,a) as the cumulative historical visitation
for rounds prior to step t.
A standard regret decomposition for optimistic algorithms (Lemma 13) allows us to relate regret to the
average Bellman error under the learner’s sequence of policies:
          X   (t)                                   X X
   Reg ≤        f1 (x1 ,πf (t) ,1 (x1 ))−J(π (t) ) =            Ed(t) fh(t) (x,a)−(Th fh+1
                                                                                       (t)
                                                                                           )(x,a) . (1)
                          1                                       h
         t∈[T ]                                      t∈[T ]h∈[H]
                                                                      |            {z           }
                                                                                          (t)
                                                                                       =:δh (x,a)

   3
       We require H = 2 to apply the result to contextual bandits due to assuming the deterministic starting state.
   4
       π̄ is the non-Markov policy obtained by sampling t ∼ [T ] and playing π (t) .


                                                          5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Fix h ∈ [H]. We use a change-of-measure argument to relate the on-policy average Bellman error
E(x,a)∼d(t) [δh(t) (x,a)] to the in-sample squared Bellman error under deh(t) , writing Eq. (1) as
           h

                                  !1/2               v                       2 s
                         (t)
                                                     u X X (t)
 X X (t)               d (x,a)
                        e                                          dh (x,a)       X X (t)                         2
           dh (x,a) h(t)
                                                     u
                                       δh(t) (x,a) ≤ t                (t)
                                                                               ·            deh (x,a) δh(t) (x,a) ,
t∈[T ] x,a
                       deh (x,a)                       t∈[T ] x,a
                                                                    deh (x,a)    t∈[T ] x,a
                                                     |            {z          }|                 {z               }
                                                             (I): extrapolation error       (II): in-sample squared Bellman error


where the inequality is an application of Cauchy-Schwarz. As an immediate consequence of
the confidence set construction in Eq. (3), completeness, and a standard concentration
                                                                         √             argument
(Lemma 12 in Appendix D), we can bound the in-sample error by (II) ≤ O βT .

Bounding the extrapolation error using coverability.                       To proceed, we show that the extrapolation
error (I) is controlled by coverability. We have:
X X d(t) (x,a) 2

                                                               dh(t) (x,a)          X d(t) (x,a)    X

                                                  (t′ )
                             XX
             h                                                                             h                        (t)
                         ≤              max     d h     (x,a)·             ≤   max                    ·     max   d h   (x,a)  .
t∈[T ] x,a
             de(t)
               h (x,a)       t∈[T ] x,a
                                        t′ ∈[T ]               de(t)
                                                                 h (x,a)
                                                                               x,a       de(t) (x,a)
                                                                                   t∈[T ] h             x,a
                                                                                                            t∈[T ]
                                                                             |         {z            }|         {z            }
                                                                            (a)                             (b)

                                                                            ≲O(log(T )) by Lemma 15         ≤Ccov by Lemma 14

Here, the inequality (a) uses a scalar variant of the elliptic
potential lemma (Lemma 15; cf. Lattimore and Szepesvári
(2020)), which we apply on a per-state basis.5 The inequality
(b) uses a key result (Lemma 14 in Appendix D), which shows
that coverability is equivalentP
                               to a quantity we term cumulative
                                                        π
reachability, defined via        (x,a)∈X ×A supπ∈Π dh (x, a).
Cumulative reachability reflects the variation in visitation
probabilities for policies in the class Π, and boundedness of
                                                                                   Figure 1: An example of coverability
this quantity (which occurs when state-action pairs visited by
                                                                                   ⇐⇒ cumulative reachability (which is
policies in Π have large overlap) implies that the contributions                   equal to the total area of the shaded re-
from potentials for different state-action pairs average out.                      gion without double-counting overlaps.
See Figure 1 for an illustration.                                                  Π = {π1 ,π2 ,π3 ,π4 }, dashed curves is dπ ).
To conclude, we  substitute
                            the preceding  bounds  into the term (I), which gives Reg ≤
PH                 (t)
                                 p
  h=1 E(x,a)∼d(t) δh (x,a) ≤ O H
                  h
                                   Ccov ·βT log(T ) .
Note that to obtain the expression in term (I), our proof critically uses that the confidence set construc-
tion provides a bound on the squared Bellman error E(x,a)∼de(t) [δh(t) (x,a)2 ] in the change of measure
                                                                  h
argument. This contrasts with existing works on online RL with general function approximation (e.g.,
Jiang et al., 2017; Jin et al., 2021a; Du et al., 2021), which typically move from average Bellman error
to squared Bellman error as a lossy step, and only work with squared Bellman error because it permits
simpler construction of confidence sets. Confidence sets based on average Bellman error will lead
to a larger notion of extrapolation error which cannot be controlled using coverability (cf. Section 5).

3.2     R ICH O BSERVATIONS AND E XOGENOUS N OISE : A PPLICATION TO B LOCK MDP S
As an application of Theorem 1, we consider the problem of reinforcement learning in Exogenous
Block MDPs (Ex-BMDPs), a problem which has received extensive recent interest (Efroni et al., 2021;
2022a;b; Lamb et al., 2022). Recall that the block MDP (Jiang et al., 2017; Du et al., 2019; Misra
et al., 2020) is a model in which the (“observed”) state space X is large/high-dimensional, but can
be mapped by an (unknown) decoder ϕ⋆ to a small latent state space which governs the dynamics.
Exogenous block MDPs generalize this model further by factorizing the latent state space into small
controllable (“endogenous”) component S and a large irrelevant (“exogenous”) component Ξ, which
may be temporally correlated.
The main challenge of learning in block MDPs is that the decoder ϕ⋆ is not known √  to the learner in
advance. Indeed, given access to the decoder, one can obtain regret poly(H,|S|,|A|)· T by applying
   5
     Applying this result formally requires a separate argument to handle early rounds in which pairs (x,a) have
been visited very little; this is given in Appendix D.


                                                               6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


tabular reinforcement learning algorithms to the latent state space. In light of this, the aim of the
Ex-BMDP setting is to obtain sample complexity guarantees that are independent of the size of the
observed state space |X | and exogenous state space |Ξ|, and scale as poly(|S|,|A|,H,log|F|), where
F is an appropriate class of function approximators (typically either a value function class F or a class
of decoders Φ that attempts to model ϕ⋆ directly).
We show (Proposition 8 in Appendix C) that for any Ex-BMDP,          p one has Ccov ≤ |S| · |A|,
which—through Theorem 1—implies that G OLF attains Reg ≤ O H |S||A|T log(T H|F |/δ)log(T )
whenever Assumption 1 holds; critically, this result scales only with the cardinality |S| for the
endogenous latent state space, and with the capacity log|F| for the value function class. It is the first
result for this setting that allows for stochastic latent dynamics and emission process, albeit with
the extra assumption of completeness. Existing algorithms either require that the endogenous latent
dynamics P endo are deterministic (Efroni et al., 2021) or allow for stochastic dynamics but heavily
restrict the observation process (Efroni et al., 2022a), and existing complexity measures such as
Bellman Rank and Bellman-Eluder dimension can be arbitrarily large for this setting (see discussion
in Section 5). See Appendix C for details and discussion.

4    A RE W EAKER N OTIONS OF C OVERAGE S UFFICIENT ?
In Section 3, we showed that existence of a distribution with good concentrability (coverability)
is sufficient for sample-efficient online RL. However, while concentrability is the most ubiquitous
coverage condition in offline RL, there are several weaker notions of coverage which also lead to
sample-efficient offline RL algorithms. In this section, we show that analogues of coverability based on
these conditions, single-policy concentrability and generalized concentrability for Bellman residuals,
do not suffice for sample-efficient online RL. This indicates that in general, the interplay between
offline coverage and online exploration is nuanced.

Single-policy concentrability. Single-policy concentrability is a widely used coverage assumption
in offline RL which weakens concentrability by requiring only that the state distribution induced by π ⋆
is covered by the offline data distribution µ, as opposed to requiring coverage for all policies (Jin et al.,
2021b; Rashidinejad et al., 2021).
Definition 3 (Single-policy concentrability). The single-policy concentrability coefficient for a data
                       H                                 ⋆
                                          ⋆
distribution µ = {µh }h=1 is given by Cconc   (µ) := dπh /µh ∞ .

For offline RL, algorithms based on pessimism provide sample guarantee complexity guarantees that
              ⋆
scale with Cconc  (µ) (Jin et al., 2021b; Rashidinejad et al., 2021). However, for the online setting, it is
trivial to show that an analogous notion of “single-policy coverability” (i.e., existence of a distribution
with good single-policy coverability) is not sufficient for sample-efficient learning, since for any MDP,
                      ⋆
one can take µ = dπ to attain Cconc  ⋆
                                        (µ) = 1. This suggests that any notion of coverage that suffices
for online RL must be more uniform in nature.

Generalized concentrability for Bellman residuals. Another approach to weaker coverage in
offline RL is to relax concentrability by only requiring coverage with respect to the Bellman residuals
for value functions in F (Chen and Jiang, 2019; Xie et al., 2021a; Cheng et al., 2022); the following
definition adapts this notion to the finite-horizon setting.
Definition 4 (Generalized concentrability). We define the generalized concentrability coefficient
Cconc (µ,F) for a policy class Π and value function class F as the least constant C > 0 such that the
                                   H                                           P
offline data distribution µ = {µh }h=1 satisfies that for all f ∈ F and π ∈ Π, h∈[H] Edπh (fh (sh ,ah )−
                                                                             2
(Th fh+1 )(sh ,ah ))2 ≤ C · h∈[H] Eµh fh (sh ,ah )−(Th fh+1 )(sh ,ah ) .
                            P

Note that Cconc (µ,F) ≤ Cconc (µ) (in particular, they coincide if one chooses F to be the set of all
functions over X × A) but in general Cconc (µ,F) can be much smaller. For example, in the linear
Bellman-complete setting, it is possible to bound Cconc (µ,F) in terms of feature coverage conditions
(Wang et al., 2021a; Zanette et al., 2021). Using offline data from µ, sample complexity guarantees
that scale with Cconc (µ,F) can be obtained under Assumption 1 via MSBO (see, e.g., Xie and Jiang,
2020, Section 5) or by running a “one-step” variant of G OLF (Algorithm 1); we provide this result
(Proposition 16) in Appendix E for completeness. Given that this notion leads to positive results for
offline RL, it is natural to consider a generalized notion of coverability based upon it.


                                                     7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Definition 5 (Generalized coverability). We define the generalized coverability coefficient for a policy
class Π value function class F and as Ccov (F) = inf µ1 ,...,µH ∈∆(X ×A) {Cconc (µ,F)}.
Unfortunately, we show that this condition does not suffice for sample-efficient online RL, even when
the number of actions is constant and Assumption 1 is satisfied.
Theorem 3. For any X,H,C ∈ N, there exists a family of MDPs with |X | = X, |A| = 2 and horizon
H and a function class F with log|F| ≤ H log(2|X |) such that: i) Assumption 1 (completeness) is
satisfied for F and we have Ccov (F) ≤ C and ii) Any
                                                     online RL algorithm
                                                                            that returns a 0.1-optimal
policy with probability 0.9 requires at least Ω min X,2Ω(H) ,2Ω(C) trajectories.
Theorem 3 highlights that in general, notions of coverage that suffice for offline RL—even those
that are uniform in nature—can fail to lead to useful structural conditions for online RL. Briefly,
the issue is that bounding regret for online RL entails controlling the extent to which a deliberate
algorithm that has observed state distributions d(1)       (t−1)
                                                   h ,...,dh     can be “surprised” by a substantially new
                    (t)
state distribution dh ; here, surprise is typically measure in terms of Bellman residual. The proof of
Theorem 3 shows that existence of a distribution with good coverage with respect to Bellman residuals
does suffice to provide meaningful control of distribution shift. We caution, however, that the lower
bound construction makes use of the fact that Definition 5 requires coverage only on average across
layers, and it is unclear whether a similar lower bound holds under uniform coverage across layers.
Developing a more unified and fine-grained understanding of what coverage conditions lead to efficient
exploration is an important question for future research.
5       A N EW S TRUCTURAL C ONDITION FOR S AMPLE -E FFICIENT O NLINE RL
Having shown that coverability facilitates sample-efficient online RL, an immediate question is
whether this structural condition is related to existing complexity measures such as Bellman-Eluder
dimension (Jin et al., 2021a) and Bellman/Bilinear rank (Jiang et al., 2017; Du et al., 2021), which
attempt to unify existing approaches to sample-efficient RL. We now show that these complexity
measures are insufficient to capture coverability, then provide a new complexity measure, the
Sequential Extrapolation Coefficient, which bridges the gap.
5.1 I NSUFFICIENCY OF E XISTING C OMPLEXITY M EASURES
Bellman-Eluder dimension (Jin et al., 2021a) and Bellman/Bilinear rank (Jiang et al., 2017; Du
et al., 2021) can fail to capture coverability for two reasons: (i) insufficiency of average Bellman
error (as opposed to squared Bellman error), and (ii) incorrect dependence on scale. To highlight
these issues, we focus on Q-type Bellman-Eluder dimension (Jin et al., 2021a), which subsumes
Bellman rank.6 See Appendix F for discussion of other complexity measures. Let DΠ                     π
                                                                                           h := {dh : π ∈ Π}
and Fh − Th Fh+1 := {fh − Th fh+1 : f ∈ F }. Following Jin et al. (2021a), we define the (Q-type)
Bellman-Eluder dimension as follows.
Definition 6 (Bellman-Eluder dimension). The Bellman-Eluder dimension dimBE (F,Π,ε,h) for the
                                                                                    Π
layer h is the largest d ∈ N, such that there exist sequences {d(1)  (2)
                                                                 h ,dh ,...,d
                                                                         qP
                                                                             (d)                  (1)   (d)
                                                                             h } ⊆ Dh and {δh ,...,δh } ⊆
                                                                               t−1                 2
Fh − Th Fh+1 such that for all t ∈ [d], |Ed(t) [δh(t) ]| > ε(t) , and          i=1 Ed(i) [δh(t) ] ≤ ε(t) , for
                                                h                                    h
ε(1) ,...,ε(d) ≥ ε. We define dimBE (F,Π,ε) = maxh∈[H] dimBE (F,Π,ε,h).

Issue #1: Insufficiency of average (vs. squared) Bellman error. The Bellman-Eluder dimension
reflects the length of the longest consecutive sequence of value function pairs for which we can be
“surprised” by a large Bellman residual for a new policy if the value function has low Bellman residual
on all preceding policies. Note that via Definition 6, the Bellman-Eluder dimension measures the size
of the surprise and the error on preceding points via average Bellman error (e.g., Ed(i) [δh(t) ]). On the
                                                                                                    h
other hand, the proof of Theorem 1 critically uses squared Bellman error Ed(i) [(δh(t) )2 ] bound regret
                                                                             h
by coverability; this is because the (point-wise) nonnegativity of squared Bellman error facilitates
change-of-measure in a similar fashion to offline reinforcement learning. The following result shows
that this issue is fundamental, and Bellman-Eluder dimension can be exponential large relative to the
regret bound in Theorem 1.
Proposition 4. For any d ∈ N, there exists an MDP M with H = 2 and |A| = 2, policy class Π with
|Π| = d, and value function class F with |F| = d satisfying completeness, such that Ccov = O(1), but
the Bellman-Eluder dimension has dimBE (F,Π,ε) = Ω(min{|F|,|Π|}) = Ω(d) for any ε ≤ 1/2.
    6
        Q-type and V -type are similar, but define the Bellman residual with respect to different action distributions.


                                                            8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


The lower bound in Proposition 4 is realized by an exogenous block MDP (Appendix C), with d
representing the number of exogenous states. The result gives an exponential separation between
what
   pcan be achieved
                      using Bellman-Eluder dimension and coverability, because G OLF attains Reg ≤
Oe T log(d) (cf. Corollary 9), yet we have dimBE (F,Π,1/2) = Ω(d). The construction, which is
based on Efroni et al. (2022b, Section B.1), critically leverages cancellations in the average Bellman
error; these cancellations are ruled out by squared Bellman error, which is why Theorem 1 gives a
regret bound that scales only logarithmically in d. Bilinear rank (Du et al., 2021) and V -type Bellman
rank suffer from similar drawbacks; see Appendix F for further discussion.

Issue #2: Incorrect dependence on scale. In light of the previous example, a seemingly reasonable
fix is to adapt the Bellman-Eluder
                      qP            dimension to consider squared Bellman error rather than average Bell-
                          t−1
man error (i.e., use      i=1 Ed(i)  [(δh(t) )2 ] ≤ ε(t) in Definition 6). We show (Appendix F.1) that while
                                  h
it is possible to bound this modified Bellman-Eluder dimension in terms of the coverability parameter,
the dependence on the scale parameter ε is polynomial, and it is not possible to derive regret bounds
better than T 2/3 under coverability with this approach. Informally, the issue is scale: Bellman-eluder di-
mension only checks whether the average Bellman error violates the threshold ε, and does not consider
how far the error violates the threshold (e.g., |Ed(t) [δh(t) ]| > ε and |Ed(t) [δh(t) ]| > 1 are counted the same).
                                                      h                     h


5.2    T HE S EQUENTIAL E XTRAPOLATION C OEFFICIENT
To address the issues above, we introduce a new complexity measure, the Sequential Extrapolation
Coefficient (SEC), which i) leads to regret bounds via G OLF and ii) subsumes both coverability and the
Bellman-Eluder dimension. Conceptually, the Sequential Extrapolation Coefficient should be thought
of as a minimal abstraction of the main ingredient in regret bounds based on G OLF and other optimistic
algorithms: extrapolation from in-sample error to on-policy error. We begin by stating a variant of the
Sequential Extrapolation Coefficient for abstract function classes, then specialize it to RL.
Definition 7 (Sequential Extrapolation Coefficient). Let Z be an abstract set. Given a test function
class Ψ ⊂ (Z → R) and distribution class D ⊂ ∆(Z), the sequential extrapolation coefficient for length
T is given by
                                                                    (                                 )
                                                                      X         Ed(t) [ψ (t) ]2
            SEC(Ψ,D,T ) :=           sup                 sup                   Pt−1                    .
                                                                                                (t) 2
                             ψ (1) ,...,ψ (T ) ∈Ψ d(1) ,...,d(T ) ∈D t∈[T ] 1∨  i=1 Ed(i) [(ψ ) ]

To apply the Sequential Extrapolation Coefficient to RL, we use Bellman residuals for F as test
functions and consider state-action distributions induced by policies in Π.
Definition 8 (SEC for RL). We define SECRL (F,Π,T ) := maxh∈[H] SEC(Fh −Th Fh+1 ,DΠ h ,T ).

The following result, which is a near-immediate consequence of the definition, shows that the Sequential
Extrapolation Coefficient leads to regret bounds via G OLF; recall that Π = {πf | f ∈ F} is the set of
greedy policies induced by F.
Theorem 5. Under Assumption 1, there exists an absolute constant c such that for any δ ∈ (0,1] and
T ∈ N+ , if we
             pchoose β = c·log(
                                  T H|F |/δ ) in Algorithm 1, then with probability at least 1−δ, we have

Reg ≤ O H SECRL (F,Π,T )·T ·log(T H|F |/δ) .
We defer the proof of Theorem 5 to Appendix F, and conclude by showing that the Sequential
Extrapolation Coefficient subsumes coverability Ccov (Definition 2) and Bellman-Eluder dimension.
Proposition 6 (Coverability =⇒ SEC). SECRL (F,Π,T ) ≤ O(Ccov ·log(T )).
                                                                                  p
Proposition 7 (Bellman-Eluder dim. =⇒ SEC). SECRL (F,Π,T ) ≤ O(dimBE (F,Π, 1/T )·log(T )).
The Sequential Extrapolation Coefficient can likely be generalized further along many directions (e.g.,
by allowing for different test functions in the vein of Du et al. (2021)). Further unifying these notions is
an interesting question for future research; see Appendix F.3 for further discussion.

6     C ONCLUSION
This paper initiates the systematic study of parallels between online and offline learnability in rein-
forcement learning and uncovers surprising new connections. The possible future directions include
general theories under weaker notions of coverability or approximation conditions (see Appendix A
for open problems) as well as the connection to the practical algorithm design.


                                                          9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Nan Jiang acknowledges funding support from ARL Cooperative Agreement W911NF-17-2-0196,
NSF IIS-2112471, NSF CAREER award, and Adobe Data Science Research Award. Sham Kakade
acknowledges funding from the Office of Naval Research under award N00014-22-1-2377 and the
National Science Foundation Grant under award #CCF-1703574.

R EFERENCES
Yasin Abbasi-Yadkori, Nevena Lazic, Csaba Szepesvari, and Gellert Weisz. Exploration-enhanced
  politex. arXiv preprint arXiv:1908.10479, 2019.
Alekh Agarwal, Miroslav Dudík, Satyen Kale, John Langford, and Robert E Schapire. Contextual
  bandit learning with predictable rewards. In Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, 2012.
Alekh Agarwal, Daniel Hsu, Satyen Kale, John Langford, Lihong Li, and Robert Schapire. Taming
  the monster: A fast and simple algorithm for contextual bandits. In International Conference on
  Machine Learning, pages 1638–1646, 2014.
Alekh Agarwal, Sarah Bird, Markus Cozowicz, Luong Hoang, John Langford, Stephen Lee, Jiaji
  Li, Dan Melamed, Gal Oshri, Oswaldo Ribas, Siddhartha Sen, and Aleksandrs Slivkins. Making
  contextual decisions with low technical debt. arXiv:1606.03966, 2016.
András Antos, Csaba Szepesvári, and Rémi Munos. Learning near-optimal policies with bellman-
  residual minimization based fitted policy iteration and a single sample path. Machine Learning, 71
 (1):89–129, 2008.
Jinglin Chen and Nan Jiang. Information-theoretic considerations in batch reinforcement learning. In
   International Conference on Machine Learning, pages 1042–1051. PMLR, 2019.
Jinglin Chen, Aditya Modi, Akshay Krishnamurthy, Nan Jiang, and Alekh Agarwal. On the statistical
   efficiency of reward-free exploration in non-linear rl. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.10770, 2022.
Ching-An Cheng, Tengyang Xie, Nan Jiang, and Alekh Agarwal. Adversarially trained actor critic for
  offline reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), pages
  3852–3878. PMLR, 2022.
Kefan Dong and Tengyu Ma. Asymptotic instance-optimal algorithms for interactive decision making.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.02326, 2022.
Simon Du, Akshay Krishnamurthy, Nan Jiang, Alekh Agarwal, Miroslav Dudik, and John Langford.
  Provably efficient RL with rich observations via latent state decoding. In International Conference
  on Machine Learning, pages 1665–1674. PMLR, 2019.
Simon S Du, Sham M Kakade, Jason D Lee, Shachar Lovett, Gaurav Mahajan, Wen Sun, and Ruosong
  Wang. Bilinear classes: A structural framework for provable generalization in RL. International
  Conference on Machine Learning, 2021.
Yonathan Efroni, Dipendra Misra, Akshay Krishnamurthy, Alekh Agarwal, and John Langford. Prov-
  ably filtering exogenous distractors using multistep inverse dynamics. In International Conference
  on Learning Representations, 2021.
Yonathan Efroni, Dylan J Foster, Dipendra Misra, Akshay Krishnamurthy, and John Langford. Sample-
  efficient reinforcement learning in the presence of exogenous information. Conference on Learning
  Theory (COLT), 2022a.
Yonathan Efroni, Sham Kakade, Akshay Krishnamurthy, and Cyril Zhang. Sparsity in partially
  controllable linear systems. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pages 5851–5860.
  PMLR, 2022b.
Amir-massoud Farahmand, Csaba Szepesvári, and Rémi Munos. Error propagation for approximate
 policy and value iteration. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 23, 2010.


                                                10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Dylan J Foster, Sham M Kakade, Jian Qian, and Alexander Rakhlin. The statistical complexity of
  interactive decision making. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.13487, 2021.
Dylan J Foster, Akshay Krishnamurthy, David Simchi-Levi, and Yunzong Xu. Offline reinforcement
  learning: Fundamental barriers for value function approximation. Conference on Learning Theory
 (COLT), 2022.
Nan Jiang and Jiawei Huang. Minimax value interval for off-policy evaluation and policy optimization.
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:2747–2758, 2020.
Nan Jiang, Akshay Krishnamurthy, Alekh Agarwal, John Langford, and Robert E Schapire. Contextual
  decision processes with low Bellman rank are PAC-learnable. In International Conference on
  Machine Learning, pages 1704–1713, 2017.
Chi Jin, Akshay Krishnamurthy, Max Simchowitz, and Tiancheng Yu. Reward-free exploration for
  reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pages 4870–4879.
  PMLR, 2020a.
Chi Jin, Zhuoran Yang, Zhaoran Wang, and Michael I Jordan. Provably efficient reinforcement learning
  with linear function approximation. In Conference on Learning Theory, pages 2137–2143, 2020b.
Chi Jin, Qinghua Liu, and Sobhan Miryoosefi. Bellman eluder dimension: New rich classes of rl
  problems, and sample-efficient algorithms. Advances in neural information processing systems, 34:
 13406–13418, 2021a.
Ying Jin, Zhuoran Yang, and Zhaoran Wang. Is pessimism provably efficient for offline RL? In
  International Conference on Machine Learning, pages 5084–5096. PMLR, 2021b.
Dmitry Kalashnikov, Alex Irpan, Peter Pastor, Julian Ibarz, Alexander Herzog, Eric Jang, Deirdre
 Quillen, Ethan Holly, Mrinal Kalakrishnan, Vincent Vanhoucke, et al. Scalable deep reinforcement
 learning for vision-based robotic manipulation. In Conference on Robot Learning, pages 651–673.
 PMLR, 2018.
Jens Kober, J Andrew Bagnell, and Jan Peters. Reinforcement learning in robotics: A survey. The
  International Journal of Robotics Research, 32(11):1238–1274, 2013.
Akshay Krishnamurthy, Alekh Agarwal, and John Langford. PAC reinforcement learning with rich
  observations. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pages 1840–1848, 2016.
Alex Lamb, Riashat Islam, Yonathan Efroni, Aniket Didolkar, Dipendra Misra, Dylan Foster, Lekan
  Molu, Rajan Chari, Akshay Krishnamurthy, and John Langford. Guaranteed discovery of control-
  lable latent states with multi-step inverse models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.08229, 2022.
Tor Lattimore and Csaba Szepesvári. Bandit algorithms. Cambridge University Press, 2020.
Jiwei Li, Will Monroe, Alan Ritter, Dan Jurafsky, Michel Galley, and Jianfeng Gao. Deep reinforcement
  learning for dialogue generation. In EMNLP, 2016.
Timothy P Lillicrap, Jonathan J Hunt, Alexander Pritzel, Nicolas Heess, Tom Erez, Yuval Tassa, David
  Silver, and Daan Wierstra. Continuous control with deep reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1509.02971, 2015.
Dipendra Misra, Mikael Henaff, Akshay Krishnamurthy, and John Langford. Kinematic state abstrac-
  tion and provably efficient rich-observation reinforcement learning. In International conference on
  machine learning, pages 6961–6971. PMLR, 2020.
Rémi Munos. Error bounds for approximate policy iteration. In International Conference on Machine
  Learning, 2003.
Rémi Munos. Performance bounds in ℓp -norm for approximate value iteration. SIAM Journal on
  Control and Optimization, 2007.
Rémi Munos and Csaba Szepesvári. Finite-time bounds for fitted value iteration. Journal of Machine
  Learning Research, 2008.


                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Paria Rashidinejad, Banghua Zhu, Cong Ma, Jiantao Jiao, and Stuart Russell. Bridging offline
  reinforcement learning and imitation learning: A tale of pessimism. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 34:11702–11716, 2021.

Daniel Russo and Benjamin Van Roy. Eluder dimension and the sample complexity of optimistic
  exploration. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pages 2256–2264, 2013.

Wen Sun, Nan Jiang, Akshay Krishnamurthy, Alekh Agarwal, and John Langford. Model-based
 RL in contextual decision processes: PAC bounds and exponential improvements over model-free
 approaches. In Conference on learning theory, pages 2898–2933. PMLR, 2019.

Ambuj Tewari and Susan A. Murphy. From ads to interventions: Contextual bandits in mobile health.
 In Mobile Health, 2017.

Andrew Wagenmaker and Kevin Jamieson. Instance-dependent near-optimal policy identification in
  linear MDPs via online experiment design. arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.02575, 2022.

Andrew J Wagenmaker, Max Simchowitz, and Kevin Jamieson. Beyond no regret: Instance-dependent
  PAC reinforcement learning. In Conference on Learning Theory, pages 358–418. PMLR, 2022.

Ruosong Wang, Simon S Du, Lin Yang, and Russ R Salakhutdinov. On reward-free reinforcement
  learning with linear function approximation. Advances in neural information processing systems,
  33:17816–17826, 2020a.

Ruosong Wang, Russ R Salakhutdinov, and Lin Yang. Reinforcement learning with general value
  function approximation: Provably efficient approach via bounded eluder dimension. Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:6123–6135, 2020b.

Ruosong Wang, Dean P. Foster, and Sham M. Kakade. What are the statistical limits of offline RL with
  linear function approximation? In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR),
  2021a.

Yining Wang, Ruosong Wang, Simon Shaolei Du, and Akshay Krishnamurthy. Optimism in rein-
  forcement learning with generalized linear function approximation. In International Conference on
  Learning Representations, 2021b.

Tengyang Xie and Nan Jiang. Q* approximation schemes for batch reinforcement learning: A
  theoretical comparison. In Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, pages 550–559.
  PMLR, 2020.

Tengyang Xie and Nan Jiang. Batch value-function approximation with only realizability. In Interna-
  tional Conference on Machine Learning, pages 11404–11413. PMLR, 2021.

Tengyang Xie, Ching-An Cheng, Nan Jiang, Paul Mineiro, and Alekh Agarwal. Bellman-consistent
  pessimism for offline reinforcement learning. Advances in neural information processing systems,
  34:6683–6694, 2021a.

Tengyang Xie, Nan Jiang, Huan Wang, Caiming Xiong, and Yu Bai. Policy finetuning: Bridging sample-
  efficient offline and online reinforcement learning. Advances in neural information processing
  systems, 34:27395–27407, 2021b.

Andrea Zanette, Alessandro Lazaric, Mykel Kochenderfer, and Emma Brunskill. Learning near optimal
  policies with low inherent bellman error. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pages
 10978–10989. PMLR, 2020a.

Andrea Zanette, Alessandro Lazaric, Mykel J Kochenderfer, and Emma Brunskill. Provably efficient
  reward-agnostic navigation with linear value iteration. Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 33:11756–11766, 2020b.

Andrea Zanette, Martin J Wainwright, and Emma Brunskill. Provable benefits of actor-critic methods
  for offline reinforcement learning. Advances in neural information processing systems, 34:13626–
 13640, 2021.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Wenhao Zhan, Baihe Huang, Audrey Huang, Nan Jiang, and Jason Lee. Offline reinforcement learning
 with realizability and single-policy concentrability. In Conference on Learning Theory, pages
 2730–2775. PMLR, 2022.
Xuezhou Zhang, Yuzhe Ma, and Adish Singla. Task-agnostic exploration in reinforcement learning.
 Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:11734–11743, 2020.


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                          A PPENDIX


A Discussion and Open Problems                                                                          14

B Additional Related Work                                                                               15

C Application to Exogenous Block MDPs                                                                   15
    C.1 Invariance of coverability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        16
    C.2 Proofs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        17

D Proofs and Additional Details from Section 3                                                          18
    D.1 G OLF Algorithm and Proofs from Section 3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .             18

E Proofs and Additional Details from Section 4                                                          21
    E.1 Additional Details: Offline RL . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          21
    E.2 Proofs from Section 4 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         22

F Proofs and Additional Results from Section 5                                                          23
    F.1   Additional Details: Sequential Extrapolation Coefficient versus Bellman-Eluder di-
          mension . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       23
    F.2   Proofs from Section 5 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       26
    F.3   Discussion: Relationship to Additional Complexity Measures . . . . . . . . . . . .            32

G Extension: Reward-Free Exploration                                                                    34
    G.1 Algorithm and Theoretical Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .            35
    G.2 Proofs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        37


A    D ISCUSSION AND O PEN P ROBLEMS
Toward a general theory beyond this paper, we highlight some exciting and challenging open problems
for future research.
• Linear feature coverage. Our results in Section 4 show that the generalized coverability condition
  (Definition 4), which exploits the structure of the value function class F, is not sufficient for online
  exploration. For the special case of linear functions (F = (x,a) 7→ ⟨ϕ(x,a),θ⟩ | θ ∈ Θ ⊂ Rd )
  a natural strengthening of this condition (Wang et al., 2021a; Zanette        et al., 2021) is ⊤   to  as-
                                                          H
  sert the existence of a data distribution µ = {µh }h=1 such that Edh ϕ(xh ,ah )ϕ(xh ,ah ) ⪯
                                                                            π

  C · Eµh ϕ(xh ,ah )ϕ(xh ,ah )⊤ for some coverage parameter C. Is this condition (or a variant)

  sufficient for sample-efficient online exploration?
• Further conditions from offline RL. There are many conditions used to provide sample-efficient
  learning guarantees in offline RL beyond those considered in this paper, including (i) pushforward
  concentrability (Munos, 2003; Xie and Jiang, 2021), (ii) Lp variants of concentrability (Farahmand
  et al., 2010; Xie and Jiang, 2020), and (iii) weight function realizability (Xie and Jiang, 2020;
  Jiang and Huang, 2020; Zhan et al., 2022). Which of these conditions can be adapted for online
  exploration, and to what extent?


                                                    14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


B    A DDITIONAL R ELATED W ORK
In this section we briefly highlight some relevant related work not otherwise discussed.

Online RL with access to offline data. A separate line of work develops algorithms for online
reinforcement learning that assume additional access to offline data gathered with a known data
distribution µ or known exploratory policy (Abbasi-Yadkori et al., 2019; Xie et al., 2021b). These
results are complementary to our own, since we assume only that a good exploratory distribution exists,
but do not assume that such a distribution is known to the learner.

Further structural conditions for online RL. While we have already discussed connections to
Bellman Rank, Bilinear Classes, and Bellman-Eluder Dimension, another more general complexity
measure is the Decision-Estimation Coefficient (Foster et al., 2021). One can show that the Decision-
Estimation Coefficient is bounded by coverability, but to apply the algorithm in Foster et al. (2021),
one must assume access to a realizable model class M, which leads to regret bounds that scale with
log|M| rather than log|F|.

Instance-dependent algorithms. Wagenmaker et al. (2022) provide instance-dependent guarantees
for tabular PAC-RL which scale with a quantity called gap-visitation complexity. It is possible to bound
the gap-visitation complexity in terms of coverability, but the lower-order sample complexity terms in
this result have explicit dependence on the number of states, which our results avoid. For future work,
it would be interesting to understand deeper connections between coverability and instance-dependent
complexity measures (Wagenmaker et al., 2022; Wagenmaker and Jamieson, 2022; Dong and Ma,
2022). See also Wagenmaker and Jamieson (2022), which provides similar guarantees for linear MDPs.

C    A PPLICATION TO E XOGENOUS B LOCK MDP S
As an application of Theorem 1, we consider the problem of reinforcement learning in Exogenous
Block MDPs (Ex-BMDPs). Following Efroni et al. (2021), an Ex-BMDP M = (X ,A,P,R,H,x1 )
is defined by an (unobserved) latent state space, which consists of an endogenous state sh ∈ S and
exogenous state ξh ∈ Ξ, and an observation process which generates the observed state xh . We first
describe the dynamics for the latent space. Given initial endogenous and exogenous states s1 ∈ S and
ξ1 ∈ Ξ, the latent states evolve via
                            sh+1 ∼ Phendo (sh ,ah ), and ξh+1 ∼ Phexo (ξh );
that is while both states evolve in a temporally correlated fashion, only the endogenous state sh evolves
as a function of the agent’s action. The latent state (sh ,ξh ) is not observed. Instead, we observe
                                              xh ∼ qh (sh ,ξh ),
where qh : S × Ξ → ∆(X ) is an emission distribution with the property that supp(qh (s, ξ)) ∩
supp(qh (s′ ,ξ ′ )) = ∅ if (s,ξ) ̸= (s′ ,ξ ′ ). This property (decodability) ensures that there exists a unique
mapping ϕ⋆h : X → S that maps the observed state xh to the corresponding endogenous latent state sh .
We assume that Rh (x,a) = Rh (ϕ⋆h (x),a), which implies that optimal policy π ⋆ depends only on the
endogenous latent state, i.e. πh⋆ (x) = πh⋆ (ϕ⋆h (x)).
The main challenge of learning in block MDPs is that the decoder ϕ⋆ is not known √      to the learner in
advance. Indeed, given access to the decoder, one can obtain regret poly(H,|S|,|A|)· T by applying
tabular reinforcement learning algorithms to the latent state space. In light of this, the aim of the
Ex-BMDP setting is to obtain sample complexity guarantees that are independent of the size of the
observed state space |X | and exogenous state space |Ξ|, and scale as poly(|S|,|A|,H,log|F|), where
F is an appropriate class of function approximators (typically either a value function class F or a class
of decoders Φ that attempts to model ϕ⋆ directly).
Ex-BMDPs present substantial additional difficulties compared to classical block MDPs because
we aim to avoid dependence on the size |Ξ| of the exogenous latent state space. Here, the main
challenge is that executing policies π whose actions depend on ξh can lead to spurious correlations
between endogenous exogenous states. In spite of this apparent difficulty, we show that the coverability
coefficient for this setting is always bounded by the number of endogenous states.


                                                     15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Proposition 8. For any Ex-BMDP, Ccov ≤ |S|·|A|.

This bound is a consequence of a structural result from Efroni et al. (2021), which shows that for any
(s,a) ∈ S × A, all x ∈ X with ϕ⋆ (x) = s admit a common policy that maximizes dπh (x,a), and this
policy is endogenous, i.e., only depends on the endogenous state sh = ϕ⋆h (xh ). As a corollary, we
obtain the following regret bound.
Corollary 9. For the Ex-BMDP setting, under Assumption 1, Algorithm 1 ensures that with probability
at least 1−δ,                          p
                             Reg ≤ O H |S||A|T log(T H|F |/δ)log(T ) .

Critically, this result scales only with the cardinality |S| for the endogenous latent state space, and with
the capacity log|F| for the value function class.
Let us briefly compare to prior work. For general Ex-BMDPs, existing complexity measures such as
Bellman Rank and Bellman-Eluder dimension can be arbitrarily large (see discussion in Section 5).
Existing algorithms either require that the endogenous latent dynamics P endo are deterministic (Efroni
et al., 2021) or allow for stochastic dynamics but heavily restrict the observation process (Efroni et al.,
2022a). Corollary 9 is the first result for this setting that allows for stochastic latent dynamics and
emission process, albeit with the extra assumption of completeness. This result is best thought of as
a “luckiness” guarantee in the sense that it is unclear how to construct a value function class that is
complete for every problem instance,7 but the algorithm will succeed whenever F does happen to
be complete for a given instance. Understanding whether general Ex-BMDPs are learnable without
completeness is an interesting question for future work, and we are hopeful that the perspective of
coverability will lead to further insights for this setting.

C.1    I NVARIANCE OF COVERABILITY

Proposition 8 is a consequence of two general invariance properties of coverability, which show
that Ccov is unaffected by the following augmentations to the underlying MDP: (i) addition of rich
observations, and (ii) addition of exogenous noise.
The first property shows that for a given MDP M , creating a new block MDP M ′ by equipping M with
a decodable emission process (so that M acts as a latent MDP), does not increase coverability.
Proposition 10 (Invariance to rich observations). Let an MDP M = (S,A,P,R,H,s1 ). Let M ′ =
(X ,A,P ′ ,R′ ,H,x1 ) be the MDP defined implicitly by the following process. For each h ∈ [H]:
• sh+1 ∼ Ph (sh ,ah ) and rh = Rh (sh ,ah ). Here, sh is unobserved, and may be thought of as a latent
  state.
• xh ∼ qh (sh ), where qh : S → ∆(X ) is an emission distribution with the property that supp(qh (s))∩
  supp(qh (s′ )) = ∅ for s ̸= s′ .
Then, writing Ccov (M ) to make the dependence on M explicit, we have
                                             Ccov (M ′ ) ≤ Ccov (M ).

The second result shows that coverability is also preserved if we expand the state space to include
temporally correlated exogenous state whose evolution does not depend on the agent’s actions.
Proposition 11 (Invariance to exogenous noise). Let an MDP M = (S,A,P,R,H,s1 ), conditional
distribution P exo : Ξ → ∆(Ξ), and ξ1 ∈ Ξ be given, where Ξ is an abstract set. Let X := S ×Ξ, and
let M ′ = (X ,A,P ′ ,R′ ,H,x1 ) be the MDP with state xh = (sh ,ξh ) defined implicitly by the following
process. For each h ∈ [H]:
• sh+1 ∼ Ph (sh ,ah ), rh = Rh (sh ,ah ).
• ξh+1 ∼ Phexo (ξh ).
Then we have
                                             Ccov (M ′ ) ≤ Ccov (M ).
   7
     For example, it is not clear how to construct a complete value function class given access to a class of decoders
Φ that contains ϕ⋆ .


                                                         16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


This result is non-trivial because policies that act based on the endogenous state sh and ξh can cause
these processes to become coupled (Efroni et al., 2021), but holds nonetheless.
Proposition 8 can be deduced by combining Propositions 10 and 11 with the observation that any
tabular (finite-state/action) MDP with S states and A actions has Ccov ≤ SA. However, Propositions 10
and 11 yield more general results, since they imply that starting with any (potentially non-tabular)
class of MDPs M with low coverability and augmenting it with rich observations and exogenous noise
preserves coverability.

C.2       P ROOFS

Proof of Proposition 8. Let h ∈ [H] be fixed. Let zh := (sh ,ξh ). For each z = (s,ξ) ∈ S × Ξ, let
dπh (z) := Pπ (zh = z). Proposition 4 of Efroni et al. (2021) shows that for all z = (s,ξ), if we define
πs = argmaxπ∈Π Pπ (sh = s), then
                                         maxdπh (z) = dπhs (z).                                       (2)
                                          π∈Π
That is, πs maximizes Pπ (zh = (s,ξ)) for all ξ ∈ Ξ simultaneously. With this in mind, let us define
                                                   1 X πs
                                   µh (x,a) =              dh (x).
                                                |S||A|
                                                         s∈S

We proceed to bound the concentrability coefficient for µ. Fix π ∈ Π and x ∈ X , and let z = (s,ξ) ∈ S ×Ξ
be the unique latent state such that x ∈ supp(qh (s,ξ)). We first observe that
                                      dπh (x,a)           dπ (x)
                                                ≤ |S||A|· πhs    .
                                      µh (x,a)           dh (x)
Next, since xh ∼ qh (zh ), we have
                                 dπh (x)   qh (x | z)dπh (z)   dπ (z)
                                  πs     =            πs     = πhs    .
                                 dh (x) qh (x | z)dh (z) dh (z)
Finally, by Eq. (2), we have
                                 dπh (z) maxπ dπh (z) dπhs (z)
                                          ≤          = πs      = 1.
                                 dπhs (z)   dπhs (z)  dh (z)
Since this holds for all x ∈ X simultaneously, this choice for µh certifies that that Ccov ≤ |S||A|.

Proof of Proposition 10. Let Π denote the space of all randomized policies acting on the latent state
space S, and let Π′ denote the space of all randomized policies acting on the observed state space X .
                                                                              ′
Let Pπ denote distribution over trajectories in M induced by π ∈ Π, and let Qπ denote the distribution
over trajectories in M induced by π ′ ∈ Π′ .
Fix h ∈ [H], and let µh ∈ ∆(S ×A) witness the coverability coefficient for M . Define
                                 µ′h (x,a) = qh (x | ϕ⋆ (x))µh (ϕ⋆ (x),a),
where ϕ⋆h : X → S is the decoder that maps x ∈ X to the unique state s ∈ S such that x ∈ supp(qh (s)).
For any π ′ ∈ Π′ and (x,a) ∈ X ×A, letting s = ϕ⋆h (x), we have
      ′                    ′                       ′                                   ′
  dπh (x,a) qh (x | s)Qπ (sh = s,ah = a) Qπ (sh = s,ah = a) maxπ′ ∈Π Qπ (sh = s,ah = a)
            =                           =                  ≤                            .
  µ′h (x,a)        qh (x | s)µh (s,a)         µh (s,a)               µh (s,a)
                                                                                   ′
Finally, because the observation process is decodable, we have maxπ′ ∈Π Qπ (sh = s, ah = a) =
maxπ∈Π Pπ (sh = s,ah = a), and
                                maxπ∈Π Pπ (sh = s,ah = a)
                                                          ≤ Ccov (M ).
                                       µh (s,a)


                                                    17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Proof of Proposition 11. Let Π denote the space of all randomized policies acting on the latent state
space S, and let Π′ denote the space of all randomized policies acting on the observed state space X .
                                                                              ′
Let Pπ denote distribution over trajectories in M induced by π ∈ Π, and let Qπ denote the distribution
                                     ′    ′
over trajectories in M induced by π ∈ Π .
Fix h ∈ [H], and let µh ∈ ∆(S ×A) witness the coverability coefficient for M . For x = (s,ξ) ∈ S ×Ξ,
let
                                   µ′h (x,a) = Q(ξh = ξ)µh (s,a),
where Q(ξh = ξ) is the marginal probability of the event that ξh = ξ in M ′ , which does not depend on
the policy under consideration.
For any π ′ ∈ Π and (s,ξ,a) ∈ S ×Ξ×A, we have
               ′                ′                                              ′
            dπh (x,a) Qπ (sh = s,ξh = ξ,ah = a) maxπ′ ∈Π′ Qπ (sh = s,ξh = ξ,ah = a)
                      =                        ≤                                    .
            µ′h (x,a)    Q(ξh = ξ)µh (s,a)              Q(ξh = ξ)µh (s,a)
                                                                                       ′
From Propositions 3 and 4 of Efroni et al. (2021), we have maxπ′ ∈Π′ Qπ (sh = s,ξh = ξ,ah = a) =
                      ′
Q(ξh = ξ)·maxπ′ ∈Π′ Qπ (sh = s,ah = a) = Q(ξh = ξ)·maxπ∈Π Pπ (sh = s,ah = a), so that
                            ′
           maxπ′ ∈Π′ Qπ (sh = s,ξh = ξ,ah = a) Q(ξh = ξ)maxπ∈Π Pπ (sh = s,ah = a)
                                              =
                   Q(ξh = ξ)µh (s,a)                   Q(ξh = ξ)µh (s,a)
                                                maxπ∈Π Pπ (sh = s,ah = a)
                                              =                           ≤ Ccov (M ).
                                                       µh (s,a)


D     P ROOFS AND A DDITIONAL D ETAILS FROM S ECTION 3
D.1    G OLF A LGORITHM AND P ROOFS FROM S ECTION 3

Algorithm 1 G OLF (Jin et al., 2021a)
input: Function class F, confidence width β > 0.
initialize: F (0) ← F, Dh(0) ← ∅ ∀h ∈ [H].
 1: for episode t = 1,2,...,T do
 2:      Select policy π (t) ← πf (t) , where f (t) := argmaxf ∈F (t−1) f (x1 ,πf,1 (x1 )).
 3:      Execute π (t) for one episode and obtain trajectory  (x1(t) ,a(t)   (t)       (t)  (t)  (t)
                                                                         1 ,r1 ),...,(xH ,aH ,rH ).
                             (t)      (t−1)       (t)  (t)   (t)
 4:      Update dataset: Dh ← Dh ∪ xh ,ah ,xh+1 ∀h ∈ [H].
 5:      Compute confidence set:

                     (t)                 (t)                      (t) ′
                   F ← f ∈ F : Lh (fh ,fh+1 )− min         ′
                                                                 Lh (fh ,fh+1 ) ≤ β ∀h ∈ [H] ,                     (3)
                                                            fh ∈Fh
                                               X                                               2
                                  ′
              where        L(t)
                            h (f,f ) :=                         f (x,a)−r−max
                                                                           ′
                                                                              f ′ (x′ ,a′ )        , ∀f,f ′ ∈ F.
                                                                            a ∈A
                                                      (t)
                                          (x,a,r,x′ )∈Dh


 6: Output π̄ = unif(π (1:T ) ). // For PAC guarantee only.

Lemma 12 (Jin et al. (2021a, Lemmas 39 and 40)). Suppose Assumption 1 holds. Then if β > 0 is
selected as in Theorem 1, then with probability at least 1−δ, for all t ∈ [T ], Algorithm 1 satisfies
1. Q⋆ ∈ F (t) .
   P                                           2
     i<t E(x,a)∼d(i) (fh (x,a)−[Th fh+1 ](x,a)) ≤ O(β) for all f ∈ F .
                                                                    (t)
2.
                      h

Lemma 13 (Jiang et al. (2017, Lemma 1)). For any value function f = (f1 ,...,fH ),
                                                    H
                                                    X
                   f1 (x1 ,πf1 ,1 (x1 ))−J(πf ) =       E(x,a)∼dπf [fh (x,a)−(Th fh+1 )(x,a)].
                                                                     h
                                                    h=1


                                                           18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Lemma 14 (Equivalence of coverability and cumulative reachability). The following definition is
equivalent to Definition 2:
                                            X
                            Ccov := max           sup dπh (x,a).
                                             h∈[H]           π∈Π
                                                  (x,a)∈X ×A


Proof of Lemma 14. We relate coverability and cumulative reachability for each choice for h ∈ [H].
Coverability bounds cumulative reachability. It follows immediately from the definition of coverability
that if µh ∈ ∆(X ×A) realizes the value of Ccov , then
                    X                          X       maxπ∈Π dπh (x,a)
                           maxdπh (x,a) =                               µh (x,a)
                           π∈Π                              µh (x,a)
                (x,a)∈X ×A                 (x,a)∈X ×A
                                               X
                                        ≤              Ccov ·µh (x,a)                (by Definition 2)
                                                   (x,a)∈X ×A

                                              = Ccov .

Cumulative reachability bounds coverability. Define µh (x,a) ∝ maxπ∈Π dπh (x,a). Then for any π ∈ Π
and any (x,a) ∈ X ×A, we have
                       dπh (x,a)                       dπh (x,a)
                                 =           ′′
                       µh (x,a) maxπ′′ ∈Π dπh (x,a)/P(x′ ,a′ )∈X ×A maxπ′ ∈Π dπh′ (x′ ,a′ )
                                   X                  ′
                                 ≤             max
                                                ′
                                                   dπh (x′ ,a′ ).
                                                     π ∈Π
                                    (x′ ,a′ )∈X ×A

This completes the proof.

Proof of Theorem 1. Equipped with Lemma 14, we prove Theorem 1.

Preliminaries. For each t, we define δh(t) (·,·) := fh(t) (·,·)−(Th fh+1
                                                                     (t)
                                                                         )(·,·), which may be viewed as a
                                                                                         (t)
“test function” at level h induced by f (t) ∈ F. We adopt the shorthand dh(t) ≡ dπh , and we define
                                  t−1
                                  X
                                                     ⋆                           dπh
                   de(t)
                     h (x,a) :=       d(i)
                                       h (x,a), and µh :=            argmin sup                      .         (4)
                                  i=1                             µh ∈∆(X ×A)π∈Π µh            ∞

                                                                                                 ⋆
That is, de(t)
           h unnormalized average of all state visitations encountered prior to step t, and µh is the
distribution that attains the value of Ccov for layer h.8 Throughout the proof, we perform a slight abuse
                                    Pt−1
of notation and write Ede(t) [f ] := i=1 Ed(i) [f ] for any function f : X ×A → R.
                           h                   h


Regret decomposition. As a consequence of completeness (Assumption 1) and the construction of
F (t) , a standard concentration argument (Lemma 12) guarantees that with probability at least 1−δ, for
all t ∈ [T ]:
                                                 X (t)                  2
                       (i) Q⋆ ∈ F (t) , and (ii)  deh (x,a) δh(t) (x,a) ≤ O(β).                     (5)
                                                       x,a

We condition on this event going forward. Since Q⋆ ∈ F (t) , we are guaranteed that f (t) is optimistic
(i.e., f1(t) (x1 ,πf (t) ,1 (x1 )) ≥ Q⋆1 (x1 ,πf ⋆ ,1 (x1 ))), and a regret decomposition for optimistic algorithms
(Lemma 13) allows us to relate regret to the average Bellman error under the learner’s sequence of
policies:
            XT                                          X T X H

    Reg ≤        f1(t) (x1 ,πf (t) ,1 (x1 ))−J(π (t) ) =         E(x,a)∼d(t) fh(t) (x,a)−(Th fh+1
                                                                                              (t)
                                                                                                  )(x,a) .
                              1                                          h
            t=1                                          t=1 h=1
                                                                             |            {z           }
                                                                                               (t)
                                                                                        =:δh (x,a)

   8
     If the minimum in Eq. (4) is not obtained, we can repeat the argument that follows for each element of a limit
sequence attaining the infimum.


                                                         19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


To proceed, we use a change of measure argument to relate the on-policy average Bellman error
E(x,a)∼d(t) [δh(t) (x,a)] appearing above to the in-sample squared Bellman error E(x,a)∼de(t) [δh(t) (x,a)2 ];
          h                                                                               h
the latter is small as a consequence of Eq. (5). Unfortunately, naive attempts at applying change-of-
measure fail because during the initial rounds of exploration, the on-policy and in-sample visitation
probabilities can be very different, making it impossible to relate the two quantities (i.e., any natural
notion of extrapolation error will be arbitrarily large).
To address this issue, we introduce the notion of a “burn-in” phase for each state-action pair (x,a) ∈
X ×A by defining                          n                                o
                                                                    ⋆
                            τh (x,a) = min t | de(t)
                                                 h   (x,a) ≥ Ccov ·µh (x,a) ,
which captures the earliest time at which (x,a) has been explored sufficiently; we refer to t < τh (x,a)
as the burn-in phase for (x,a).
Going forward, let h ∈ [H] be fixed. We decompose regret into contributions from the burn-in phase for
each state-action pair, and contributions from pairs which have been explored sufficiently and reached
a stable phase “stable phase”.
T
X                           T                                         T
                           X                                          X
  E(x,a)∼d(t) δh(t) (x,a) =   E(x,a)∼d(t) δh(t) (x,a)1[t < τh (x,a)] + E(x,a)∼d(t) δh(t) (x,a)1[t ≥ τh (x,a)] .
                  h                                          h                                                       h
t=1                                           t=1                                                     t=1
|                {z                   }       |                      {z                          } |                           {z                }
    on-policy average Bellman error                              burn-in phase                                             stable phase

We will not show that every state-action pair leaves the burn-in phase. Instead, we use coverability to
argue that the contribution from pairs that have not left this phase is small on average. In particular, we
use that |δh(t) | ≤ 1 to bound
T
X                                         X                             X                       X (τ (x,a))               X
                                                                                                                            µ⋆ (x,a) = 2Ccov ,

  E(x,a)∼d(t) δh(t) (x,a)1[t < τh (x,a)] ≤                                        d(t)
                                                                                   h (x,a) =     de h  h    (x,a) ≤ 2Ccov                  h
                  h
t=1                                                              x,a t<τh (x,a)                 x,a                                  x,a

where the last inequality holds because
                                                                     (x,a) ≤ 2Ccov ·µ⋆ (x,a),
                  (τ (x,a))           (τ (x,a)−1)        (τ (x,a)−1)
                de h    h   (x,a) = de h          (x,a)+d h
                                                    h                        h                                 h
which follows from Eq. (4) and the definition of τh .
For the stable phase, we apply change-of-measure as follows:
                      T
                      X
                            E(x,a)∼d(t) δh(t) (x,a)1[t ≥ τh (x,a)]
                                          h
                      t=1
                         T X
                                                   !1/2
                        X        (t)     de(t)
                                           h (x,a)
                      =         dh (x,a) (t)            δh(t) (x,a)1[t ≥ τh (x,a)]
                        t=1 x,a          de (x,a)
                                           h
                        v                                        v
                        u T                                  2 u T
                        uXX 1[t ≥ τh (x,a)]d(t)  h (x,a)
                                                                 uXX (t)                         2
                      ≤t                    (t)
                                                               · t         deh (x,a) δh(t) (x,a) ,                                         (6)
                          t=1 x,a         dh (x,a)
                                           e
                                                                   t=1 x,a
                        |               {z                    }|                {z               }
                                          (I): extrapolation error                 (II): in-sample squared Bellman error

where the last inequality is an application of Cauchy-Schwarz. Using part (II) of Eq. (5), we bound
the in-sample error above by
                                                    p
                                           (II) ≤ O    βT .                                      (7)
Bounding the extrapolation error using coverability. To proceed, we show that the extrapolation
error (I) is controlled by coverability. We begin with a scalar variant of the standard elliptic potential
lemma (Lattimore and Szepesvári, 2020); this result is proven in the sequel.
Lemma 15 (Per-state-action elliptic potential lemma). Let d(1) ,d(2) ,...,d(T ) be an arbitrary sequence
of distributions over a set Z (e.g., Z = X × A), and let µ ∈ ∆(Z) be a distribution such that
d(t) (z)/µ(z) ≤ C for all (z,t) ∈ Z ×[T ]. Then for all z ∈ Z, we have
                                                  T
                                                  X           d(t) (z)
                                                        P                 ≤ O(log(T )).
                                                        i<t d (z)+C ·µ(z)
                                                             (i)
                                                  t=1


                                                                        20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


We bound the extrapolation error (I) by applying Lemma 15 on a per-state basis, then using coverability
(and the equivalence to cumulative reachability) to argue that the potentials from different state-
action pairs average out. Observe that by the definition of τh , we have that for all t ≥ τh (s, a),
                   ⋆                        1 e(t)                 ⋆
de(t)                           e(t)
  h (x,a) ≥ Ccov µh (x,a) ⇒ dh (x,a) ≥ 2 (dh (x,a)+Ccov µh (x,a)), which allows us to bound term
(I) of extrapolation error by
  T X                                 2     T X
X        1[t ≥ τh (x,a)]dh(t) (x,a)         X           d(t)       (t)
                                                          h (x,a)·dh (x,a)
                                        ≤ 2
t=1 x,a          de(t) (x,a)
                  h                                de(t) (x,a)+Ccov ·µ⋆ (x,a)
                                             t=1 x,a   h                   h
                                             T X
                                             X              (t′ )                d(t)
                                                                                  h (x,a)
                                       ≤2         max      dh     (x,a)·
                                          t=1 x,a
                                                  t′ ∈[T ]               dh (x,a)+Ccov ·µ⋆h (x,a)
                                                                         e(t)

                                                                    !                 T
                                                                                                                !
                                            X           (t)
                                                                                    X           d(t)
                                                                                                 h   (x,a)
                                       ≤2       maxdh (x,a) ·                max
                                                                                        e(t)               ⋆
                                                                                    t=1 dh (x,a)+Ccov ·µh (x,a)
                                                t∈[T ]                   (s,a)∈S×A
                                            x,a
                                          |           {z             }|                      {z                 }
                                                 ≤Ccov by Lemma 14                 ≤O(log(T )) by Lemma 15

                                       ≤ O(Ccov log(T )).                                                    (8)
To conclude, we substitute Eqs. (7) and (8) into Eq. (6), which gives
                              H
                              X                                p

                      Reg ≤       E(x,a)∼d(t) δh(t) (x,a) ≤ O H Ccov ·βT log(T ) .
                                             h
                              h=1


Proof of Lemma 15. Using the fact for any u ∈ [0,1], u ≤ 2log(1+u), we have
          T                              T
         X            d(t) (z)          X                        d(t) (x,a)
             P                      ≤ 2 log 1+ P
              i<t d (z)+C ·µ(x,a)                        i<t d (z)+C ·µ(x,a)
                   (i)                                          (i)
         t=1                            t=1
                                                                 (since d(t) (x,a)/µ(x,a) ≤ C ∀t ∈ [T ])
                                         T       P
                                                     i<t+1 d (z)+C ·µ(x,a)
                                                              (i)
                                        X
                                    = 2 log         P
                                                       i<t d (z)+C ·µ(x,a)
                                                            (i)
                                        t=1
                                               T P
                                                                                  !
                                                     i<t+1 d (z)+C ·µ(x,a)
                                              Y               (i)

                                    = 2log         P
                                                       i<t d (z)+C ·µ(x,a)
                                                            (i)
                                              t=1
                                              PT (i)                         !
                                                 i=1 d   (z)+C      ·µ(x,a)
                                    = 2log
                                                       C ·µ(x,a)
                                             ≤ 2log(T +1).                (since d(t) (x,a)/µ(x,a) ≤ C ∀t ∈ [T ])
This completes the proof.


E     P ROOFS AND A DDITIONAL D ETAILS FROM S ECTION 4
E.1   A DDITIONAL D ETAILS : O FFLINE RL
Proposition 16 (Generalized concentrability is sufficient for offline RL). Given access to an offline
data distribution µ satisfying generalized concentrability (Definition 4), if F satisfies Assumption 1,
one can find an ε-optimal policy using poly(Cconc (µ,F),H,log|F|,ε−1 ) samples.
Proof of Proposition 16. Given an offline dataset D = {Dh }Hh=1 with n samples for each layer h ∈ [H]
under the distribution µh , the MSBO algorithm (e.g., Xie and Jiang, 2020) produces a value function
fb∈ F of the form
                                   H
                                   X
                                                                    ′
                       f ← argmin
                        b               Lh (fh ,fh+1 )− min
                                                         ′
                                                              Lh (fh ,fh+1 ) ,
                                f ∈F                             fh ∈Fh
                                       h=1


                                                           21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                X                                           2
             where     Lh (f,f ′ ) :=                        f (x,a)−r−max
                                                                        ′
                                                                           f ′ (x′ ,a′ )        , ∀f,f ′ ∈ F.
                                                                            a ∈A
                                        (x,a,r,x′ )∈Dh
By adapting the proof of Theorem 5 of Xie and Jiang (2020) (or Lemma 12), one can show that under
Assumption 1, with probability at least 1−δ, fb satisfies
                   H                                         2
                  X                                                  log(|F |/δ)
                      E(x,a)∼µh (fh (x,a)−Th fh+1 )(x,a)
                                     b             b             ≤H·             .
                                                                         n
                     h=1

The result now follows by applying an adaptation of Xie and Jiang (2020, Corollary 4), which shows
that for any f ∈ F,
                         XH
  J(π ⋆ )−J(πf ) ≤ 2max E(x,a)∼dπh [|fh (x,a)−(Th fh+1 )(x,a)|]
                       π∈Π
                             h=1
                      v
                      u
                      u    H
                           X
                   ≤ 2tHmax E(x,a)∼µh [(fh (x,a)−(Th fh+1 )(x,a))2 ]
                               π∈Π
                                     h=1
                      v
                      u
                      u            H
                                   X
                   ≤ 2tHCconc (µ,F) E(x,a)∼µh [(fh (x,a)−(Th fh+1 )(x,a))2 ] (by Definition 4)
                                                h=1
                           r
                               Cconc (µ,F)log(|F |/δ)
                   ≤ 2H                               .
                                         n



E.2    P ROOFS FROM S ECTION 4
Proof of Theorem 3. Assume without loss of generality that H ≤ min{log2 (X),C}; if this does not
hold, the result is obtained by applying the argument that follows with H ′ = min{H,⌊log2 (X)⌋,C}.
We consider a family of deterministic MDPs with horizon H. We use a layered state space X =
X1 ∪···∪XH , where only states in Xh are reachable at layer h. The state space is a binary tree of depth
                    Plog (X)−1 h
H −1, which has h=02             2 = X −1 states. The are two actions, left and right, which determine
whether the next state is the left or right successor in the tree.
For each MDP in the family, we allow a single action at a single leaf at h = H to have reward rH = 1,
give reward 0 to all actions in all other states. For each such MDP, we use (x⋆H ,a⋆H ) to denote the single
state-action pair with r = 1. We also use (x⋆h ,a⋆h ) for h ∈ [H] to denote the unique path from x1 to
(x⋆H ,a⋆H ). Note that the optimal policy is to follow this path, i.e.
                                            ⋆
                                         dπh (x,a) = 1[(x,a) = (x⋆h ,a⋆h )].
We choose Fh to be the set of all possible indicator functions for a single state-action pair:
                       Fh := {fh (x′ ,a′ ) = 1(x′ = x,a′ = a) | ∀(x,a) ∈ Xh ×A}.
We define F = F1 ×···×FH . Note that for each h ∈ [H],
                              Q⋆h (xh ,ah ) = 1(xh = x⋆h ,ah = a⋆h ) ∈ Fh .
In addition, we have log|F| ≤ Hlog(2X).

Completeness. We first verify that the construction satisfies completeness. Fix fh ∈ Fh , and let
fh (x, a) = 1(x = xf,h , a = af,h ) for some (xf,h , af,h ) ∈ Xh × A. Then for any (xh−1 , ah−1 ) ∈
Xh−1 × A, we consider two cases. First, if xf,h is not the unique successor of (xh−1 ,ah−1 ), then
(Th−1 fh )(xh−1 ,ah−1 ) = 0. Otherwise,
                                   X
         (Th−1 fh )(xh−1 ,ah−1 ) =     P(xh | xh−1 ,ah−1 )maxf (xh ,ah )
                                                                       ah
                                           xh
                              = P(xf,h | xh−1 ,ah−1 ).        (as maxah f (xh ,ah ) = 1(xh = xf,h ))
                              = 1.
This means Th−1 fh ∈ Fh−1 , because there exists a single (xh−1 ,ah−1 ) pair in Xh−1 × A such that
(Th−1 fh )(xh−1 ,ah−1 ) ̸= 0.


                                                              22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Generalized coverability. We now show that the construction satisfies generalized coverability. Fix
                                                       H
an MDP in the family with optimal path {(x⋆h ,a⋆h )}h=1 . We will show that for all f = f1:H ∈ F, if
f1:H ̸= Q⋆1:H , then there exists h′ ∈ [H], such that
         h                                           i
                                                   2                                               2
   Edπ′⋆ (fh (xh′ ,ah′ )−(Th′ fh′ +1 )(xh′ ,ah′ )) = (fh′ (x⋆h′ ,a⋆h′ )−(Th′ fh′ +1 )(x⋆h′ ,a⋆h′ )) = 1. (9)
      h
                                                             ⋆
From here, the result will follow by choosing µh = dπh ∀h ∈ [H]. Indeed, using the boundedness of
f1:H ∈ F, we have
                          XH      h                                    i
                                                                     2
                              Edπh (fh (xh ,ah )−(Th fh+1 )(xh ,ah )) ≤ H,
                            h=1
for all π ∈ Π, meaning that Eq. (9) implies that Ccov (µ,F) ≤ H ≤ C in this problem instance.
We proceed to prove Eq. (9).                        Based on the definition of F, we know that
                                      2
(fh (x⋆h ,a⋆h )−(Th fh+1 )(x⋆h ,a⋆h )) ∈ {0, 1} for all h ∈ [H]. Therefore, if we assume by contra-
diction that f1:H ̸= Q⋆1:H and there does not exist an h′ ∈ [H] that satisfies Eq. (9), we must
have
                                  fh (x⋆h ,a⋆h ) = (Th fh+1 )(x⋆h ,a⋆h ), ∀h ∈ [H].                     (10)
By the condition Eq. (10), we have (TH fH+1 )(x⋆h , a⋆H ) = RH (x⋆H , a⋆H ) = 1, which implies that
fh (x⋆h ,a⋆h ) = 1 for all h ∈ [H]. From the construction of F, we know Q⋆1:H is the only function with
Q⋆h (x⋆h ,a⋆h ) = 1 for all h ∈ [H], which gives the desired contraction, and proves that such h′ ∈ [H] must
exist, establishing Eq. (9).

Lower bound on sample complexity. A lower bound of 2Ω(H) samples to learn a 0.1-optimal with
probability 0.9 follows from standard lower bounds for binary tree-structured MDPs (Krishnamurthy
et al., 2016; Jiang et al., 2017) (recall that since there are 2H/2 leaves at layer H, and only one has
non-zero reward, finding a policy with non-trivial regret is no easier than solving a multi-armed bandit
problem with 2H/2 actions and binary rewards).


F     P ROOFS AND A DDITIONAL R ESULTS FROM S ECTION 5
F.1   A DDITIONAL D ETAILS : S EQUENTIAL E XTRAPOLATION C OEFFICIENT VERSUS
      B ELLMAN -E LUDER DIMENSION
The discussion in Section 5 (in particular, Proposition 4 shows that Bellman-Eluder dimension and
Bellman rank fail to capture coverability as a result of only considering average Bellman error rather
than squared Bellman error. In light of this observation, a seemingly reasonable fix is to adapt the
Bellman-Eluder dimension to consider squared Bellman error rather than average Bellman error.
Consider the following variant.
Definition 9 (Squared Bellman-Eluder dimension). We define the Squared Bellman-Eluder dimension
dimsq                                                                               (1) (2)     (d)    Π
    BE (F,Π,ε,h) for layer h is the largest d ∈ N such that there exist sequences {dh ,dh ,...,dh } ⊆ Dh
       (1)    (d)
and {δh ,...,δh } ⊆ Fh −Th Fh+1 such that for all t ∈ [d],
                                                     v
                                                     u t−1
                                                     uX
                        |E (t) [δ ]| > ε , and t E (i) (δ (t) )2 ≤ ε(t) ,
                             dh
                                 (t)
                                  h
                                         (t)
                                                                 dh     h                            (11)
                                                           i=1

for ε(1) ,...,ε(d) ≥ ε. We define dimsq                              sq
                                     BE (F,Π,ε) = maxh∈[H] dimBE (F,Π,ε,h).
                                                                         qP
                                                                             t−1
This definition is identical to Definition 6, except that the constraint     i=1 (Ed(i) [δh(t) ])2 ≤ ε(t) in Def-
                                                qP                                    h
                                                       t−1         (t)   (t)
inition 6 has been replaced by the constraint          i=1 Ed(i)  (δh )2 ≤ ε , which uses squared Bellman
                                                             h
error instead of average Bellman error. By p    adapting the analysis of Jin et al. (2021a) it  is possible to
show that this definition yields Reg ≤ O  e H inf ε>0 {ε2 T +dimsq (F,Π,ε)}·T log|F| . If one could
                                                                        BE
show that dimsq   BE (F,Π,ε) ≲ Ccov ·polylog(ε
                                                −1
                                                   ), this would recover Theorem 1. Unfortunately, it turns
out that in general, one can have dimsq  BE (F,Π,ε) = Ω(Ccov /ε), which leads to suboptimal T
                                                                                                       2/3
                                                                                                           -type
regret using the result above. The following result shows that this guarantee cannot be improved
without changing the complexity measure under consideration.


                                                      23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Proposition 17. Fix T ∈ N, and let εT := T −1/3 . There exist MDP class/policy class/value function
class tuples (M1 ,Π1 ,F1 ) and (M2 ,Π2 ,F2 ) with the following properties.
1. All MDPs in M1 (resp. M2 ) satisfy Assumption 1 with respect to F1 (resp. F2 ). In addition,
   log|F1 | = log|F2 | = O(1).
                         e
2. For all MDPs in M1 , we have dimsqBE (F1 ,Π1 ,εT ) ∝ 1/εT , and any algorithm must have E[Reg] ≥
   Ω(T 2/3 ) for some MDP in the class
3. For all MDPs in M2 , we also have dimsq
                                        BE (F2 ,Π2 ,εT ) ∝ 1/εT , yet Ccov = O(1) and G OLF attains
              √
   E[Reg] ≤ O( T ).
            e
                                                                                                    2/3
         √ shows that there are two classes for which the optimal rate differs polynomially (Ω(T )
This result
vs. O( T )), yet the Bellman-Eluder dimension has the same size, and implies that the Bellman-
     e
Eluder dimension cannot provide rates better than Ω(T 2/3 ) for classes with low coverability in general.
Informally, the reason why Bellman-Eluder dimension fails capture the optimal rates for the problem
instances in Proposition 17 is that the definition in Eq. (11) only checks whether the average Bellman
error violates the threshold ε, and does not consider how far the error violates the threshold (e.g.,
|Ed(t) [δh(t) ]| > ε and |Ed(t) [δh(t) ]| > 1 are counted the same).
      h                  h

In spite of this counterexample, it is possible to show that the Bellman-Eluder dimension with squared
Bellman error is always bounded by the Sequential Extrapolation Coefficient up to a poly(ε−1 ) factor,
and hence can always be bounded by coverability, albeit suboptimally.
Proposition 18. Let F be a [0, 1]-valued function class. For all T ∈ N and ε > 0, we have
                            SECRL (F ,Π,T )
min{dimsq BE (F,Π,ε),T } ≤        ε2        .

F.1.1     P ROOFS FROM A DDITIONAL D ETAILS
Proof of Proposition 17. Let the time horizon T ∈ N be fixed. We first construct the class M1 and
verify that it satisfies the properties in the statement of Proposition 17, then do the same for M2 .

Class M1 . We choose M1 to be a class of bandit problems with H = 1. Let a parameter ε1 ∈ [0,1/2]
be fixed, and let A := ε−1
                        1 . We define M1 = {M ,...,M
                                                 (1)       (A)
                                                               }, where for each M (i) :
• The action space is A = {1,...,A}.
• The reward distribution for action a ∈ A in state x1 is Ber(1/2 +ε1 1{a = i}).
                                                                                                            A
For each i ∈ M(i) , the mean reward function is f1(i) (x1 ,π) = 1/2 +ε1 1{a = i}. We define F = {f (i) }i=1
and Π = {πf | f ∈ F}. Note that since H = 1, completeness of F is immediate.
Lower bounding the Bellman-Eluder dimension. Let M (A) be the underlying instance. We will lower
bound the Bellman-Eluder dimension for layer h = 1. Consider the sequence d(1)                     (A−1)
                                                                                           1 ,...,d1     , where
 (t)
         πf (t)       (1)    (A−1)              (t)        (t)       (t)     (t)     (A)
d1 := d1        and δ1 ,...,δ1      , where δ1 := f1 − T1 f2 = f1 − f1 (recall that we adopt the
convention fH+1 = 0). Observe that for each t ∈ [A−1], we have
                          |Ed(t) [δ1(t) ](x1 ,a1 )| = |f1(t) (x1 ,t)−f1(A) (x1 ,t)| = ε1 ,
                                 1

yet                 X                             X
                     Ed(i) (δ1(t) (x1 ,a1 ))2 = ε1 (f1(t) (x1 ,i)−f1(A) (x1 ,i))2 = 0.

                             1
                     i<t                         i<t
This certifies that dimsq
                        BE (F,Π,ε) ≥ A−1 ≥ ε −1
                                             1  /2 for all ε < ε1 .
Lower bounding regret. A standard result (e.g., Lattimore and Szepesvári, 2020) is that for any family
of multi-armed bandit instances of the form {M (1) ,...,M (A) }, where M (i) has Bernoulli rewards with
mean 1/2 +∆1{a = i} for ∆ ≤ 1/4, any algorithm must have regret

                                                                 A
                                   E[Reg] ≥ Ω(1)·min ∆T,
                                                                 ∆
for some instance. We apply this result with the class M1 , which has ∆ = ε1 and A = ε−1
                                                                                      1 , which gives

                                                               1
                                   E[Reg] ≥ Ω(1)·min ε1 T, 2 .
                                                               ε1
Choosing ε1 = εT = T −1/3 yields E[Reg] ≥ Ω(T 2/3 ) whenever T is greater than an absolute constant.


                                                      24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Class M2 . Let a parameter ε2 ∈ [0,1/2] be fixed, and let A := ε−1
                                                                2 (we assume without loss of
                 −1
generality that ε2 ∈ N). We define M2 = {M ,...,M }, where each MDP M (i) is as defined
                                             (1)      (A)

follows:
• We have H = 2, and there is a layered state space X = X1 ×X2 , where X1 = {x1 } and X2 = {y,z}.
• The action space is A = {1,...,A}.
• x1 is the deterministic initial state. Regardless of the action, we transition to z with probability 1−ε2
  and y with probability ε2 .
• For each MDP M (i) all actions have zero reward in states x1 and z. For state y, action i has reward 1
  and all other actions have reward 0.
We let f (i) denote the optimal Q-function for M (i) , which has:
• f1(i) (x1 ,·) = ε2 and f2(i) (z,·) = 0.
• f2(i) (y,a) = 1{a = i}.
We define F = {f (i) }i∈[A] ; it is clear that this class satisfies completeness. We define Π = {πf | f ∈ F};
for states where there are multiple optimal actions (i.e., fh (x,a) = fh (x,a′ )), we take πf,h (x) to be the
optimal with the least index, which implies that πf,1 (x1 ) = πf,2 (z) = 1 for all f ∈ F.
Verifying coverability. We choose µ1 (x, a) = 1{x = x1 , a = 1}. We choose µ2 (z, 1) = 12 and
            1
µ2 (y,a) = 2A for all a ∈ A. It is immediate that coverability is satisfied with constant 1 for h = 1. For
h = 2, we have that for all π ∈ Π,
                                         dπ2 (z,1) 1−ε2
                                                   = 1      ≤2
                                         µ2 (z,1)      /2
and
                                            dπ2 (y,a)   ε2
                                                      ≤       ≤ 2Aε2 ≤ 2.
                                            µ2 (y,a) µ2 (y,a)
Hence, we have Ccov ≤ 2; note that this holds for any choice of ε2 .
Lower bounding the Bellman-Eluder dimension. Let M (A) be the underlying MDP. We will lower
bound the Bellman-Eluder dimension for layer h = 2. Consider the sequence d(1)                          (A−1)
                                                                                                2 ,...,d2     , where
          π f (t)
d(t)
 2   := d 2       and δ (1)
                        2   ,...,δ (A−1)
                                   2     , where δ (t)
                                                   2   := f (t)
                                                            2   − T  f
                                                                    2 3
                                                                       (t)
                                                                           = f (t)
                                                                               2   − f2
                                                                                       (A)
                                                                                           (recall that we adopt  the
convention fH+1 = 0). Observe that for each t ∈ [A−1], we have
                               |Ed(t) [δ2(t) ](x2 ,a2 )| = ε2 |f2(t) (y,t)−f2(A) (y,t)| = ε2 ,
                                    2

yet
                       X                                   X
                              Ed(i) (δ2(t) (x2 ,a2 ))2 = ε2 (f2(t) (y,i)−f2(A) (y,i))2 = 0.

                                2
                        i<t                                   i<t

This certifies that dimsq                    −1
                       BE (F,Π,ε,2) ≥ A−1 ≥ ε2 /2 for all ε < ε2 .

Upper bound on regret. To conclude, we set ε2 = εT = 1/T −1/3 . With this choice, we have
dimsq                    −1
   BE (F2 ,Π2 ,εT ) ≥ Ω(εT ). Since the construction satisfies completeness (Assumption 1) and has
Ccov ≤ 2 and H = 2, Theorem 1 yields
                       p                       p                       p
             Reg ≤ O( T log(|F|T /δ)) = O( T log(T /(ε2 δ))) = O(    e T log(1/δ)).


Proof of Proposition 18. Fix h ∈ [H], and n ∈ N, and consider sequences {d(1)          (2)    (n)
                                                                                  h ,dh ,...,dh } and
  (1) (2)     (n)
{δh ,δh ,...,δh } that satisfy Eq. (11) (that is, the sequences witness the value of dimBE (F,Π,ε,h)).
Then
                                             2
                                 n E (t) δ (t)
                                X     d      h
           dimsqBE (F,Π,ε,h) ≤
                                       h
                                          (t) 2
                                t=1    (ε )

                                                            25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023



                                                                                 2
                                     n
                                     X                  2
                                                                       Ed(t) δh(t)
                                                  (t)
                                  ≤      1+(ε ) ·                    P     h

                                                                 2            t−1
                                    t=1                   (ε(t) ) 1+ i=1 Ed(i) [δh(t) ]2
                                                                                   h
                                                                                      Pt−1
                                                                                   (by i=1 Ed(i) [δh(t) ]2 ≤ (ε(t) )2 )
                                                                                                h
                                                                    (t)  2
                                     n          (t) 2      E   (t) δ
                                    X   1+(ε )                dh      h
                                  ≤
                                             (t) 2
                                                          Pt−1
                                    t=1 (ε )          1+ i=1 Ed(i) [δh(t) ]2
                                                                       h
                                                               (t)  2
                                     n                 Ed(t) δh
                                    X      2
                                  ≤            2      P   h
                                                         t−1            (t) 2
                                                                                       (by ε(t) < |Ed(t) [δh(t) ]| ≤ 1)
                                    t=1 (ε ) 1+                      [δh ]
                                          (t)                                                         h
                                                         i=1 Ed(i)
                                                                 h
                                                           2
                                     1X
                                        n         Ed(t) δh(t)
                                  ≤ 2            P h                                                   (by ε(t) ≥ ε)
                                    ε t=1 1∨ t−1                 (t) 2
                                                    i=1 E (i) [δh ]
                                                                dh
                                    SECRL (F,Π,n)
                                  ≤               .
                                         ε2
This implies for any T > 0,
                                                                     SECRL (F,Π,T )
                                 min{dimsq
                                        BE (F,Π,ε),T } ≤                            .
                                                                           ε2



F.2    P ROOFS FROM S ECTION 5
Proof of Proposition 4. We present a counterexample for both Q-type and V -type Bellman-Eluder
dimension. We recall that the V -type Bellman-Eluder dimension is defined by replacing Fh −Th Fh+1
with VFh −Th Fh+1 and DΠ           Π
                        h with Dh,x in Definition 6, where VFh −Th Fh+1 := {(fh −Th fh+1 )(·,πf,h ) :
f ∈ F} ⊂ (X → R) and Dh,x {dπh (·) : π ∈ Π} ⊂ ∆(X ); see Appendix F.3.1 or Jin et al. (2021a) for
                          Π :=

more background on V -type Bellman-Eluder dimension.

V -type Bellman-Eluder dimension. The hard instance for V -type Bellman-Eluder dimension is
based on the construction of Efroni et al. (2022a, Proposition B.1), which shows that for any d = 2i
(i ∈ N), there exists an exogenous MDP (ExoMDP) with |S| = 3 endogenous states, |A| = 2, H = 2,
and d exogenous factors, with the following properties:9
1. There exists a function class F such that Q⋆ ∈ F and |F| = d. In addition for all f ∈ F with f ̸= Q⋆ ,
   πf is 1/8-suboptimal.
2. For all f,f ′ ∈ F \Q⋆ , we have (note that H = 2)
                                                                   1
                            Ex∼dπf ′ ,a∼π [f2 (x,a)−R2 (x,a)] = 1{f = f ′ }.                        (12)
                                  2      f,2                       2
3. Ccov ≤ 6; this is a consequence of Proposition 8 and the fact that the ExoMDP model in Efroni et al.
   (2022a) is a special case of the Ex-BMDP model in Section 3.2.
This means that if we take {f (1) ,f (2) ,...,f (d−1) } to be any ordering of the set of functions in F \{Q⋆ },
                                                  πf (t)
then set δh(i) := fh(i) −Th fh+1
                             (i)
                                    and d(t)h := dh      , we have that for all t ∈ [d−1],
                                                              v
                                                              u t−1
                                           (t)   1            uX                                       2
                 Ex∼d(t) ,a∼π            [δ2 ] = , and t              Ex∼d(i) ,a∼π            [δ2(t) ] = 0.
                         2      f (t) ,2         2               i=1
                                                                            2        f (t) ,2



This implies that the V -type Bellman-Eluder dimension dimBE-v (F,ΠF ,ε) is at least d − 1 for all
ε ≤ 1/2. It is straightforward to verify that this construction in Efroni et al. (2022a) satisfies Assumption
1 (completeness), because functions in the class have f1 = T2 f2 (that is, zero Bellman error at h = 1).
As a result, since H = 2, completeness for this construction is implied by Q⋆ ∈ F.
   9
     Technically, the construction in Efroni et al. (2022a) has a stochastic initial state with known distribution. This
can be embedded in our framework, which has a deterministic initial state, by lifting the horizon from 2 to 3.


                                                                26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Q-type Bellman-Eluder dimension. The construction above immediately extends to Q-type. This
is because in the construction, the value of R2 (x,·) and f2 (x,·) depends only on x (i.e., is independent
of the action) for all f ∈ F (cf. Efroni et al., 2022a, Proposition B.1). Therefore, for any f,g ∈ F, we
have,
                Ex∼dπf ,a∼πg,2 [g2 (x,a)−R2 (x,a)] = E(x,a)∼dπf [g2 (x,a)−R2 (x,a)].                      (13)
                       2                                          2

This implies that the Q-type Bellman residual matrix
                           n                                o
                            E(x,a)∼dπf ′ [f2 (x,a)−R2 (x,a)]
                                         2                        f,f ′ ∈F \{Q⋆ }

embeds the scaled identity matrix and, via the same argument as for V -type above, immediately
implies that dimBE (F,Π,ε) ≥ d−1 for all ε ≤ 1/2. As before, we have Ccov ≤ 6, and F is complete.

Proposition 19. For any d ∈ N, there exists an MDP M with H = 2 and |A| = 2, a policy class Π with
|Π| = d, and a value function class F with |F| = d satisfying completeness, such that Ccov = O(1), yet
O LIVE (Jiang et al., 2017) requires at least Ω(d) trajectories to return a 0.1-optimal policy.
Proof of Proposition 19. We now show that that O LIVE, a canonical average-Bellman-error-based
hypothesis elimination algorithm, also suffers from the lower bound in the construction from
Proposition 4. By Eq. (12) (V-type O LIVE) and Eq. (13) (Q-type O LIVE), we know that any
sub-optimal hypothesis f ∈ F \Q⋆ cannot be eliminated until πf is executed. On the other hand, the
construction ensures E[maxa f (s1 ,a)] = 7/8 whereas J(π ⋆ ) = 3/4. This means O LIVE will enumerate
over F \Q⋆ before finding a 0.1-optimal policy for this instance, and hence suffers from complexity of
Ω(d) (|F| = d).

Proof of Theorem 5. As in Theorem 1, as a consequence of completeness (Assumption 1), the
construction of F (t) , and Lemma 12, we have that with probability at least 1−δ, for all t ∈ [T ]:
                                                 X (t)                   2
                       (i) Q⋆ ∈ F (t) , and (ii)   deh (x,a) δh(t) (x,a) ≤ O(β),
                                                     x,a

and whenever this event holds,
           XT                                          X T X H

   Reg ≤        f1(t) (x1 ,πf (t) ,1 (x1 ))−J(π (t) ) =         E(x,a)∼d(t) fh(t) (x,a)−(Th fh+1
                                                                                             (t)
                                                                                                 )(x,a) .
                             1                                          h
           t=1                                          t=1 h=1
                                                                            |            {z           }
                                                                                       (t)
                                                                                    =:δh (x,a)

To proceed, we have that for all h ∈ [H],
                                                 Pt−1              (t) 2   1/2
            T                 T
            X          (t)   X            (t)    1∨ i=1 Ed(i)      (δh )
                Ed(t) δh =         Ed(t) δh  Pt−1 h   (t)   
            t=1
                  h
                             t=1
                                     h             1∨ i=1 Ed(i) (δh )2
                                                                h
                             v                                 v
                             u                    (t)  2                                       !
                             uX  T        Ed(t) δh
                                                               u T
                                                               uX        t−1
                                                                         X
                            ≤t          Pt−1h                                Ed(i) (δh(t) )2
                             u
                                                      (t)   t         1∨
                                    1∨         E (i) (δ    ) 2                   h
                               t=1        i=1 d      h
                                                         h       t=1     i=1
                                                                          (by Cauchy-Schwarz inequality)
                             v
                             u                      2
                             uXT            Ed(t) δh(t)       p
                            ≤t                h
                             u
                                           Pt−1         (t)   βT
                                                            2
                                    t=1 1∨  i=1 Ed(i) (δh )
                                                     h
                                p
                            ≤       SECRL (F,Π,T )·βT .                                      (by Definition 13)
Therefore, we obtain
                                                p
                                      Reg ≤ H       SECRL (F,Π,T )·βT .
Plugging in the choice for β completes the proof.



                                                         27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Proof of Proposition 6. We prove a more general result. Consider a set of distributions D ⊂ ∆(Z),
and a set of test functions Ψ ⊂ (Z → [0,1]). We define a generalized form of coverability with respect
to D by
                                                                            d
                                            Ccov (D) := inf sup                 .                              (14)
                                                             µ∈∆(Z)d∈D      µ ∞
We will show that, for any T > 0,
                                        SEC(Ψ,D,T ) ≲ Ccov (D)log(T ),
which is implies Proposition 6.
Going forward, we fix an arbitrary sequence {d(1) ,d(2) ,...,d(T ) } ⊂ D as well as an arbitrary sequence of
{ψ (1) ,ψ (2) ,...,ψ (T ) } ⊂ Ψ. Following Eq. (4), we define
                                                                     d
                                                  µ⋆ := argmin sup       .                                     (15)
                                                          µ∈∆(Z) d∈D µ ∞
                              P
In addition, define de(t) =   i<t d
                                      (t)
                                            .
For each z ∈ Z, let
                                                 t−1
                                                      (                    )
                                                 X
                                  τ (z) := min t     d(i) (z) ≥ Ccov µ⋆ (z) .                                  (16)
                                                            i=1

We decompose Ed(t) [ψ (t) ] as

              Ed(t) ψ (t) = Ed(t) ψ (t) (z)1[t < τ (z)] +Ed(t) ψ (t) (z)1[t ≥ τ (z)] .
Then,
                      T                    2
                      X       Ed(t) ψ (t)
                           Pt−1
                                             (t) 2

                    t=1 1∨    i=1 Ed(i) (ψ )
                                                      2 T
                     T                                  X Ed(t) ψ (t) (z)1[t ≥ τ (z)] 2                        (17)

                    X   Ed(t) ψ (t) (z)1[t < τ (z)]
                  ≲          Pt−1                      +        Pt−1                    ,
                                               (t) 2                            (t) 2
                    t=1 1∨      i=1 Ed(i) (ψ )           t=1 1∨   i=1 Ed(i) (ψ )
                    |               {z                } |             {z                }
                                        (I)                                       (II)

where we use a ≲ b as shorthand for a ≤ O(b).
We first bound the term (I),
                               T
                               X                             2
                         (I) ≤   Ed(t) ψ (t) (z)1[t < τ (z)]
                                  t=1
                                  T
                                  X                    2
                              ≤     Ed(t) 1[t < τ (z)]                                     (by ψ(·) ∈ [0,1], ∀ψ ∈ Ψ)
                                  t=1
                                  T
                                  X
                              ≤     Ed(t) 1[t < τ (z)]                                   (by Ed(t) 1[t < τ (z)] ≤ 1)
                                  t=1
                                   T
                                  XX
                              =      d(t)
                                      h (z)1[t < τ (z)]
                                  z∈Z t=1
                                  X
                              =                 de(τ (z)−1) (z)+d(τ (z)−1) (z)
                                  z∈Z
                              (a) X
                              ≤         2Ccov (D)µ⋆ (z)
                                  z∈Z
                              ≤ Ccov (D),                                                                      (18)


                                                                28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


where (a) follows because de(τ (z)−1) (z),d(τ (z)−1) (z) ≤ Ccov (D)µ⋆ (z), for all z ∈ Z, as a consequence of
Eqs. (15) and (16).
We now turn to the term (II). First, observe that
         X
              1[t ≥ τ (z)]d(t) (z)ψ (t) (z)
             z∈Z
                                       Pt−1 (i) !1/2
             X                                 d (z)
           =     1[t ≥ τ (z)]d (z) Pi=1
                                 (t)
                                           t−1 (i)     ψ (t) (z)
             z∈Z                           i=1 d   (z)
             v                               v
             uX                              u t−1
                                           2 uX
             u      1[t ≥ τ (z)](d(t)
                                      (z))   t E (i)  (ψ (t) )2  .
           ≤t            Pt−1 (i)                    d                               (by Cauchy-Schwarz inequality)
               z∈Z         i=1 d (z)            i=1

By rearranging this inequality, we have
                            T X                         2
                           X       1[t ≥ τ (z)] d(t)
                                                 h (z)
                    (II) ≤             Pt−1 (i)                                                   (defining 0/0 = 0)
                           t=1 z∈Z        i=1 d (z)
                              T X                                     2
                              X         1[t ≥ τ (z)](d(t) (z))
                         ≤2                         Pt−1 (i)                                           (by Eq. (16))
                                             ⋆
                              t=1 z∈Z Ccov ·µ (z)+    i=1 d (z)
                             T X                          2
                             X              (d(t) (z))
                         ≲                         Pt−1 (i)
                                          ⋆
                           t=1 z∈Z Ccov ·µ (z)+      i=1 d (z)
                            T X
                           X                                    d(t) (z)
                         ≤          maxd(i) (z) Pt−1
                                                                         ⋆
                                                       i=1 d (z)+Ccov ·µ (z)
                                     i≤T                    (i)
                           t=1 z∈Z
                                                     T
                                        X           X                     d(t) (z)
                         ≤ Ccov (Dh )         µ⋆ (z)   Pt−1                                            (by Eq. (14))
                                        z∈Z         t=1       i=1 d
                                                                   (i)
                                                                          (z)+Ccov ·µ⋆ (z)
                                       X
                         ≲ Ccov (D)          µ⋆ (z)log(T )                                          (by Lemma 15)
                                       z∈Z
                         = Ccov (D)log(T ).                                                                       (19)

Substituting Eqs. (18) and (19) into Eq. (17), we obtain
                                         SEC(Ψ,D,T ) ≲ Ccov (D)log(T ).



Proof of Proposition 7. This proof provides a slightly more general result. Consider a set of
distributions D ⊂ ∆(Z) and a set of test functions Ψ ⊂ (Z → [0,1]) be given. We consider an abstract
version of the Bellman-Eluder dimension with respect to D and Ψ. We define dimBE (Ψ,D,ε) is the
largest d ∈ N such that there exist sequences {d(1) ,d(2) ,...,d(d) } ⊂ D and {ψ (1) ,ψ (2) ,...,ψ (d) } ⊂ Ψ such
that for all t ∈ [d], 10
                                                     v
                                                     u t−1
                                  (t)    (t)
                                                     uX                       2
                         |Ed(t) [ψ ]| > ε , and t              Ed(i) [ψ (t) ] ≤ ε(t) ,                        (20)
                                                                   i=1
     (1)
for ε ,...,ε  (d)
                    ≥ ε. We will show that, for any all T ∈ N,
                            SEC(Ψ,D,T ) ≲ inf ε2 T +dimBE (Ψ,D,ε) ·log(T ),

                                                  ε>0

which immediately implies Proposition 7.
   10
      This definition coincides with distributional Eluder dimension (see, e.g., Jin et al., 2021a), which only differs
from Bellman-Eluder dimension on the notation of test function. We overload the notation for dimBE over this
proof for simplicity.


                                                              29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A generalized definition of ε-dependent sequence. In what follows, we rely on a slightly different
notion of an ε-(in)dependent sequence from the one given in Jin et al. (2021a, Definition 6) and Russo
and Van Roy (2013). We provide background on both definitions below.
ε-(in)dependent sequence (e.g., Jin et al., 2021a, Definition 6). A distribution ν ∈ D is ε-dependent on
                                                                                            Pk
a sequence {ν (1) ,...,ν (k) } ⊆ D if: When |Eν [ψ]| > ε for some ψ ∈ Ψ, we also have i=1 (Eν (i) [ψ])2 >
ε2 . Otherwise, ν is ε-independent if this does not hold.
Generalized ε-(in)dependent sequence. A distribution ν ∈ D is (generalized) ε-dependent on
a sequence {ν (1) , ... , ν (k) } ⊆ D if: for all ε′ ≥ ε, if |Eν [ψ]| > ε′ for some ψ ∈ Ψ, we also have
Pk                   2    ′2
    i=1 (Eν (i) [ψ]) > ε . We say that  Pk
                                           ν is (generalized) ε-independent if this does not hold, i.e., for
some ε ≥ ε, it has |Eν [ψ]| > ε′ but i=1 (Eν (i) [ψ])2 ≤ ε′2 .
         ′

The generalized definition above naturally induces a new implication (which the original definition
may not have): If ε′ ≥ ε, then ε-dependent sequence ⇒ ε′ -dependent sequence, or in other words,
ε′ -independent sequence ⇒ ε-independent sequence.
The definition of the distributional Eluder dimension (see Eq. (20)) can be written in two equivalent
ways using original and generalized definition for a ε-independent sequence: dimBE (Ψ,D,ε) is the
largest d ∈ N such that there exists a sequence {d(1) ,d(2) ,...,d(d) } ⊂ D such that for all t ∈ [d]:
    (i) d(t) is ε′ -independent of {d(1) ,d(2) ,...,d(t−1) } for some ε′ ≥ ε.
   (ii) d(t) is (generalized) ε-independent of {d(1) ,d(2) ,...,d(t−1) } ⇐=[by the implication above]=⇒
        d(t) is (generalized) ε′ -independent of {d(1) ,d(2) ,...,d(t−1) } for some ε′ ≥ ε.
This indicates that the distributional Eluder dimension can be equivalently written in terms of general-
ized independent sequences. Going forward, we only use the generalized ε-(in)dependent definition,
and omit the word generalized.

Setup. Let us use dimBE (ε) as shorthand for dimBE (Ψ,D,ε). By Eq. (20), we know dimBE (ε) also
upper bounds the length of sequences {d(1) ,d(2) ,...,d(d) } ⊂ D and {ψ (1) ,ψ (2) ,...,ψ (d) } ⊂ Ψ such that for
all t ∈ [d],
                                                      v
                                                      u t−1
                                                      uX
                       |E (t) [δ ]| > ε , and t E (i) [(ψ (t) )2 ] ≤ ε(t) ,
                             d
                                (t)    (t)
                                                                           d
                                                                     i=1

for ε(1) ,...,ε(d) ≥ ε (note that the square is inside the expectation which is different from Eq. (20)).
Now, for any {d(1) , d(2) , ... , d(T ) } ⊂ D and {ψ (1) , ψ (2) , ... , ψ (T ) } ⊂ Ψ, we define β (t) :=
Pt−1               (t) 2
   i=1 Ed(i) [(ψ ) ]. We will study the sequence
                                   Ed(1) [ψ (1) ]2 Ed(2) [ψ (2) ]2       Ed(T ) [ψ (T ) ]2

                                                  ,                ,...,                     .           (21)
                                     1∨β (1)         1∨β (3)               1∨β (T )
                                  will be specified later. For the remainder of the proof, we use L(t)
Fix a parameter α > 0, whose valueq
to denote the number of disjoint α             1∨βh(t) -dependent subsequences of d(t) in {d(1) ,d(2) ,...,d(t−1) },
for each t ∈ [T ].
                                                                                              √
Step 1. Suppose the t-th term of Eq. (21) is greater than α2 , so that |Ed(t) [ψ (t) ]| > α 1∨β (t) . From
the definition of L(t) , we know there have at least L(t) disjoint subsequences of {d(1) ,...,d(t−1) } (denoted
                (t)
by S(1) ,...,S(L ) ), such that
                                        (t)
                                       L
                                       X X
                                                    (Eν [ψ (t) ])2 ≥ (1∨β (t) )α2 .                            (22)
                                       i=1 ν∈S(i)

On the other hand, by the definition of βh(t) , we have
                                 (t)
                             L
                             X X                                 t−1
                                                                 X
                                              (Eν [ψ (t) ])2 ≤       Ed(i) [(ψ (t) )2 ] ≤ β (t) .              (23)
                             i=1 ν∈S(i)                          i=1
                                                                               √
Therefore, combining Eqs. (22) and (23) we obtain that, if |Ed(t) [ψ (t) ]| > α 1∨β (t) for some t ∈ [T ],
                                                                    1
                              β (t) ≥ L(t) (1∨β (t) )α2 =⇒ L(t) ≤ 2 .                                (24)
                                                                   α

                                                            30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Step 2. On the other hand, let {i1 ,i2 ,...,iκ } be the longest subsequence of [T ], where
                                         Ed(ij ) [δ (ij ) ]2
                                                             > α2 , ∀j ∈ [κ].
                                           1∨β (ij )
For compactness, we use {ν (1) ,ν (2) ,...,ν (κ) } abbreviate {d(i1 ) ,d(i2 ) ,...,d(iκ ) }. We now argue that there
                                    ⋆
exists j ⋆ ∈ [κ], such that for ν (j ) , there must exist at least

                                    ⋆            κ                   κ
                                 L ≥                        ≥                    −1                             (25)
                                            dimBE (α)+1        dimBE (α)+1
                                                                    ⋆
α-dependent disjoint subsequences in {ν (1) ,ν (2) ,...,ν (j −1) } (the actual number of disjoint subse-
quences is denoted by L⋆ ). This is because we can construct such disjoint subsequences by the
following procedure:
⟨1⟩ For j ∈ [L⋆ ], S(j) ← {ν (j) }. Then, set j ← L⋆ +1.
                                             ⋆
⟨2⟩ If ν (j) is α-dependent on S(1) ,...,S(L ) , terminate the procedure (goal achieved).
                                                                                     ⋆
⟨3⟩ Otherwise, we know      ν (j) is α-independent on at least one of S(1) ,...,S(L ) (denoted by S⋆ ).
    Update S⋆ ← S⋆ {ν (j) }, j ← j +1, and go to ⟨2⟩.
                        S

From the definition of dimBE (α), we know if |S(i) | ≥ dimBE (α) + 1, any ν ∈ Dh must be α-
dependent on S(i) (for each i ∈ [L⋆ ]). Therefore, such a procedure must terminate before or on
j (max) = L⋆ dimBE (α)+L⋆ . Thus, if j (max) ≤ κ, termination in ⟨2⟩ must happen. This only requires L⋆
to satisfy
                                                                       κ
                         L⋆ dimBE (α)+L⋆ ≤ κ =⇒ L⋆ ≤                          .
                                                                 dimBE (α)+1
                        j            k
That is, as long as L⋆ ≤ dimBEκ(α)+1 , the termination in ⟨2⟩ must happen for some j ⋆ ≤ κ.

Step 3. As we discussed at the beginning, α-dependence implies α′ -dependence for all α′ ≥ α. This
means the L⋆ in Step 2 lower bounds maxt∈[T ] L(t) in Step 1, because {d(i1 ) ,d(i2 ) ,...,d(iκ ) } is a subset
of {d(1) ,d(2) ,...,d(iκ ) }. Thus, combining Eqs. (24) and (25), we can obtain that,
                                  1                       κ
                                    ≥ maxL(t) ≥ L⋆ ≥             −1.
                                  α2 t∈[T ]          dimBE (α)+1
This implies that

                             1                        3dimBE (α)
                 κ ≤ 1+ 2 (dimBE (α)+1) ≤                        +1.                             (suppose α ≤ 1)
                            α                             α2
                                                      √
As a consequence, for any ε ∈ (0,1], by setting α = ε,
                             T                                    √
                                    Ed(t) [ψ (t) ]2

                           X                              3dimBE ( ε)
                                1                   >ε ≤              +1.                                      (26)
                            t=1
                                      1∨β (t)                  ε

Step 4. Let e(1) ≥ e(2) ≥ ··· ≥ e(T ) denote the sequence in Eq. (21) reordered in a decreasing fashion.
For any parameter w ∈ (0,1] to be specified later, we have
                                    T                                  T
                                    X       Ed(t) [ψ (t) ]2           X
                                           Pt−1                     =     e(t)
                                                            (t) 2
                                    t=1 1∨      E
                                            i=1 d  (i) [(ψ     )  ]   t=1
                                                     T
                                                     X
                                          ≤ T w+           e(t) 1(e(t) > w).
                                                     t=1


Observe that for any t ∈ [T ] such that e(t) > w, if 2η ≥ e(t) > η ≥ w, we have
                                               T
                                               X
                                          t≤     1(ei > η)
                                               i=1


                                                           31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                           3        √
                                          ≤ dimBE ( η)+1                                      (by Eq. (26))
                                           η
                                           3        √
                                          ≤ dimBE w +1
                                           η
                                            3d                                                       √
                                   =⇒ η ≤                                        (define d := dimBE ( w))
                                           t−1

                                      (t)
                                                  6d
                                  =⇒ e ≤ min         ,1 .                                    (2η ≥ e(t) > η)
                                                 t−1
Therefore,
                    T                              T
                    X                              X  6d
                          e(t) 1(e(t) > w) ≤ d+
                    t=1
                                                     t−1
                                                  t=d+1
                                           ≤ d+6dlog(T ).
                                  T
                                  X                            √         √
                             =⇒         e(t) ≤ T w+dimBE        w +6dimBE w log(T ).
                                  t=1
                2
Selecting w = ε implies
                                 SEC(T ) ≲ inf ε2 T +dimBE (ε) ·log(T ).

                                             ε>0

This completes the proof.


F.3     D ISCUSSION : R ELATIONSHIP TO A DDITIONAL C OMPLEXITY M EASURES

F.3.1    S EQUENTIAL E XTRAPOLATION C OEFFICIENT : Q- TYPE VERSUS V - TYPE
The Sequential Extrapolation Coefficient, as defined in Definition 8), can be thought of as a general-
ization of Q-type Bellman-Eluder dimension (Jin et al., 2021a). In this section we sketch how one
can adapt Sequential Extrapolation Coefficient so as to generalize V -type Bellman-Eluder dimension
instead. Note that V -type Bellman-Eluder dimension subsumes the original notion of Bellman rank
from Jiang et al. (2017).
We define the V -type Sequential Extrapolation Coefficient for RL as follows.
Definition 10 (Sequential Extrapolation Coefficient for RL, V -type). For each h ∈ [H], let DΠ
                                                                                             h,x :=
  π
{dh (·) : π ∈ Π} ⊂ ∆(X ) and VFh −Th Fh+1 := {(fh −Th fh+1 )(·,πf,h ) : f ∈ F } ⊂ (X → R). Then we
define,
                             SECRL-v (F,Π,T ) := max SEC(VFh −Th Fh+1 ,DΠ
                                                                        h,x ,T ).
                                                    h∈[H]


We recall that the V -type Bellman-Eluder dimension dimBE-v (F, Π, ε) is defined analogously, by
replacing Fh −Th Fh+1 → VFh −Th Fh+1 and DΠ       Π
                                            h → Dh,x in Definition 6.

Lastly, we give a V -type generalization of Definition 2 (i.e., coverability w.r.t. state only), for a policy
class Π as follows:
                                                                    dπh
                             Ccov-v :=         inf        sup              .                             (27)
                                       µ1 ,...,µH ∈∆(X )π∈Π,h∈[H] µh ∞

As a simple implication, we have Ccov-v ≤ Ccov ≤ Ccov-v ·|A|.
Note that the V -type variants of sequential extrapolation coefficient, Bellman-Eluder dimension, and
coverability differ from their Q-type counterparts only in the choices for the distribution and test
function sets. Since our proofs for Propositions 6 and 7 hold for arbitrary distributions and test function
sets, we immediately obtain the following V -type extensions of Propositions 6 and 7.
Proposition 20 (Coverability =⇒ SEC, V -type). Let Ccov-v be the V -type coverability coeffi-
cient (Eq. (27)) with policy class Π. Then for any value function class F, SECRL-v (F, Π, T ) ≤
O(Ccov-v ·log(T )).


                                                          32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Proposition 21 (Bellman-Eluder dimension =⇒ SEC, V -type). Suppose dimBE-v (F,Π,ε) be the
V -type Bellman-Eluder dimension with function class F and policy Π, then

                                              2
                 SECRL-v (F,Π,T ) ≤ O inf ε T +dimBE-v (F,Π,ε) ·log(T ) .
                                               ε>0


As shown in Jin et al. (2021a), G OLF (Algorithm 1) can be extended to V -type by simply replacing
Line 3 in Algorithm 1 with sampling (sh ,ah ,rh ,sh+1 ) ∼ d(t)                      (t)
                                                                  h ×πunif (sh ∼ dh and ah ∼ unif(A)) each
h ∈ [H]. By slightly modifying the proof of Theorem 5 one can obtain similar sample complexity
guarantees based on the V -type Sequential Extrapolation Coefficient. We omit the details here, since
the only differences are 1) a V -type analog of Lemma 12 (provided by Jin et al., 2021a, Lemma 44); and
2) trivially upper bounding the quantity Ed(i) ×π(t) [(δh(t) )2 ] (used in SECRL-v ) by |A|·Ed(i) ×π [(δh(t) )2 ]
                                            h    h                                            h     unif
(controlled by in-sample error). Note, however, that due to the uniform exploration, this algorithm
leads to a sample complexity guarantee of the form
                                            r                                            !
                         ⋆                      SECRL-v (F,Π,T )|A|log(T H|F |/δ)
                     J(π )−J(π̄) ≤ O H                                                    ,
                                                                     T
but not a regret bound.

F.3.2    C ONNECTION TO B ILINEAR C LASSES
The Bilinear class framework (Du et al., 2021) generalizes the notion of Bellman rank (Jiang et al., 2017),
which captures various more structural conditions via an additional class of discrepancy functions. In
this section we sketch how one can generalize the sequential extrapolation coefficient (SEC) further by
allowing for the use of general discrepancy functions to form confidence sets and estimate Bellman
residuals, in the vein of Bilinear classes.
Definition 11 (Gen-SEC). Let Z be an abstract set. Let Ψ ⊂ (Z → R) be a function class, and let
DΨ (:= {dψ : ψ ∈ Ψ}),PΨ (:= {pψ : ψ ∈ Ψ}) ⊂ ∆(Z) be two corresponding distribution classes, and
LΨ (:= {ℓψ : ψ ∈ Ψ}) ⊂ (Z → R) be a corresponding discrepancy function class. The Gen-SEC for
length T is given by
                                                                        Edψ(t) [ψ (t) ]2
                                                                ( T                           )
                                                                 X
                   gen
              SEC (Ψ,DΨ ,PΨ ,LΨ ,T ) :=             sup                 Pt−1             2
                                                                                               .       (28)
                                            ψ (1) ,...,ψ (T ) ∈Ψ t=1 1∨  i=1 Epψ(i) [ℓψ (t) ]

To apply the generalized SEC to reinforcement learning, one can set (for each level h) Ψ = Fh −Th Fh+1 ,
DΨ = {dπh (·,·) : π ∈ ΠF }, and PΨ = {(dπh ×πest,ψh )(·,·) : π ∈ ΠF }, where (d×π)(x,a) := d(x)π(a | x)
(for any d ∈ ∆(X ), π ∈ (X → ∆(A)) and (x,a) ∈ X ×A), and πest,ψh denotes the estimation policy
depending on ψh (e.g., greedy policy w.r.t. ψh or uniformly random policy over A). The discrepancy
function class LΨ can be selected according to the original Bilinear rank for covering various structural
conditions, and setting LΨ = Ψ recovers the original SEC.
By combining G OLF and Theorem 5 with the approach from Du et al. (2021), one can provide sample
complexity guarantees that scale with the Gen-SEC. We omit the details, but the basic idea is to form
the confidence set using the discrepancy function class LΨ rather than working with squared Bellman
error.

Bounding the generalized SEC by bilinear rank. In what follows, we show that the abstract version
of the Generalized SEC in Eq. (28) can be bounded by an abstract generalization of the notion of
Bilinear rank from Du et al. (2021).
Definition 12 (Bilinear rank, finite dimension (Du et al., 2021)). Let Z be an abstract set. Let
Ψ ⊂ (Z → R) be a function class, and let DΨ (:= {dψ : ψ ∈ Ψ}),PΨ (:= {pψ : ψ ∈ Ψ}) ⊂ ∆(Z) be
two corresponding distribution classes, and LΨ (:= {ℓψ : ψ ∈ Ψ}) ⊂ (Z → R) be a corresponding
                                                                rank d if there exists ψ ⋆ ∈ Ψ and
discrepancy function class. The class ΨPis said to have BilinearP
functions X,W ⊂ (Ψ → Rd ) such that 1) ψ∈Ψ ∥X(ψ)∥2 ≤ 1 and ψ∈Ψ ∥W (ψ)∥2 ≤ BW , and 2)
                            Edψ [ψ] ≤ |⟨W (ψ)−W (ψ ⋆ ),X(ψ)⟩|           ∀ψ ∈ Ψ,
                                                ′           ⋆
                           Epψ [ℓψ′ ] = |⟨W (ψ )−W (ψ ),X(ψ)⟩|           ∀ψ,ψ ′ ∈ Ψ.
We define dimbi (Ψ,DΨ ,PΨ ,LΨ ) as the least dimension d for which this property holds.


                                                       33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Proposition 22 (Bilinear rank =⇒ Gen-SEC). Suppose SECgen (Ψ, DΨ , PΨ , LΨ , T ) and
dimbi (Ψ, DΨ , PΨ , LΨ ) be the gen-SEC and Bilinear rank defined in Definitions 11 and 12 with
respect to function class Ψ, distribution classes DΨ and DΨ , and discrepancy function class LΨ . Then
we have,
                                                                                2

                     gen                                                    4BW   T
                SEC (Ψ,DΨ ,PΨ ,LΨ ,T ) ≲ dimbi (Ψ,DΨ ,PΨ ,LΨ )log 1+                   .
                                                                                d

Proof of Proposition 22. Throughout the proof, we use d(t) , p(t) and ℓ(t) as the shorthands of dψ(t) ,
pψ(t) and ℓψ(t) . We study the quantity,
                          T                                 T
                          X       Ed(t) [ψ (t) ]2         X       Ed(t) [ψ (t) ]2
                                 Pt−1                   ≤2        Pt−1                  .
                                                  (t) 2                           (t) 2
                          t=1 1∨  i=1 Ep(i) [(ℓ ) ]        t=1 1+  i=1 Ep(i) [ℓ ]

By Definition 12, we have
                                                                                 2
                            Ed(t) [ψ (t) ]2 ≤ |⟨W (ψ (t) )−W (ψ ⋆ ),X(ψ (t) )⟩| ,
and
                         t−1                    t−1
                                                                                  2
                         X                      X
                    1+       Ep(i) [ℓ(t) ]2 = 1+ |⟨W (ψ (t) )−W (ψ ⋆ ),X(ψ (i) )⟩|
                         i=1                        i=1
                                                                    ⊤
                                             ≥ (W (ψ (t) )−W (ψ ⋆ )) Σt (W (ψ (t) )−W (ψ ⋆ ))
                                                                    2
                                             = ∥W (ψ (t) )−W (ψ ⋆ )∥Σt ,
                         Pt−1
where Σt := 4B12 I+         i=1 X(ψ
                                      (i)
                                            )X(ψ (i) )⊤ .
                W

We bound
                                                                              2
                           Ed(t) [ψ (t) ]2 ≤ |⟨W (ψ (t) )−W (ψ ⋆ ),X(ψ (t) )⟩|
                                                                    2                2
                                            ≤ ∥W (ψ (t) )−W (ψ ⋆ )∥Σt ·∥X(ψ (t) )∥Σ−1 ,
                                                                                         t

which implies
                T                               T
                X      Ed(t) [ψ (t) ]2         X                2
                       Pt−1                  ≤     1∧∥X(ψ (t) )∥Σ−1
                                       (t) 2
                t=1 1+  i=1 pE   (i) [ℓ   ]    t=1
                                                                  t


                                                      det(ΣT )
                                             ≤ 2log
                                                      det(Σ1 )
                                                                                4B 2 T

                                                  ≤ 2dimbi (Ψ,DΨ ,PΨ ,LΨ )log 1+ W      ,
                                                                                  d
where the last two inequalities follow from the elliptical potential lemma (Lattimore and Szepesvári,
2020, Lemma 19.4). Putting everything together, we obtain
                                                                                 2

                   gen                                                       4BW   T
               SEC (Ψ,DΨ ,PΨ ,LΨ ,T ) ≤ 4dimbi (Ψ,DΨ ,PΨ ,LΨ )log 1+                   .
                                                                                 d


G     E XTENSION : R EWARD -F REE E XPLORATION
Reward-free exploration investigates is a problem where 1) the learning agent interacts with an
environment without rewards, aiming to gather information so that 2) in a subsequent offline phase, the
information collected can be used to learn near-optimal policies for a wide range of possible reward
functions (Jin et al., 2020a; Zhang et al., 2020; Wang et al., 2020a; Zanette et al., 2020b; Chen et al.,
2022). This section provides a reward-free extension of our main results, and gives sample complexity
bounds based on coverability for a reward-free extension of G OLF.


                                                            34
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Function approximation. We assume access to a value function class F, which is used for the offline
optimization, and a function class, G, which is used for the reward-free exploration phase. Following
the normalized reward assumption, we assume gh ∈ X ×A → [0,1], ∀(g,h) ∈ G ×[H].
We define Ph as be the “zero-reward” Bellman operator for horizon h ∈ [H]. That is, for any gh ∈ Gh
and any h ∈ [H],
                                      X
               (Ph gh+1 )(xh ,ah ) :=   Ph (xh+1 | xh ,ah ) max gh+1 (xh+1 ,ah+1 ).
                                                                     ah+1 ∈A
                                               x′


We let R denote the target reward function used in the offline phase, which is not known to the algorithm
in the offline exploration phase. We make the following assumption.
Assumption 2 (Reward-free completeness). Let T1:H be the Bellman operator with the target reward
function R, and F be the function class used to optimize the target reward function. Then for all h ∈ [H]
(a) Ph Gh+1 ∈ Gh for all gh+1 ∈ Gh+1
(b) Fh −Th Fh+1 ⊆ Gh −Ph Gh+1 .

Analogous to Assumption 1, Assumption 2(a) is used to control the squared Bellman error with zero
reward. Assumption 2(b) guarantees that the class of test functions of interest for the reward-free
exploration phase (Gh −Ph Gh+1 for layer h ∈ [H], see Algorithm 2) is sufficiently rich relative to the
relevant class of test functions for the offline phase (Fh −Th Fh+1 for layer h ∈ [H], see Algorithm 3).
Without loss of generality, we assume that |G| = max{|F|,|G|}.

Reward-free Sequential Extrapolation Coefficient. The main guarantees for this section are stated
in terms of a reward-free variant of the sequential extrapolation coefficient, which we define as follows.
Definition 13 (Sequential Extrapolation Coefficient for Reward-Free RL). For each h ∈ [H], let
DΠ  G      π
  h := {dh : π ∈ ΠG } and Gh −Ph Gh+1 := {gh −Ph gh+1 : g ∈ G}. Then we define,

                          SECRL,rf (G,ΠG ,T ) := max SEC(Gh −Ph Gh+1 ,DΠG
                                                                       h ,T ).
                                                      h∈[H]


Using the same arguments (and same proofs) as Section 5.2, the reward-free variant of sequential
extrapolation coefficient can be shown to subsume coverability (as well as reward-free counterpart of
the Bellman-Eluder dimension, which we omit).

G.1     A LGORITHM AND T HEORETICAL A NALYSIS

Algorithm 2 Reward-Free Exploration with G OLF
input: Function class for reward-free exploration G.
             (0)
initialize: Dh,rf ← ∅, ∀h ∈ [H]. G (0) ← G.
 1: for episode t = 1,2,...,T do
 2:      Select policy π (t) ← πg(t) , where g (t) = argmaxg∈G (t−1) g(x1 ,πg,1 ).

 3:      Execute π (t) for one episode and obtain x(t)      ,a(t) ,x(t) ,...,x(t) ,a(t) ,x(t)     .
                                   (t)       (t−1)
                                                   S 1(t) 1(t) 2(t)   H H H+1

 4:      Update historical data Dh,rf ← Dh,rf           xh ,ah ,xh+1 , ∀h ∈ [H].
 5:      Compute confidence set:

                   (t)               (t)                         (t)     ′
                  G ← g ∈ G : Lh,rf (gh ,gh+1 )− min     ′ ∈G
                                                                Lh,rf (gh ,gh+1 ) ≤ βrf , ∀h ∈ [H] ,            (29)
                                                       gh     h
                                                        "                                    2 #
                                              X
              where Lh,rf (g,g ′ ) :=
                           (t)
                                                            g(x,a)−max    ′
                                                                              g ′ (x′ ,a′ )     , ∀g,g ′ ∈ G.
                                                                         a ∈A
                                                          (t)
                                              (x,a,x′ )∈Dh,rf

                                      (t)      (t)
 6: Select t⋆ ← argmint∈[T ] g1 (x1 ,π1 ).
                      (t⋆ −1)
 7: Return data Dh,rf           , ∀h ∈ [H].



                                                                35
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Algorithm 3 Offline G OLF with Exploration Data and Target Reward
input:
• Target reward function, R.
• Function class F for offline RL.
• Exploration data from Algorithm 2, denoted by Dh,rf , ∀h ∈ [H].
 1: Compute confidence set:

                                                                     ′
              F (off) ← f ∈ F : L(off)
                                 h     (f ,f
                                         h h+1 )−   min    L(off)
                                                            h     (f   ,f
                                                                    h h+1   ) ≤ β off , ∀h ∈ [H]   ,       (30)
                                                   fh′ ∈Fh
                                             "                                            2 #
                                     X
                            ′                                                  ′ ′ ′
                    (off)
       where Lh (f,f ) :=                       f (x,a)−R(x,a)−max        ′
                                                                              f (x ,a )       , ∀f,f ′ ∈ F.
                                                                         a ∈A
                                  (x,a,x′ )∈Dh,rf

           b ← πfb, where fb= argmaxf ∈F (off) f (x1 ,πf,1 ).
 2: Return π



Recall that the key ideas in G OLF are: 1) using optimism to relate regret to on-policy average Bellman
error; 2) using squared Bellman error to construct a confidence set, which ensures optimism. In the
reward-free setting, one can apply these ideas by running G OLF (Algorithm 2) with rewards set to
zero. Intuitively, this strategy ensures exploration because the algorithm must explore to rule out test
functions in G. However, a-priori it is unclear whether running some standard offline RL algorithms on
the exploration data produced by this strategy should lead to a near-optimal policy, especially given
that the PAC guarantee of G OLF relies on outputting a uniform mixture of all historical policies (see,
e.g., Corollary 2).
To address such issues, one can imagine that, if we know which is the best over all historical policies
(say, π (t⋆ ) for some t⋆ ), could running one-step G OLF on the exploration data at t⋆ (Algorithm 3)
guarantee to find a good policy? Note that, for the original G OLF algorithm (in the known-reward case),
running so directly reproduces π (t⋆ ) . Although knowing which is the best over all historical policies
seems impossible in the known-reward case, thanks to the reward-free nature, we will show that the
value of g(x1 ,πg,1 ) directly captures “how bad is g” (akin to the regret in the known-reward case),
which allow us to find the best step over the reward-free exploration phase.
The following result provides a sample complexity guarantee for this strategy.
Theorem 23. Under Assumptions 1 and 2, there exists an absolute constants c1 and c2 such that for
any δ ∈ (0,1] and T ∈ N+ , if we choose βoff = c1 · log(T H|G|/δ) and βrf = (c1 + c2 ) · log(T H|G|/δ) in
Algorithms 2 and 3, then with probability at least 1−δ, the policy π
                                                                   b output by Algorithm 3 has
                                           r                                    !
                        ⋆                      SECRL,rf (G,ΠG ,T )log(T H|G|/δ)
                    J(π )−J(b  π) ≤ O H                                          .
                                                             T

We defer the proof to Appendix G.2. We also introduce the following two lemmas, which are key to
adapting the known-reward results to the reward-free case.
Lemma 24 (Reward-free exploration overestimates regret). For any f ∈ F, let g be defined as
gh = fh − Th fh+1 + Ph gh+1 , ∀h ∈ [H]. Then for any (x,a,h) ∈ X × A × [H], we have gh (x,a) ≥
            π
fh (x,a)−Qhf (x,a).
Since the Q-function for all policies in the zero-reward case are zero, Lemma 24 guarantees that, regret
in the reward-free exploration phase—(g1 (x1 ,πg,1 )−0) always upper bounds its counterpart of the
                                     π
offline phase—(f1 (x1 ,πf,1 )−Qhf (x,πf,1 )). Equipped with the optimism argument, we can show that
if g1 (x1 ,πg,1 ) is small, its corresponding πf (the f with fh −Th fh+1 = gh −Ph gh+1 , ∀h ∈ [H]) also
has small regret.
Lemma 25 (Reward-free exploration has larger confidence set). Suppose Assumption 2 holds and
under the same conditions as Theorem 23. For any f ∈ F (off) (defined in Eq. (30)), there must exist
g ∈ G (t⋆ −1) (defined in Eq. (29)), such that fh −Th fh+1 = gh −Ph gh+1 , ∀h ∈ [H].
Lemma 25 ensures that the reward-free version space G (t⋆ −1) subsumes the offline version space F (off) .
Thus, we can use the metrics during reward-free exploration to upper bound that of the offline phase.


                                                      36
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


G.1.1    R ELATED W ORK
Our approach adapts techniques for reward-free exploration in nonlinear RL introduced in Chen et al.
(2022). In what follows, we discuss the connection to this work in greater detail. We focus on the
Q-type results of Chen et al. (2022), but similar arguments are likely apply to the V -type.
Briefly, Chen et al. (2022) extends the O LIVE algorithm to the reward-free setting by using the idea
of online exploration with zero rewards. The most important difference here is that, as discussed
in Section 5, since O LIVE only considers average Bellman residuals, it cannot capture coverability.
Beyond this difference, let us compare the completeness assumptions in Assumption 2 to those made
in Chen et al. (2022). We will show that the completeness assumption used by Chen et al. (2022,
Assumption 2) is a sufficient condition for ours (Assumptions 1 and 2). In our notation, Chen et al.
(2022), use F := Ψ + R := {ψ1:H (·,·) + R1:H (·,·) : ψ ∈ Ψ} for some function class Ψ during offline
                                                ′
phase, and select G := Ψ − Ψ := {ψ1:H (·,·) − ψ1:H   (·,·) : ψ,ψ ′ ∈ Ψ} for the reward-free exploration
phase. Thus for any h ∈ [H], we have: For Assumption 1 and Assumption 2(a):
                  Th Fh+1 = Rh +Ph (Ψh+1 +Rh+1 )
                          ⊆ Rh +Ψh = Fh .                                (by Chen et al. (2022, Assumption 2))
                  Ph Gh+1 = Ph (Ψh+1 −Ψh+1 )
                          ⊆ Ψh+1 −Ψh+1 = Gh .                            (by Chen et al. (2022, Assumption 2))
For Assumption 2(b):
                     Fh −Th Fh+1 = Ψh +Rh −Rh −Ph (Ψh+1 +Rh+1 )
                                 = Ψh −Ph (Ψh+1 +Rh+1 )
                                 ⊆ Ψh −Ψh .             (by Chen et al. (2022, Assumption 2))
                     Gh −Ph Gh+1 = Ψh −Ψh −Ph (Ψh+1 −Ψh+1 )
                                 ⊇ Ψh −Ψh .                                (0 ∈ Ψh+1 −Ψh+1 )
                  =⇒ Fh −Th Fh+1 ⊆ Gh −Ph Gh+1 .

G.2     P ROOFS
We first present the following form of Freedman’s inequality for martingales (e.g., Agarwal et al.,
2014).
Lemma 26 (Freedman’s Inequality). Let {X (1) ,X (2) ,...,X (T ) } be a real-valued martingale difference
sequence adapted to a filtration {F (1) , F (2) , ... , F (T ) } (i.e., E[X (t) | F (t−1) ] = 0, ∀t ∈ [T ]). If
|X (t) | ≤ R almost surely for all t ∈ [T ], then for any η ∈ (0,1/R), with probability at least 1−δ,
                             T                  T
                             X                 X                        log(1/δ)
                                                   E (X (t) )2 F (t−1) +

                                   X (t) ≤ η                                     .
                             t=1               t=1
                                                                           η

We now provide proofs from Appendix G.1.
Proof of Theorem 23. Over this section, the test function class is selected as
                   (t)
                  δh,rf (xh ,ah ) := gh(t) (xh ,ah )−(Ph gh+1
                                                          (t)
                                                              )(xh ,ah ), ∀(h,t) ∈ [H]×[T ].
By Theorem 5 (setting reward to be zero and replacing everything regarding F to G), we have
                           T X
                           X H            h      i    q
                                            (t)
                                     Ed(t) δh,rf   ≤ H T SECRL,rf (G,ΠG ,T )βrf .                                 (31)
                                        h
                           t=1 h=1

For any (h,t) ∈ [H]×[T ], we have,
                                           "                                            #
                    (t)
                                             X                         (t)
         Ed(t) (Ph gh+1 )(xh ,ah ) = Ed(t)    Ph (xh+1 | xh ,ah ) max gh+1 (xh+1 ,ah+1 )
            h                                   h                         ah+1 ∈A
                                                    x′
                                                    "                                              #
                                                     X                      (t)              (t)
                                       = Ed(t)           Ph (xh+1 | xh ,ah )gh+1 (xh+1 ,πh )
                                                h
                                                    x′
                                                                                  (π (t) is the greedy policy of g (t) )

                                                          37
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023



                                                  (t)
                                        = Ed(t) gh+1  (xh+1 ,ah+1 ) .                                  (32)
                                                h+1

Therefore, we know
                   H
                   X        h      i XH
                              (t)

                       Ed(t) δh,rf  =   Ed(t) gh(t) −Ph gh(t)
                          h                           h
                   h=1                      h=1
                                            H
                                            X                           (t)
                                        =          Ed(t) gh(t) −Ed(t) gh+1                     (by Eq. (32))
                                                          h               h+1
                                            h=1

                                        = Ed(t) g1(t)
                                               1

                                        = g1(t) (x1 ,π1(t) ).                                          (33)

Now, since
                                            t⋆ := argming1(t) (x1 ,π1(t) ),
                                                      t∈[T ]

then,
                                                                T
                                                          1 X (t)
                               g1(t⋆ ) (x1 ,π (t⋆ ) ) =        g (x1 ,π1(t) )
                                                          T t=1 1
                                                                T    H
                                              1 XX           h
                                                               (t)
                                                                    i
                                                    =   Ed(t) δh,rf                            (by Eq. (33))
                                              T t=1       h
                                                    h=1
                                                r
                                                  SECRL,rf (G,ΠG ,T )βrf
                                           ≤H                            ,                             (34)
                                                             T
where the last inequality follows from Eq. (31).
By Lemma 25, we know there exists a gb ∈ G (t⋆ −1) , such that fbh −Th fbh+1 = gbh −Ph gbh+1 , ∀h ∈ [H]. In
addition, we can obtain
                                    J(π ⋆ )−J(πfb) ≤ fb(x1 ,πfb,1 )−J(πfb)                   (by Lemma 12)
                                                              ≤ gb(x1 ,πgb,1 ).              (by Lemma 24)
Therefore, we have
                              J(π ⋆ )−J(πfb) ≤ gb(x1 ,πgb,1 )
                                          ≤ g1(t⋆ ) (x1 ,π1(t⋆ ) )
                                                r
                                                     SECRL,rf (G,ΠG ,T )βrf
                                          ≤H                                .                  (by Eq. (34))
                                                                   T
Plugging back the selection of βrf completes the proof.

Proof of Lemma 24. We establish the proof by induction. For h = H, the the inductive hypothesis
                                   π
holds because gH = fH −RH = fH −QHf .
Suppose the inductive hypothesis holds at h+1, we have for any x ∈ X ,
                                                              f             π
                                    gh+1 (x,a) ≥ fh+1 (x,a)−Qh+1 (x,a), ∀a ∈ A.
                                                              f                   π
                     =⇒ gh+1 (x,πf,h+1 ) ≥ fh+1 (x,πf,h+1 )−Qh+1 (x,πf,h+1 ).
                                                            f                     π
                      =⇒ maxgh+1 (x,a) ≥ fh+1 (x,πf,h+1 )−Qh+1 (x,πf,h+1 ).
                              a∈A
                                                              f                   π
                     =⇒ gh+1 (x,πg,h+1 ) ≥ fh+1 (x,πf,h+1 )−Vh+1 (x).                                  (35)
Then, as gh = fh −Th fh+1 +Ph gh+1 , we have for any (x,a) ∈ X ×A,

                                                          ′ ′                       ′ ′
      gh (x,a) = fh (x,a)−Rh (x,a)−Ex′ |x,a max
                                              ′
                                                  fh+1 (x ,a ) +Ex′ |x,a max
                                                                          ′
                                                                             gh+1 (x ,a )
                                                              a ∈A                    a ∈A



                                                                38
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                          ′   ′                 ′   ′
                  = fh (x,a)−Rh (x,a)+Ex′ |x,a max
                                                ′
                                                   gh+1 (x ,a )−max
                                                                 ′
                                                                    fh+1 (x ,a )
                                                           a ∈A                   a ∈A

                  = fh (x,a)−Rh (x,a)+Ex′ |x,a [gh+1 (x ,πg,h+1 )−fh+1 (x′ ,πf,h+1 )]
                                                                      ′

                                                    πf
                                                        (x′ )

                  ≥ fh (x,a)−Rh (x,a)+Ex′ |x,a −Vh+1                                                      (by Eq. (35))
                                                   πf ′
                  = fh (x,a)− Rh (x,a)+Ex′ |x,a Vh+1   (x )
                                     π
                  = fh (x,a)−Qhf (x,a).
Therefore, we prove that the inductive hypothesis also holds at h using the inductive hypothesis at
h+1. This completes the proof.

                                                                                         (t)
                                                                   π
Proof of Lemma 25. Over this proof, we use d(t)
                                            h as the shorthand of dh . The proof of this lemma
consists of two parts.
  (i) There exists a radius β1 , such that for any g ∈ G, if such g satisfies
                                          ⋆ −1
                                         tX           h                i
                                                                     2
                                                 Ed(t) (gh −Ph gh+1 ) ≤ β1 , ∀h ∈ [H]
                                                   h
                                         t=1

      then g ∈ G (t⋆ −1) .
  (ii) There exists another radius β2 , where β2 ≤ β1 . For any f ∈ F off , we have
                                          ⋆ −1
                                         tX         h                i
                                                                   2
                                               Ed(t) (fh −Th fh+1 ) ≤ β2 , ∀h ∈ [H].
                                                   h
                                         t=1


Proof of part (i). For any (t,h,g) ∈ [T ]×[H]×G, let Yh(t) (g) be defined as
                                                2                                        2
   Yh(t) (g) := gh (x(t) (t)          (t)                          (t) (t)   (t)
                     h ,ah )−gh+1 (xh+1 ,πg,1 ) − (Ph gh+1 )(xh ,ah )−gh+1 (xh+1 ,πg,1 ) .

Also, let Fh(t) be the filtration induced by {x(i)   (i) (i)   (i)  (i) t
                                                1 ,a1 ,x2 ,a2 ,...,xH }i=1 , and we then have
                                                             h               i
                                                                           2
                               E Yh(t) (g) Fh(t−1) = Ed(t) (gh −Ph gh+1 )

                                                                                                                     (36)
                                                                  h


and
                        h          2        i                               h                i
                                                                                           2
 V Yh(t) (g) Fh(t−1) ≤ E Yh(t) (g)   Fh(t−1) ≤ 2E Yh(t) (g) Fh(t−1) = 2Ed(t) (gh −Ph gh+1 ) .

                                                                                                h


                                                                            T
Now, let Ȳh(t) (g) := Yh(t) (g) − E Yh(t) (g) Fh(t−1) , so that Ȳh(t) (g) t=1 is a martingale difference

                                        (t) T
sequence adapts to the filtration Fh t=1 , and |Ȳh(t) (g)| ≤ 2 almost surely. Then, by applying
Lemma 26 with a union bound, we have for any (h,g) ∈ [H]×G and any η ∈ (0,1/2), with probability at
least 1−δ,
           ⋆ −1
          tX                      ⋆ −1
                                 tX   h                     i log(H|G|/δ)
                                                   2
                Ȳh(t) (g) ≤ η       E Ȳh(t) (g)    Fh(t−1) +
          t=1                    t=1
                                                                  η
                                  ⋆ −1
                                 tX   h                    i log(H|G|/δ)
                                                  2
                         ≤η          E Yh(t) (g)    Fh(t−1) +
                                 t=1
                                                                    η
                                                              (variance is bounded by the second moment)
                                  ⋆ −1
                                 tX
                                                          log(H|G|/δ)
                                     E Yh(t) (g) Fh(t−1) +

                         ≤η                                           .              (|Yh(t) (g)| ≤ 1 by its definition)
                                 t=1
                                                              η
           ⋆ −1
          tX                      ⋆ −1
                                 tX                                    ⋆ −1
                                                          log(H|G|/δ) tX
                                     E Yh(t) (g) Fh(t−1) +                 E Yh(t) (g) Fh(t−1)

     =⇒         Yh(t) (g) ≤ η                                        +
          t=1                    t=1
                                                              η        t=1
                                                                                         (by the definition of Ȳh(t) (g))

                                                             39
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                   ⋆ −1
                                                  tX
                                                                           log(H|G|/δ)
                                                      E Yh(t) (g) Fh(t−1) +

                                  = (1+η)                                              .                                           (37)
                                                  t=1
                                                                               η

If some g ∈ G satisfies
                                             ⋆ −1
                                            tX          h                 i
                                                                        2
                                                   Ed(t) (gh −Ph gh+1 )                  ≤ β1 , ∀h ∈ [H],
                                                       h
                                             t=1
                                            |               {z                      }
                                        Pt⋆ −1 h (t)    (t−1)
                                                              i
                                       = t=1  E Yh (g) Fh       by Eq. (36)

then by Eq. (37), we have for any h ∈ [H]
                                  ⋆ −1
                                 tX
                                                                          log(H|G|/δ)
                                       Yh(t) (g) ≤ (1+η)β1 +
                                 t=1
                                                                              η
                                                     ≤ 3(β1 +log(H|G|/δ)).                                    (e.g., by picking η = 1/3)

So we only need to guarantee
                                                 3·(β1 +log(H|G|/δ)) ≤ βrf
                                                                       βrf
                                                             =⇒ β1 ≤       −log(H|G|/δ).                                           (38)
                                                                        3
Proof of part (ii). Similar to (i), for any (t,h,f ) ∈ [T ]×[H]×F, let Xh(t) (f ) be defined as
                                                                                2
                Xh(t) (f ) := fh (x(t)  (t)       (t) (t)           (t)
                                    h ,ah )−R(xh ,ah )−fh+1 (xh+1 ,ΠG )
                                                                                             2
                             − (Th fh+1 )(x(t)   (t)        (t) (t)            (t)
                                             h ,ah )−R(xh ,ah )−fh+1 (xh+1 ,πf,h+1 ) .
                                                                              T
Also let X̄h(t) (f ) := E Xh(t) (f ) Fh(t−1) −Xh(t) (f ), so that X̄h(t) (f ) t=1 is a martingale difference

                                            T
sequence adapts to the filtration Fh(t) t=1 , and |X̄h(t) (f )| ≤ 2 almost surely.


Thus, by same arguments as Eqs. (36) and (37) (as well as applying Lemma 26), we have
                                                     h                 i
                                                                     2
                          E Xh(t) (f ) Fh(t) = Ed(t) (fh −Th fh+1 )

                                                                                                                                   (39)
                                                                                h

and for any (h,f ) ∈ [H]×F and any η ∈ (0,1/2), with probability at least 1−δ,
           ⋆ −1
          tX                          ⋆ −1
                                     tX                                    ⋆ −1
                                                             log(H|F |/δ) tX
               E Xh (f ) Fh               E Xh (f ) Fh
                  (t)     (t−1)
                                             (t)     (t−1)
                                  ≤η                        +            +     Xh(t) (f )
           t=1                        t=1
                                                                  η        t=1
                                              ⋆ −1
                                             tX                                      ⋆ −1
                                                                       log(H|F |/δ) tX
                                                 E Xh(t) (f ) Fh(t−1) ≤

                       =⇒ (1−η)                                                    +      Xh(t) (f ).                              (40)
                                             t=1
                                                                            η        t=1

Therefore, if f ∈ F (off) , we have
 ⋆ −1
tX                    ⋆ −1
                     tX                                               ⋆ −1
                                                                   2 tX                                              2
      Xh(t) (f ) =               fh (x(t) (t)        (t)
                                      h ,ah )−fh+1 (xh+1 ,πf,h+1 ) −       (Th fh+1 )(x(t) (t)        (t)
                                                                                       h ,ah )−fh+1 (xh+1 ,πf,h+1 )
t=1                  t=1                                                                  t=1
                      ⋆ −1
                     tX                                                                            ⋆ −1
                                                                                                  tX
                                                                                     2                                                          2
               ≤                 fh (x(t) (t)        (t)
                                      h ,ah )−fh+1 (xh+1 ,πf,h+1 ) − min
                                                                     ′
                                                                                                          fh′ (x(t) (t)        (t)
                                                                                                                h ,ah )−fh+1 (xh+1 ,πf,h+1 )
                                                                                         fh ∈Fh
                     t=1                                                                          t=1
                      (off)
               ≤ Lh (fh ,fh+1 )− min
                                 ′
                                     Lh  (t⋆ )              (off)
                                                                    (fh′ ,fh+1 )
                                                                           (t⋆ )

                                                   fh ∈Fh

               ≤ βoff .                                                                                                            (41)

We then combine Eqs. (39) to (41) and obtain
                ⋆ −1
               tX           h                   ⋆ −1
                                             i tX
                                           2
                                                     E Xh(t) (f ) Fh(t−1)

                       Ed(t) (fh −Th fh+1 ) =                                                                             (by Eq. (39))
                             h
                t=1                                                 t=1


                                                                           40
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                t⋆ −1
                                              log(H|F |/δ)    1 X
                                          ≤                +         X (t) (f )              (by Eq. (40))
                                                (1−η)η       1−η t=1 h
                                            log(H|F |/δ)    1
                                          ≤              +     βoff                          (by Eq. (41))
                                              (1−η)η       1−η
                                          ≤ 5log(H|F |/δ)+2βoff .                 (by e.g., setting η = 1/3)
                                            |        {z       }
                                                        =:β2


So we only need to guarantee
                                     5log(H|F |/δ)+2βoff = β2 ≤ β1 .                                   (42)

Putting everything together. By Eqs. (38) and (42), we know we only need the following inequality
to hold:
                                                    βrf
                            5log(H|F |/δ)+2βoff ≤       −log(H|G|/δ).
                                                     3
                                           =⇒ βrf ≥ 6βoff +18log(H|G|/δ).
This is satisfied via the condition of Theorem 23.
Combining (i) and (ii), we can simply obtain for any h ∈ [H],
                                                ⋆ −1
                               (               tX
                                                                                              )
                                                         h                i
                         off                                            2
    fh −Th fh+1 : f ∈ F      ⊆ fh −Th fh+1 :        Ed(t) (fh −Th fh+1 ) ≤ β2 ,∀h ∈ [H],f ∈ F
                                                           h
                                                  t=1
                                                                                                   (by (ii))
                                                  ⋆ −1
                                 (               tX
                                                                                                     )
                                                             h                i
                                                                            2
                             ⊆   gh −Ph fh+1 :          Ed(t) (gh −Ph fh+1 ) ≤ β1 ,∀h ∈ [H],g ∈ G
                                                           h
                                                  t=1
                                                                         (by Assumption 2 and β2 ≤ β1 )
                                                        (t⋆ −1)
                             ⊆ {gh −Ph gh+1 : g ∈ G               }.                                (by (i))
This completes the proof.


                                                     41
