Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


P LANNING WITH L ARGE L ANGUAGE M ODELS
FOR C ODE G ENERATION

 Shun Zhang, Zhenfang Chen, Yikang Shen                                Mingyu Ding
 MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab                                                 The University of Hong Kong

 Joshua B. Tenenbaum                          Chuang Gan
 MIT BCS, CBMM, CSAIL                         UMass Amherst, MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab



                                             A BSTRACT

            Existing large language model-based code generation pipelines typically use beam
            search or sampling algorithms during the decoding process. Although the pro-
            grams they generate achieve high token-matching-based scores, they often fail to
            compile or generate incorrect outputs. The main reason is that conventional Trans-
            former decoding algorithms may not be the best choice for code generation. In
            this work, we propose a novel Transformer decoding algorithm, Planning-Guided
            Transformer Decoding (PG-TD), that uses a planning algorithm to do lookahead
            search and guide the Transformer to generate better programs. Specifically, in-
            stead of simply optimizing the likelihood of the generated sequences, the Trans-
            former makes use of a planner to generate candidate programs and test them on
            public test cases. The Transformer can therefore make more informed decisions
            and generate tokens that will eventually lead to higher-quality programs. We also
            design a mechanism that shares information between the Transformer and the
            planner to make our algorithm computationally efficient. We empirically evaluate
            our framework with several large language models as backbones on public coding
            challenge benchmarks, showing that 1) it can generate programs that consistently
            achieve higher performance compared with competing baseline methods; 2) it en-
            ables controllable code generation, such as concise codes and highly-commented
            codes by optimizing modified objective1 .


1       I NTRODUCTION
Large language models like Transformer (Vaswani et al., 2017a) have shown successes in natural
language processing, computer vision, and various other domains. Thanks to Transformer’s power
on sequence modeling, it has been adopted for code generation (Wang et al., 2021; Ahmad et al.,
2021) by treating programs as text sequences. Transformer has achieved significant improvements
on the benchmarking tasks of code translation (Roziere et al., 2022), code completion (Chen et al.,
2021a), and solving coding challenge problems (Hendrycks et al., 2021). Recently, AlphaCode (Li
et al., 2022) even achieved a competitive-level performance in programming competitions with the
help of large Transformer models pre-trained on a large programming corpus.
Transformer-based pipelines like AlphaCode follow the tradition of natural language processing
and use sampling methods (Fan et al., 2018; Dabre & Fujita, 2020) during the generation process.
Specifically, they sample a large number of complete programs using a pre-trained code generation
Transformer, evaluate these programs using the public test cases provided in the dataset, and output
the program that passes the most number of test cases. Compared with beam search-based methods,
these sampling followed by filtering algorithms (which we will refer to as sampling + filtering) can
take advantage of test cases and indeed improve the quality of the generated programs. However,
during the Transformer generation process, they do not consider the test cases at all. Instead, they
only use the test cases to evaluate the programs after all the candidate programs are generated. This
can make their algorithms sample inefficient. Different from natural languages, programs may fail
    1
        Project page: https://codeaimcts.github.io. Correspondence to: shun.zhang@ibm.com.


                                                    1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


completely with even a single incorrect generated token. So these algorithms need to exhaustively
sample a large number of programs to find a correct solution.
The main reason behind the sample efficiency issue of these algorithms is that the Transformer beam
search algorithm and the sampling algorithm (Vaswani et al., 2017b) may not be the best choices
for code generation. An ideal code generation algorithm should stop early in the generation process
when it knows the program it currently generates would certainly fail, and bias the generation pro-
cess towards generating successful programs that pass more test cases. To achieve such a goal, we
contribute to applying a planning algorithm in the Transformer generation process. Since a planning
algorithm can use the pass rates of the generated programs as its objective, we use it to determine
the quality of the generated codes and make the Transformer model make more informed decisions.
In this paper, we investigate the following research question: Can we integrate a planning algo-
rithm with a pre-trained code generation Transformer, achieving an algorithm that generates better
programs than the conventional Transformer generation algorithms and the well-accepted sam-
pling + filtering scheme in the literature? To answer this question, we propose a novel algorithm,
Planning-Guided Transformer Decoding (PG-TD). During the code generation process, a planner
does lookahead search and finds tokens that will lead to high-quality codes. The planner alone may
not efficiently find high-quality codes due to the large search space of codes, and that is where a pre-
trained code generation Transformer comes into play. Specifically, the Transformer beam search
algorithm and the next-token probabilities are used inside the planner to provide useful heuristics.
We find that a straightforward integration between the planner and the Transformer can be compu-
tationally inefficient. So we design mechanisms that allow the Transformer and the planner to share
their information to make the overall algorithm more efficient.
We emphasize that our algorithm is model-agnostic, that is, any standard code generation Trans-
former model can be used as the backbone Transformer. Importantly, our algorithm does not require
acquiring more sample solutions or finetuning the Transformer model to improve its performance.
We empirically find that our proposed algorithm generates higher-quality programs under multiple
accepted metrics compared with competing baseline methods. Additionally, we also empirically
show that our algorithm has the following advantages. 1) By changing the reward function of the
planner, our algorithm becomes versatile and can optimize different objective functions without the
necessity of finetuning the Transformer model. 2) Our algorithm can generate solutions that are used
to finetune a code-generation Transformer model to improve the Transformer’s performance. More
precisely, we have the following contributions in this paper.
    • First, we propose a novel algorithm, Planning-Guided Transformer Decoding (PG-TD), that
      uses a planning algorithm for lookahead search and guide the Transformer to generate better
      codes. Our algorithm is model-agnostic, which can work with any standard Transformer model,
      and does not require knowledge of the grammar of the generated programs.
    • Second, a direct integration of the planning algorithm with the Transformer decoding process
      can cause redundant uses of the Transformer beam search algorithm. We contribute to design-
      ing mechanisms that significantly improve the computational efficiency of the algorithm.
    • Third, we evaluate our algorithm on competitive programming benchmarks and empirically
      show that our algorithm can consistently generate better programs in terms of the pass rate and
      other metrics compared with the baseline methods. We also show that our algorithm is versatile
      and can optimize objectives other than the pass rate for controllable code generation, such as
      generating concise codes and codes with more comments.

2    R ELATED W ORK
Transformers for program synthesis. Our work is based on Transformer for program synthe-
sis (Roziere et al., 2020; Austin et al., 2021). Inspired by their capacities on a range of natural
language tasks, modern transformer-based language models (Devlin et al., 2019; Radford et al.,
2019; Raffel et al., 2020) have been adopted for program synthesis by treating programming lan-
guages in the same way as natural languages. A family of BERT-based Transformers are developed
for code syntax (Kanade et al., 2020; Feng et al., 2020; Devlin et al., 2019; Guo et al., 2020). Later,
CodeX (Chen et al., 2021a) and CodeT5 (Wang et al., 2021) adopted GPT2 (Radford et al., 2019)
and T5 (Raffel et al., 2020), respectively, as backbones for both code understanding and generation.
Different learning methods including learning from examples (Ellis et al., 2021) and neural-symbolic
methods (Nye et al., 2020) were explored. Recently, AlphaCode (Li et al., 2022) combined large


                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


transformer models pre-trained on massive program data with large-scale sampling, showing com-
petitive performance in programming competitions. All these works mainly focused on training
more powerful code-generation models and still used beam search (Graves, 2012) or sampling (Fan
et al., 2018) during the Transformers’ generation process.
Test cases for program synthesis. Our work is also related to using unit tests (Myers, 1979) for
program synthesis. Tufano et al. (2020a;b) propose to generate test cases and corresponding accurate
assert statements with Transformer models (Vaswani et al., 2017a). Recently, Roziere et al. (2022)
leverage automatically generated unit tests to construct parallel training data for unsupervised code
translation. Chen et al. (2018); Gupta et al. (2020); Chen et al. (2021b) directly synthesize domain-
specific programs from input-output pairs without problem description. Ellis et al. (2019) use test
cases to train a reinforcement learning agent and use a sequential Monte-Carlo sampling method
for code generation. Unlike the prior work, we use unit-testing results as reward signals for a
tree-search-based planning algorithm, which is further integrated with a Transformer-based large
language model to generate better codes.
Planning and reinforcement learning for code generation. The code generation problem has
been formulated as a sequential decision-making problem (Bunel et al., 2018; Chen et al., 2018),
which enables designing and applying reinforcement learning (RL) and planning algorithms for code
generation. RL has been used for both the training phase and the decoding phase of the Transformer
for code generation. In the training phase, Le et al. (2022); Xu et al. (2019b) use an RL objective
that optimizes the correctness of the generated programs instead of optimizing their similarity to the
reference solutions. In the decoding phase, the Monte-Carlo tree search (MCTS) algorithm has been
applied to search for high-quality codes. However, MCTS itself is unable to scale to larger domains.
It is only used to generate domain-specific languages or for restricted programming synthesis tasks
like assembly code generation (Xu et al., 2019a), Java bytecode translation (Lim & Yoo, 2016), and
robot planning (Matulewicz, 2022). These tasks have a much smaller scale than generating Python
codes in our work. Therefore, their frameworks do not require a large language model and do not
need to address the challenge of integrating a planning algorithm with a large language model.
MCTS is more efficient and applicable to large domains when combined with deep learning or with
a default policy as prior knowledge (Gelly & Silver, 2011; Silver et al., 2016; Simmons-Edler et al.,
2018). We consider the same overall recipe in our work. Specifically, we contributed to integrating
the large language model with a tree search algorithm to design a novel algorithm that is capable of
solving competitive programming problems, and designed mechanisms to improve its efficiency.
Planning in natural language generation. Planning algorithms like MCTS have also been used
to find the optimal text outputs for different natural language processing (NLP) tasks. For example,
Scialom et al. (2021); Leblond et al. (2021); Chaffin et al. (2022) use pre-trained discriminators or
pre-defined metrics as reward functions. We want to emphasize that we are the first to combine a
tree search algorithm with large language models for general-purpose programming language gener-
ation. We design the interfaces between these two components and deal with the unique challenges
of making the framework computationally efficient. Concurrently, other search algorithms like A*
algorithm (Hart et al., 1968) are also applied in the Transformer decoding process. Lu et al. (2021)
consider the constrained text generation problem and integrate A* with the beam search algorithm.
However, their constraints are expressed as a formal logic expression, which is different from maxi-
mizing the pass rate in our problem.

3     M ETHOD
3.1   OVERVIEW
We consider the code generation problem for competitive programming, illustrated in Fig. 1. An
agent is given the natural language description of a coding problem. It requires the agent to under-
stand the problem description and generate a program that solves the problem. Similar to Li et al.
(2022); Chen et al. (2018); Ellis et al. (2019), we assume that the agent has access to a set of test
cases, where a test case is a pair of input, output strings. Given the input string, the agent is expected
to generate a program that produces an output that exactly matches the test case’s output string. The
objective is to generate a program that passes the most number of test cases. To determine if the
agent is able to generate programs that generalize to unseen test cases, we divide the test cases into
public test cases and private test cases, following the terms in Li et al. (2022). The agent can only


                                                    3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Problem Statement
    Given is a string S. Replace every character in S with x and print the result.
Constraints
    (1). S is a string consisting of lowercase English letters.
    (2). The length of S is between 1 and 100 (inclusive).
Input
    Input is given from Standard Input in the following format: S
Output
    Replace every character in S with x and print the result.
Sample Test Input
    sardine
Sample Test Output
    xxxxxxx


 Beam Search (Pass Rate: 0.00).    Sampling + Filtering (Pass Rate:      PG-TD (Pass Rate: 1.00).
                                               0.22).

Figure 1: A code generation example for competitive programming, with the problem description
(top) and the programs generated by baseline algorithms and our PG-TD algorithm (bottom).



access the public test cases during the program generation process, while we use the private test
cases to evaluate the programs it generates.
Transformer models (Li et al., 2022; Hendrycks et al., 2021) have been widely applied for code
generation thanks to their capacity in sequence-to-sequence modeling. In the Transformer’s genera-
tion process, beam search (Graves, 2012) and sampling (Fan et al., 2018; Dabre & Fujita, 2020) are
adopted to generate code sequences. However, these algorithms cannot easily optimize an objective
different from what it is trained on (usually the similarity to the reference solutions). So we cannot
directly use these generation algorithms to generate programs aiming to pass more test cases.
On the other hand, a planning algorithm can directly optimize the pass rate or any desirable pro-
gramming objective. To use a planning algorithm, we follow Bunel et al. (2018); Ellis et al. (2019)
to formulate the code generation problem as a Markov decision process (MDP) (Sutton & Barto,
2018). In this formulation, a state s is the concatenation of the problem description and a partial or
complete program, where a complete program ends with a special terminal token. An action a is a
token in the vocabulary set of the Transformer. There is a special termination action (the terminal
token) that indicates that the agent believes the program is complete. The transition function de-
terministically concatenates a state s with a token a, and an episode ends when the agent takes the
termination action. The reward of state s is the pass rate of the program on the public test cases
when s is a complete program (i.e., when the last token of s is the terminal token). The reward of a
partial program is always 0.
There is rich literature on finding the optimal policy in an MDP. In this paper, we consider a tree
search-based planning algorithm inspired by Monte-Carlo tree search (MCTS), illustrated in Fig. 2.
Intuitively, the tree search algorithm maintains a tree structure where nodes correspond to states and
edges correspond to actions. The algorithm starts from the root node (the initial state) and searches
the state space to find terminal states with high rewards. It maintains 1) the number of times each
node is visited and 2) a value function that maintains the maximum reward obtained by starting
in node (or state) s and taking action a. The algorithm would visit and expand nodes with either
higher values (as they lead to higher-quality programs) or with smaller visit numbers (as they are
under-explored). In the following part of this section, we describe how we integrate the tree search
algorithm in the generation process of a Transformer.


                                                  4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                      Selection                      Expansion                      Evaluation               Backpropagation

                       <PD>                              <PD>                           <PD>                           <PD>

                  a               x                  a           x                 a                x             a              x

                  a               x                  a           x                 a                x             a              x
             =                         ,       =          ,           ,       =          ,               ,   =          ,            ,

             a=                   x,            a=       a,      x,           a=        a,          x,       a=        a,       x,
                              suggests next tokens
                                                                                  a,b        a,\n
                                                                                                                      Evaluate on
           Transformer


                                                                                   …


                                                                                              …
                                           generates complete programs                                                public test cases
                                           using beam search

Figure 2: Illustration of using the Monte Carlo tree search algorithm in the Transformer generation
process for code generation. <PD> stands for problem description.

3.2   P LANNING -G UIDED T RANSFORMER D ECODING
Now we are ready to answer the question                          Algorithm 1 The PG-TD algorithm.
we asked in the introduction: Can we in-
tegrate a planning algorithm with a pre-                         Require: root: the current state; c: P-UCB exploration pa-
                                                                     rameter; k: the maximum number of children of any node;
trained code generation Transformer to                               b: the number of beams for Transformer beam search.
generate better programs? We design a                             1: program dict = DICTIONARY()
Transformer generation algorithm where                            2: for i ← 1, 2, . . . , max rollouts do
a tree search algorithm is used to perform                        3:     node ← root
lookahead planning. The tree search al-                           4:     # Selection
gorithm alone may not be able to find                             5:     while |node.children| > 0 do
high-quality codes due to the large search                        6:          node ← P UCB SELECT(node.children, c)
space. So the conventional Transformer                            7:     end while
beam search algorithm and the next-token                          8:     # Expansion
probabilities provided by the pre-trained                         9:     next tokens ← TOP K(node, k)
                                                                 10:      for next token ∈ next tokens do
Transformer are used by the tree search                          11:          next state ← CONCAT(node, next token)
algorithm to guide the search process.                           12:          Create node new node where new node ←
We provide the pseudocode of our                                     next state
Planning-Guided Transformer Decoding                             13:          Add new node to the children of node
                                                                 14:      end for
algorithm (PG-TD) in Algorithm 1 and                             15:      # Evaluation
illustrate the whole process in Figure 2.                        16:      p ← BEAM SEARCH(node, b)
The PG-TD algorithm follows the same                             17:      r ← GET REWARD(p)
framework as the standard MCTS algo-                             18:      program dict[p] = r
rithm, based on the implementation used                          19:      # Backpropagation
in Silver et al. (2017). Here, we focus on                       20:      Update and the values of node and its ancestors in the
how the Transformer is used in the tree                              tree with r
search steps. We provide more details of                         21: end for
our algorithm in Sec. D.1.                                       22: return program in program dict with the highest reward

In the selection step, we follow Silver
et al. (2017) and use the P-UCB algorithm to select which branch of the tree we want to explore. In
P-UCB, we weigh the exploration term by the probability of the next tokens determined by the Trans-
former. So the tree search selects higher-probability tokens more often. The selection algorithm is
parameterized by an exploration parameter, c, where a higher c value leads to more exploration. We
describe the details of P-UCB in Sec. D.1.
In the expansion step, after a node in the tree is selected, we select the possible next tokens and add
the corresponding next states as new nodes to its children list (for succinctness, a node also refers
to the state that it represents). Sampling a random token as in the standard MCTS may very likely
cause a syntax error. So we call TOP K to get the most likely next tokens, where TOP K(s, k) returns
the k most likely next tokens starting from s; k is the maximum number of children that any node
may have. The corresponding k next states are the concatenations of the current state with each of


                                                                          5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


the next tokens suggested by the Transformer. These next states are added to the children list of the
current node. (Line 9-14)
In the evaluation step, we need to evaluate the selected node. Note that node may still be a partial
program. We cannot directly evaluate the quality of a partial program as we do not know how it
will be completed and how many test cases it will pass. Here, we use the Transformer again by
calling the BEAM SEARCH function to generate a complete program from the current node, where
BEAM SEARCH (s, b) generates a sequence using the Transformer beam search algorithm with the
prefix s and beam size b. We run the generated program on the public test cases to get its reward,
and set it to be the value of node (Line 16-17). This value is backpropagated up in the tree so that
the values of its ancestors are updated (Line 20).

Information sharing between Transformer and tree                       Iteration t                  Iteration t+1
search. A keen reader may notice that if we follow the                     <PD>                          <PD>
algorithm described above, there may be a lot of repeated
                                                                      a               x             a               x
computations. The key observation is that the Trans-
former beam search algorithm also implicitly builds a tree             a              x             a               x
structure, which can be used by future iterations of tree        =          ,              ,   =          ,             ,
search. In the rest of this section, we describe how we im-      a=        a,         x,       a=        a,     x,
prove the algorithm’s efficiency by sharing information in
the Transformer beam search algorithm with tree search.
                                                                 a,b            a,c                a,b
Consider the example in Fig. 3, which shows two iter-
                                                                                       a,b, a,b=
ations of PG-TD. In the evaluation step of the t-th iter- a,b, a,b= a,c= a,c,
ation, the Transformer beam search algorithm implicitly
                                                                …    … …   …
builds a tree to find the most likely sequences within a
beam (Fig. 3 (left)). Because we only keep b partial pro-              …
grams in the beam, it is a tree where only b nodes with the
highest likelihood are expanded at each level (in the illus-
                                                             Figure 3: Illustration for caching in
tration, b = 2). Other nodes are dropped and no longer
                                                             the PG-TD algorithm. The tree search
considered by the beam search algorithm. In the (t+1)-st
                                                             part is visualized in black color and the
iteration, if the tree search algorithm selects “a,”, such a
                                                             Transformer beam search part is in red
state is already visited in the Transformer beam search in
                                                             color.
the t-th iteration. When the algorithm needs to find the
top-k most likely next tokens, such information is already obtained in the t-th iteration and can be
reused without recomputation. In our implementation, we cache the tree structure generated by the
Transformer beam search algorithm. We call this implementation tree structure caching.
We can also cache the complete programs generated during the PG-TD evaluation step. In the
evaluation step of the t-th iteration (Fig. 3), suppose the greedily-optimal sequence is “a,b=...”.
In the (t + 1)-st iteration, to generate a sequence starting with “a,b”, the Transformer beam search
algorithm will generate the same sequence “a,b=...” as before. (This is not necessarily true
when the beam size is larger than 1. We will clarify this in Sec. D.2.) To improve the efficiency of
BEAM SEARCH , we cache the sequences that have been generated during the evaluation step. In the
evaluation step of future iterations, PG-TD will check if the current state matches the prefix of any
sequence that has been generated before, and use the generated sequence directly without calling
the Transformer beam search function. We call this implementation sequence caching. We will
empirically confirm the effectiveness of using these caching methods in the next section.

4   E MPIRICAL E VALUATION
In this section, we empirically examine the effectiveness and efficiency of our PG-TD algorithm
by answering the following questions. Q1: Does PG-TD generate better programs than using
the Transformer beam search algorithm and other competing baseline methods? Is our algorithm
model-agnostic, showing improvement when applied to different Transformer models? Q2: Is the
tree search algorithm an effective planning algorithm in PG-TD? Is it better than other planning
or sampling-based algorithms? Q3: Is PG-TD efficient in terms of the number of times it runs
the Transformer beam search algorithm and also the computation time it consumes? Q4: Are the
caching methods effective in saving computation time? Q5: Can we use the samples generated by
PG-TD in its search process and finetune the Transformer to generate even better solutions?


                                                  6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                        Pass Rate (%)                                               Strict Accuracy (%)
                                               APPS Intro.   APPS Inter.              APPS comp.   CodeContests   APPS Intro.   APPS Inter.   APPS comp.    CodeContests
 APPS GPT-2               Beam Search               11.95            9.55                   5.04           5.10         5.50          2.10           1.00           0.00
                          Sampling+Filtering        25.19           24.13                  11.92          20.40        13.80          5.70           2.30           3.64
                          SMCG-TD                   24.10           21.98                  10.37          17.47        11.70          5.50           2.10           4.24
                          PG-TD (c = 4)             26.70           24.92                  12.89          24.05        13.10          6.10           3.10           4.85
APPS GPT-Neo              Beam Search               14.32            9.80                   6.39           5.73         6.70          2.00           2.10           0.00
                          Sampling+Filtering        27.71           24.85                  12.55          25.26        15.50          5.80           3.00           4.24
                          SMCG-TD                   25.09           20.34                   9.16          15.44        13.80          5.10           1.80           3.03
                          PG-TD (c = 4)             29.27           25.69                  13.55          26.07        15.50          6.43           3.50           4.85


Table 1: Results of PG-TD and other algorithms. The maximum number of Transformer generations
for all algorithms is 256.

                  28                                                             28                                                     SMCG-TD
                                                                                                                                        Sampling + Filtering
  Pass Rate (%)


                                                                 Pass Rate (%)
                  26                                                             26                                                     PG-TD (c = 2)
                                                                                                                                        PG-TD (c = 4)
                  24                                                             24                                                     PG-TD (c = 6)

                  22                                                             22
                            200          400           600                                 1000       2000        3000
                       # of Transformer Generations                                       Computation Time (sec.)
Figure 4: Pass rates of PG-TD and baseline algorithms vs. the number of Transformer generations
(left) and the computation time (middle) on the introductory problems in the APPS test dataset (1000
problems), using the APPS GPT-2 Transformer model.

Datasets and models. Recently, several competitive programming datasets have been made avail-
able for benchmarking code generation algorithms. For each programming problem, they include
the natural language program descriptions, sample solutions, and test cases. We evaluated PG-TD
and the baseline algorithms on some popular benchmark datasets: APPS (Hendrycks et al., 2021)
and CodeContests in AlphaCode (Li et al., 2022). The APPS dataset does not specify public vs. pri-
vate test cases. So we split all the test cases of a program evenly into two sets, where the first set is
used as the public test cases for the algorithms to optimize the pass rate, and the second set is used as
the private test cases for evaluating the generated programs. For CodeContests, we use their public
and generated test cases as our public test cases, and their private test cases as our private test cases.
To show that PG-TD is model-agnostic and can be applied to different pre-trained Transformers and
achieve a better performance, we use two popular pre-trained code-generation Transformers in the
literature: GPT-2 and GPT-Neo finetuned on the APPS training dataset (Hendrycks et al., 2021).
Algorithms. We compare PG-TD with the following algorithms. Beam search only uses the Trans-
former beam search algorithm to generate the whole program, without using the test cases. This is
the method used in Hendrycks et al. (2021); Chen et al. (2021a). We use the beam size of 5 in the
Transformer generation function, which is the same choice as in Hendrycks et al. (2021).
We also implemented two baselines that use Transformer to sample programs and filter them using
the test cases. Sampling + Filtering (S+F) generates a set of programs using the Transformer
sampling algorithm. Once the programs are all generated, it computes the pass rates of all the
programs on the public test cases and returns the program with the highest pass rate. To avoid
generating low-probability tokens that may fail the program completely, we use top-3 sampling, that
is, the Transformer only samples the token that is in the top-3 most-likely tokens in each step. The
sampling temperature is 1. This method is similar to the algorithm in AlphaCode (Li et al., 2022),
except that we did not perform clustering as we generate a much smaller number of programs.
To determine the effectiveness of the tree search algorithm, we considered another baseline, Se-
quential Monte-Carlo-Guided Transformer Decoding (SMCG-TD), that replaces the tree search
algorithm component with a sequential Monte-Carlo algorithm (Ellis et al., 2019). It is an iterative
algorithm that maintains a population of partial programs. It determines the fitness of a partial pro-
gram using the Transformer in the same way as the evaluation step in PG-TD. Partial programs with
higher fitness scores are more likely to be selected in the next iteration. We leave more details about
the baseline algorithms in Sec D.3.
For PG-TD, we set the maximum number of children of any node (k) to be 3, and the beam size
(b) to be 1 by default. For the baseline methods, we sample at most 512 programs in Sampling


                                                                                             7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


     Method                           Time (sec.)       Method         Pass Rate (%) Strict Acc. (%)
     With both caching methods         1312.27          Original           14.32           6.70
     W/ only sequence caching          1430.63          FT w/ S+F          15.24           7.90
     W/ only tree structure caching    1899.17          FT w/ PG-TD        16.54           7.90
     W/o caching                       2206.38
                                                        Table 3: Performance on APPS introduc-
Table 2: Affects of using caching for PG-TD on          tory dataset with finetuned (FT) APPS GPT-2
the first 100 problems on the APPS introductory         (2.7B), using Beam Search for code genera-
dataset, using the APPS GPT-2 (1.5B).                   tion.

+ Filtering, and maintain a set of 200 partial programs in each iteration for SMCG-TD. We will
use these parameters for the following experiments unless noted otherwise. The experiments are
conducted on the test set of the APPS dataset (5000 problems) (Hendrycks et al., 2021) and the test
set of CodeContests (165 problems) (Li et al., 2022). We use the same metrics as in Hendrycks et al.
(2021), which are pass rates and strict accuracies on the private test cases. Specifically, the pass
rate is the average percentage of the private test cases that the generated programs pass over all the
problems. The strict accuracy is the percentage of the problems where the generated programs pass
all the private test cases.
Effectiveness of PG-TD. To make a fair comparison, we evaluate the best programs found by the
algorithms when they use the same number of Transformer generations. Specifically, the num-
ber of Transformer generations is the number of function calls of BEAM SEARCH in PG-TD and
SMCG-TD (when no cached sequences are found and used in sequence caching), and the number
of sampling function calls in S+F.
As shown in Table 1, PG-TD consistently outperforms all the other baselines on all the datasets
under the pass rate metric. As we optimize the pass rate, we expect our algorithm to outperform other
baselines under strict accuracy as well. This is almost true except that our algorithm is matched or
outperformed by S+F on the APPS introductory set, mostly due to the fact that this set of programs
is less challenging. The gaps between different algorithms are also small on this set. Overall, these
results confirm that our algorithm indeed generates programs that pass more test cases than the
baseline methods (answering Q1). Specifically, S+F and SMCG-TD both use test cases to filter
programs generated by the Transformer, while their performance is overall outperformed by PG-
TD. So the tree search-based planning algorithm is indeed powerful enough and can be effectively
integrated with Transformer (answering Q2). We also report the performance of PG-TD and S+F
under the n@k and pass@k metrics (Li et al., 2022) in Sec. A (Table 6).
Efficiency of PG-TD. To show PG-TD’s efficiency, we report the pass rates of the best programs
found by the algorithms using the same computation time (Fig. 4 (right)). The experiments are run
on the introductory problems in the APPS test set. Since one may implement these algorithms dif-
ferently (possibly using parallelization), we also report the results using the number of Transformer
generations as a budget (Fig. 4 (left)).
For PG-TD, we set k = 3, b = 1 and vary the P-UCB exploration parameter c to be 2, 4, and 6. We
see that PG-TD with c = 4 has the best performance, while setting c = 2 tends to under-explore
and setting c = 6 over-explores. With the same computational budget, S+F generates programs with
lower pass rates (answering Q3). This confirms our observation that S+F, like the algorithm used
in AlphaCode (Li et al., 2022), generates solutions only according to the Transformer’s generation
probabilities, without taking their pass rates into consideration until all the programs are generated.
PG-TD actively considers the pass rates of the generated programs during the generation process,
which achieves better efficiency. On the other hand, SMCG-TD also uses the Transformer and
public test cases to guide the generation process. However, due to its sampling nature, it cannot do
multi-step lookahead search as in PG-TD, which results in worse performance. We leave additional
results of varying k, b for PG-TD and varying temperatures for S+F in Sec. A.
Effectiveness of caching. In terms of the design choices of tree structure caching and sequence
caching, we performed ablative studies to verify their efficiencies. In Table 2, we compare versions
of PG-TD with and without tree structure caching and sequence caching. As we expect, without
sequence caching, the algorithm needs to regenerate whole sequences, ending up consuming much
more time. Without tree structure caching, the algorithm is slightly slower as it needs to call Trans-
former to get the most likely next tokens (answering Q4).


                                                    8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Finetuning transformer with PG-TD-generated samples. Since we are able to generate solutions
with high pass rates using our PG-TD algorithm, can we use these generated solutions to finetune
the code generation Transformers to further improve their performance? This may effectively solve
the problem that high-quality human-written programs that can be used to train the code generation
Transformers are scarcely available. Concretely, we first run PG-TD on the training set of APPS.
We then add the generated solutions with pass rates larger than 80% to the APPS sample solution
set, and use the augmented solution set to finetune the GPT-2 (2.7B) model. With the finetuned
Transformer model, we run beam search to generate solutions on the test set to see if it has a better
performance. We use the first 500 problems in the interview-level problems in APPS test set for
validation and the introductory-level problems in APPS test set for testing. The results are reported
in Table 3. After finetuning with PG-TD-generated solutions, we see improvement in both pass rate
and strict accuracy. More details are in Sec. D.4.
Optimizing other code generation                                    Code      Comment      Pass
objectives.     Beyond the pass rate,       Methods                        ↓            ↑         ↑
                                                                    length      number       rate
we can make the algorithm versatile
by using different reward functions.        Default                 248.42        0.68      23.14
                                            Length Penalty          190.73          -       22.82
We consider two new objectives, code
                                            Comment Encouragement      -          3.11      21.65
length penalty and comment encour-
agement. As shown in Table 4, the
code length penalty reward function Table 4: Performance of controllable code generation.
makes the model generate more con- Code length denotes the length of the generated code
cise codes; the comment encourage- string and comment number denotes the number of code
ment reward function encourages mod- lines that contains comments.
els to generate codes with more comments. Both objectives still achieve reasonable pass rates on
the public test cases. We provide qualitative examples and more details of the reward functions in
Sec. C of the appendix.
Using automatically-generated test cases. The datasets we use in this paper both contain test
cases that can be used to compute rewards for PG-TD. However, in reality, human-specified test
cases are not always available. Recently, Chen et al. (2022) observe that Transformer pre-trained
on code generation can also generate useful test cases by adding an assert keyword at the end of
the prompt. We follow the prompt design in Chen et al. (2022) to automatically generate test cases
and run our PG-TD algorithm using the automatically-generated test cases. Empirically, we confirm
that compared with beam search, PG-TD still has a higher strict accuracy by using automatically-
generated test cases to verify the generated programs. We provide the details of the method and the
experiments are in Sec. B.


5   D ISCUSSION AND C ONCLUSION

In summary, we proposed a novel algorithm that uses the power of a pre-trained Transformer and
a tree search algorithm inspired by Monte-Carlo tree search. We evaluate our algorithm and em-
pirically show that our algorithm generates programs of higher quality compared with competing
baseline algorithms in different settings. We also design model structure-specific caching mecha-
nisms which contribute to saving computational expenses. We show that our algorithm is versatile
and can generate codes under objectives other than the pass rate without finetuning the Transformer.
We hope our work can inspire more ways of incorporating planning algorithms into the Transformer
generation process for code generation or other problems.
One limitation of our algorithm is its reliance on test cases, although we find that even a small
number of test cases can help find better solutions (Sec. A, Table 7). To address this limitation, we
provided results to show that our algorithm can take advantage of automatically-generated test cases
(Sec. B). Our algorithm is also more computationally expensive than the pure Transformer beam
search algorithm since ours needs to run the beam search algorithm multiple times within the tree
search algorithm. In the future, we consider improving the framework’s performance by using a
value function to estimate the programs’ pass rates, similar to the evaluation function in Silver et al.
(2016) for mastering the game of Go. We can learn a neural state representation for partial programs
as in Chen et al. (2018). We also consider using parallel tree search algorithms (Chaslot et al., 2008)
for the evaluation step to parallelize the computation for different states.


                                                   9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Acknowledgements. This work was supported by the MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab, DARPA MCS,
and gift funding from MERL, Cisco, and Amazon. We would also like to thank the computation
support from AiMOS, a server cluster for the IBM Research AI Hardware Center.

R EFERENCES
Wasi Ahmad, Saikat Chakraborty, Baishakhi Ray, and Kai-Wei Chang. Unified pre-training for pro-
 gram understanding and generation. In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference of the North American
 Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, pp.
 2655–2668, Online, June 2021. Association for Computational Linguistics. 1
Jacob Austin, Augustus Odena, Maxwell Nye, Maarten Bosma, Henryk Michalewski, David Dohan,
  Ellen Jiang, Carrie Cai, Michael Terry, Quoc Le, and Charles Sutton. Program Synthesis with
  Large Language Models. arXiv:2108.07732 [cs], August 2021. URL http://arxiv.org/
  abs/2108.07732. arXiv: 2108.07732. 2
Rudy Bunel, Matthew Hausknecht, Jacob Devlin, Rishabh Singh, and Pushmeet Kohli. Leveraging
  Grammar and Reinforcement Learning for Neural Program Synthesis. ICLR, May 2018. URL
  http://arxiv.org/abs/1805.04276. arXiv: 1805.04276. 3, 4
Antoine Chaffin, Vincent Claveau, and Ewa Kijak. Ppl-mcts: Constrained textual generation through
  discriminator-guided mcts decoding. In Proceedings of the 2022 Conference of the North Amer-
  ican Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies,
  pp. 2953–2967, 2022. 3
Guillaume MJ-B Chaslot, Mark HM Winands, and HJVD Herik. Parallel monte-carlo tree search.
  In International Conference on Computers and Games, pp. 60–71. Springer, 2008. 9
Bei Chen, Fengji Zhang, Anh Nguyen, Daoguang Zan, Zeqi Lin, Jian-Guang Lou, and Weizhu
  Chen. CodeT: Code Generation with Generated Tests, July 2022. URL http://arxiv.org/
  abs/2207.10397. arXiv:2207.10397 [cs]. 9, 17
Mark Chen, Jerry Tworek, Heewoo Jun, Qiming Yuan, Henrique Ponde de Oliveira Pinto, Jared
 Kaplan, Harri Edwards, Yuri Burda, Nicholas Joseph, Greg Brockman, Alex Ray, Raul Puri,
 Gretchen Krueger, Michael Petrov, Heidy Khlaaf, Girish Sastry, Pamela Mishkin, Brooke Chan,
 Scott Gray, Nick Ryder, Mikhail Pavlov, Alethea Power, Lukasz Kaiser, Mohammad Bavarian,
 Clemens Winter, Philippe Tillet, Felipe Petroski Such, Dave Cummings, Matthias Plappert, Fo-
 tios Chantzis, Elizabeth Barnes, Ariel Herbert-Voss, William Hebgen Guss, Alex Nichol, Alex
 Paino, Nikolas Tezak, Jie Tang, Igor Babuschkin, Suchir Balaji, Shantanu Jain, William Saunders,
 Christopher Hesse, Andrew N. Carr, Jan Leike, Josh Achiam, Vedant Misra, Evan Morikawa,
 Alec Radford, Matthew Knight, Miles Brundage, Mira Murati, Katie Mayer, Peter Welinder,
 Bob McGrew, Dario Amodei, Sam McCandlish, Ilya Sutskever, and Wojciech Zaremba. Eval-
 uating Large Language Models Trained on Code. arXiv:2107.03374 [cs], July 2021a. URL
 http://arxiv.org/abs/2107.03374. arXiv: 2107.03374. 1, 2, 7, 15, 17
Xinyun Chen, Chang Liu, and Dawn Song. Execution-guided neural program synthesis. In Interna-
  tional Conference on Learning Representations, 2018. 3, 9
Xinyun Chen, Dawn Song, and Yuandong Tian. Latent execution for neural program synthesis
  beyond domain-specific languages. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2021b.
  3
Raj Dabre and Atsushi Fujita. Softmax tempering for training neural machine translation models.
  arXiv, 2020. 1, 4
Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. BERT: Pre-training of deep
  bidirectional transformers for language understanding. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of
  the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language
  Technologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers), pp. 4171–4186, Minneapolis, Minnesota, June
  2019. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/N19-1423. URL https:
  //aclanthology.org/N19-1423. 2


                                               10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Kevin Ellis, Catherine Wong, Maxwell Nye, Mathias Sablé-Meyer, Lucas Morales, Luke Hewitt,
  Luc Cary, Armando Solar-Lezama, and Joshua B Tenenbaum. Dreamcoder: Bootstrapping in-
  ductive program synthesis with wake-sleep library learning. In Proceedings of the 42nd ACM
  SIGPLAN International Conference on Programming Language Design and Implementation, pp.
  835–850, 2021. 2
Kevin M. Ellis, Maxwell Nye, Yewen Pu, Felix Sosa, Joshua Tenenbaum, and Armando Solar-
  Lezama. Write, execute, assess: Program synthesis with a repl. Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 2019. 3, 4, 7
Angela Fan, Mike Lewis, and Yann Dauphin. Hierarchical neural story generation. In Proceedings
  of the 56th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long
  Papers), pp. 889–898, 2018. 1, 3, 4
Zhangyin Feng, Daya Guo, Duyu Tang, Nan Duan, Xiaocheng Feng, Ming Gong, Linjun Shou,
  Bing Qin, Ting Liu, Daxin Jiang, et al. Codebert: A pre-trained model for programming and
  natural languages. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2020,
  pp. 1536–1547, 2020. 2
Sylvain Gelly and David Silver. Monte-carlo tree search and rapid action value estimation in com-
  puter go. Artificial Intelligence, 175(11):1856–1875, 2011. 3
Alex Graves. Sequence transduction with recurrent neural networks. In International Conference
  on Machine Learning: Representation Learning Workshop, 2012. 3, 4
Daya Guo, Shuo Ren, Shuai Lu, Zhangyin Feng, Duyu Tang, LIU Shujie, Long Zhou, Nan Duan,
  Alexey Svyatkovskiy, Shengyu Fu, et al. Graphcodebert: Pre-training code representations with
  data flow. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2020. 2
Kavi Gupta, Peter Ebert Christensen, Xinyun Chen, and Dawn Song. Synthesize, execute and debug:
  Learning to repair for neural program synthesis. Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 2020. 3
Peter E Hart, Nils J Nilsson, and Bertram Raphael. A formal basis for the heuristic determination
  of minimum cost paths. IEEE transactions on Systems Science and Cybernetics, 4(2):100–107,
  1968. 3
Dan Hendrycks, Steven Basart, Saurav Kadavath, Mantas Mazeika, Akul Arora, Ethan Guo, Collin
  Burns, Samir Puranik, Horace He, Dawn Song, and Jacob Steinhardt. Measuring coding challenge
  competence with APPS. NeurIPS, 2021. 1, 4, 7, 8, 14, 17
Aditya Kanade, Petros Maniatis, Gogul Balakrishnan, and Kensen Shi. Learning and evaluating
  contextual embedding of source code. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp.
  5110–5121. PMLR, 2020. 2
Levente Kocsis and Csaba Szepesvári. Bandit based monte-carlo planning. In European conference
  on machine learning, pp. 282–293. Springer, 2006. 21
Hung Le, Yue Wang, Akhilesh Deepak Gotmare, Silvio Savarese, and Steven C. H. Hoi. CodeRL:
  Mastering Code Generation through Pretrained Models and Deep Reinforcement Learning.
  arXiv, July 2022. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2207.01780. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2207.
  01780. arXiv:2207.01780 [cs]. 3, 24
Rémi Leblond, Jean-Baptiste Alayrac, Laurent Sifre, Miruna Pislar, Jean-Baptiste Lespiau, Ioannis
   Antonoglou, Karen Simonyan, and Oriol Vinyals. Machine translation decoding beyond beam
   search. arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.05336, 2021. 3
Yujia Li, David Choi, Junyoung Chung, Nate Kushman, Julian Schrittwieser, Rémi Leblond, Tom
  Eccles, James Keeling, Felix Gimeno, and Agustin Dal Lago. Competition-Level Code Genera-
  tion with AlphaCode. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.07814, 2022. 1, 2, 3, 4, 7, 8, 14, 17
Jinsuk Lim and Shin Yoo. Field report: Applying monte carlo tree search for program synthesis. In
   International Symposium on Search Based Software Engineering, pp. 304–310. Springer, 2016. 3


                                               11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Ximing Lu, Sean Welleck, Peter West, Liwei Jiang, Jungo Kasai, Daniel Khashabi, Ronan Le
  Bras, Lianhui Qin, Youngjae Yu, Rowan Zellers, Noah A. Smith, and Yejin Choi. NeuroLogic
  A*esque Decoding: Constrained Text Generation with Lookahead Heuristics, December 2021.
  URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2112.08726. arXiv:2112.08726 [cs]. 3
Nadia Matulewicz. Inductive program synthesis through using monte carlo tree search guided by a
  heuristic-based loss function. 2022. 3
Glenford J Myers. The art of software testing. 1979. 3
Maxwell Nye, Armando Solar-Lezama, Josh Tenenbaum, and Brenden M Lake. Learning compo-
 sitional rules via neural program synthesis. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
 33:10832–10842, 2020. 2
Alec Radford, Jeff Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario Amodei, and Ilya Sutskever. Language
  models are unsupervised multitask learners. 2019. 2, 28
Colin Raffel, Noam Shazeer, Adam Roberts, Katherine Lee, Sharan Narang, Michael Matena, Yanqi
  Zhou, Wei Li, and Peter J. Liu. Exploring the limits of transfer learning with a unified text-to-
  text transformer. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 2020. URL http://jmlr.org/
  papers/v21/20-074.html. 2
Baptiste Roziere, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Lowik Chanussot, and Guillaume Lample. Unsupervised
  translation of programming languages. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33,
  2020. 2
Baptiste Roziere, Jie M Zhang, Francois Charton, Mark Harman, Gabriel Synnaeve, and Guillaume
  Lample. Leveraging automated unit tests for unsupervised code translation. In International
  Conference on Learning Representations, 2022. 1, 3
Thomas Scialom, Paul-Alexis Dray, Jacopo Staiano, Sylvain Lamprier, and Benjamin Piwowarski.
  To beam or not to beam: That is a question of cooperation for language gans. Advances in neural
  information processing systems, 34:26585–26597, 2021. 3
David Silver, Aja Huang, Chris J. Maddison, Arthur Guez, Laurent Sifre, George Van Den Driess-
  che, Julian Schrittwieser, Ioannis Antonoglou, Veda Panneershelvam, and Marc Lanctot. Mas-
  tering the game of Go with deep neural networks and tree search. Nature, 529(7587):484, 2016.
  Publisher: Nature Publishing Group. 3, 9
David Silver, Thomas Hubert, Julian Schrittwieser, Ioannis Antonoglou, Matthew Lai, Arthur Guez,
  Marc Lanctot, Laurent Sifre, Dharshan Kumaran, Thore Graepel, Timothy Lillicrap, Karen Si-
  monyan, and Demis Hassabis. Mastering Chess and Shogi by Self-Play with a General Reinforce-
  ment Learning Algorithm, December 2017. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1712.01815.
  arXiv:1712.01815 [cs]. 5, 21
Riley Simmons-Edler, Anders Miltner, and Sebastian Seung. Program synthesis through reinforce-
  ment learning guided tree search. arXiv preprint arXiv:1806.02932, 2018. 3
Richard S. Sutton and Andrew G. Barto. Reinforcement Learning: An Introduction. MIT Press,
  October 2018. ISBN 978-0-262-35270-3. 4
Michele Tufano, Dawn Drain, Alexey Svyatkovskiy, Shao Kun Deng, and Neel Sundaresan. Unit
 test case generation with transformers and focal context. arXiv, 2020a. 3
Michele Tufano, Dawn Drain, Alexey Svyatkovskiy, and Neel Sundaresan. Generating accurate
 assert statements for unit test cases using pretrained transformers. arXiv, 2020b. 3
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez,
  Łukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. Advances in neural informa-
  tion processing systems, 2017a. 1, 3
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N. Gomez,
  Lukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention Is All You Need. arXiv:1706.03762 [cs], De-
  cember 2017b. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1706.03762. arXiv: 1706.03762. 2


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Yue Wang, Weishi Wang, Shafiq Joty, and Steven C.H. Hoi. CodeT5: Identifier-aware Unified
  Pre-trained Encoder-Decoder Models for Code Understanding and Generation. In Proceedings
  of the 2021 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pp. 8696–8708,
  Online and Punta Cana, Dominican Republic, November 2021. Association for Computational
  Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2021.emnlp-main.685. URL https://aclanthology.org/
  2021.emnlp-main.685. 1, 2
Thomas Wolf, Lysandre Debut, Victor Sanh, Julien Chaumond, Clement Delangue, Anthony Moi,
  Pierric Cistac, Tim Rault, Rémi Louf, and Morgan Funtowicz. Huggingface’s transformers: State-
  of-the-art natural language processing. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.03771, 2019. 17
Yifan Xu, Lu Dai, Udaikaran Singh, Kening Zhang, and Zhuowen Tu. Neural program synthesis by
  self-learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.05865, 2019a. 3
Yifan Xu, Lu Dai, Udaikaran Singh, Kening Zhang, and Zhuowen Tu. Neural Program Synthesis
  By Self-Learning. October 2019b. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.1910.05865. URL https://arxiv.
  org/abs/1910.05865v1. 3


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A PPENDIX
In this appendix, we supplement the main paper by providing more thorough empirical evaluations to
back up our claims and more detailed descriptions of the algorithms to help readers better understand
our paper.
This appendix is organized as follows.

    • In Sec. A, we provide more comprehensive results of our algorithm and the baseline algorithms.
      We also include the license information of the datasets we use.
    • In Sec. B, we consider the scenario where test cases are not provided. We evaluate our PG-TD
      algorithm using automatically-generated test cases.
    • In Sec. C, we provide empirical evidence for our claims in the discussion section that our
      algorithm is versatile and can be used to optimize different code generation objectives other
      than the pass rate. We consider the objectives of generating concise codes and generating
      codes with more comments.
    • In Sec. D, we provide more details on the components in PG-TD as well as the baseline algo-
      rithms.
    • In Sec. E, we illustrate more examples of the codes generated by our PG-TD algorithm and the
      baseline algorithms.
    • In Sec. F, we discuss more on the advantages and the potential negative social impacts of our
      algorithm.

A     E MPIRICAL E VALUATION
We reported the performance of our algorithm and other baselines on the whole APPS dataset
(Hendrycks et al., 2021) and CodeContests (Li et al., 2022). The APPS test dataset contains coding
problems at three levels: introductory (1000 problems), interview (3000 problems), and competition
(1000 problems).
In addition to our results in Table 1 in the main paper, Table 5 shows the results where the budget
of the number of Transformer generations is 512. As we expect, with a larger number of generated
programs, the gap between PG-TD and the rest is smaller. Sampling + Filtering has a better strict
accuracy than our algorithm on some subsets of datasets. We also experimented with other parameter
settings of PG-TD. In Fig. 5 and 6, we vary the beam size (b = 1, 3, 5) under c = 2, 4. In Fig. 7, we
vary the maximum number of children of any node (k = 2, 3, 4).
Although one may expect expanding the width of the tree (increasing k) can help find better pro-
grams, considering generating less-likely tokens suggested by the Transformer may not contribute
to finding better programs. In fact, it wastes the budget of the number of Transformer generations
and the computation time by considering less likely tokens. On the other hand, increasing the beam
size (b) does help improve the pass rate when the number of rollouts (corresponding to the number
of Transformer generations) is small. However, increasing the beam size under a larger number of
rollouts does not always increase the pass rate (Fig. 7), which may be caused by an overfitting issue.
Increasing b also costs more computation time even though sequence caching is used.
In Fig. 8, we use different temperatures in the Sampling + Filtering algorithm (t = 0.6, 0.8, 1),
confirming that our choice of t = 1 in the experiments in the main paper does have the best perfor-
mance.

n@k and pass@k metrics. We also report the performance of PG-TD and S+F under the n@k and
pass@k metrics (Li et al., 2022). Given a problem, each algorithm is asked to generate k programs
and submit n programs for evaluation (they submit the n programs with the highest reward on the
public test cases). n@k is the proportion of the problems where any of the n submitted programs
passes all the private test cases. pass@k is the proportion of the problems where any of the k
generated programs passes all the private test cases (effectively k@k). For PG-TD, the k samples are
the complete programs found in the first k rollouts. The results are reported in Table 6, evaluated on
the APPS introductory problems. We observe that for smaller n or k values, PG-TD finds programs


                                                 14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                         Pass Rate (%)                                            Strict Accuracy (%)
                                    APPS Intro.   APPS Inter.   APPS comp.       CodeContests   APPS Intro.   APPS Inter.   APPS comp.    CodeContests
 APPS GPT-2    Beam Search               11.95          9.55              5.04           5.10         5.50          2.10           1.00           0.00
               Sampling+Filtering        27.33         25.75             12.09          21.57        14.80          6.97           2.40           4.24
               SMCG-TD                   24.40         22.18             10.60          17.72        11.80          5.87           2.50           4.24
               PG-TD (c = 4)             28.27         26.13             13.74          25.91        14.40          6.63           4.00           4.85
APPS GPT-Neo   Beam Search               14.32          9.80              6.39           5.73         6.70          2.00           2.10           0.00
               Sampling+Filtering        30.23         26.58             13.12          26.57        16.70          7.40           3.10           4.24
               SMCG-TD                   24.77         20.52              9.19          15.42        14.00          5.20           1.70           2.42
               PG-TD (c = 4)             30.38         26.89             13.28          27.10        16.70          6.90           3.20           5.45


Table 5: Results of PG-TD and other algorithms. The maximum number of Transformer generations
for all algorithms is 512.

                                                                  1@10               1@50            1@100
                                     PG-TD (c = 4)                       8.1           10.2              11.6
                                     S+F                                 6.5            9.7              11.4
                                                                  5@10               5@50            5@100
                                     PG-TD (c = 4)                  12.5               14.9              16.2
                                     S+F                            11.9               14.6              18.2
                                                                pass@10          pass@50         pass@100
                                     PG-TD (c = 4)                  14.7               23.7              27.3
                                     S+F                            14.7               23.2              28.3

Table 6: n@k and pass@k results of PG-TD and Sampling, evaluated on the APPS introductory
problems.
                                                                                                  Pass Rate         Strict Accuracy
          0 public test cases (the beam search baseline)                                               13.61                         4.2
          1 public test case                                                                           23.27                         7.4
          3 public test cases                                                                          33.02                        13.4
          5 public test cases                                                                          32.99                        14.2
          Half of all test cases (10.44 public test cases on average)                                  37.71                        14.8

Table 7: The performance of PG-TD using different numbers of public test cases, evaluated on the
first 500 APPS introductory problems.


that are more likely to pass all the private test cases. When more programs are generated (k) or more
programs are submitted for evaluation (n), the performance of PG-TD is matched or outperformed
by S+F.

Using different numbers of public test cases. On the APPS dataset, we split all the test cases
evenly into public test cases and private test cases. To investigate how many test cases are enough
for PG-TD to achieve a satisfactory performance, we consider using 1, 3, and 5 public test cases and
using the rest of the test cases as private test cases. The results are reported in Table 7, evaluated on
the first 500 APPS introductory problems. We observe that even with a small number of public test
cases, PG-TD is able to find programs with higher a pass rate and strict accuracy than beam search.
This also suggests that the Transformer can serve as a regularizer in code generation. With a small
number of public test cases, PG-TD still generates programs similar to human-written programs
without overfitting the pubic test cases.

Results on Codex. To evaluate the effectiveness of our algorithms on more powerful code-
generation Transformers, we run both beam search and PG-TD algorithms using Codex (Chen et al.,
2021a) as the backbone. We follow the “best practices” provided in the Codex guide to put the
problem description into a block comment in the beginning, and ask Codex to complete the rest.
The prompt looks like the following.

"""
Python 3
{problem description}
"""


                                                                         15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                         28                                                   28
                                                                                                               SMCG-TD
                                                                                                               Sampling + Filtering
                         26                                                   26



         Pass Rate (%)


                                                              Pass Rate (%)
                                                                                                               PG-TD (b = 1)
                                                                                                               PG-TD (b = 3)
                         24                                                   24                               PG-TD (b = 5)

                         22                                                   22
                              100 200 300 400 500                                   1000      2000      3000
                               # of Transformer Generations                          Computation Time (sec.)


Figure 5: Results of PG-TD (c = 2) on the APPS introductory dataset, using the APPS GPT-2
Transformer model.
                         28                                                   28                               SMCG-TD
                                                                                                               Sampling + Filtering
         Pass Rate (%)


                                                              Pass Rate (%)
                         26                                                   26                               PG-TD (b = 1)
                                                                                                               PG-TD (b = 3)
                         24                                                   24                               PG-TD (b = 5)

                         22                                                   22
                                   200           400                                1000      2000      3000
                               # of Transformer Generations                          Computation Time (sec.)


Figure 6: Results of PG-TD (c = 4) on the APPS introductory dataset, using the APPS GPT-2
Transformer model.
                         28                                                   28                               PG-TD (k = 2)
                                                                                                               PG-TD (k = 3)
         Pass Rate (%)


                                                              Pass Rate (%)


                         26                                                   26                               PG-TD (k = 4)

                         24                                                   24
                         22                                                   22
                                   200           400                               500 1000 1500 2000
                               # of Transformer Generations                          Computation Time (sec.)


Figure 7: Results of PG-TD (c = 4) with different k on the APPS introductory dataset, using the
APPS GPT-2 Transformer model..

                                                                                                               S + F (t = 0.6)
                         26                                                   26                               S + F (t = 0.8)
         Pass Rate (%)


                                                              Pass Rate (%)


                                                                                                               S + F (t = 1)
                         24                                                   24

                         22                                                   22
                              100 200 300 400 500                                  500 1000 1500 2000
                               # of Transformer Generations                          Computation Time (sec.)


Figure 8: Results of Sampling + Filtering with different temperatures on the APPS introductory
dataset, using the APPS GPT-2 Transformer model.


As we expect, PG-TD helps Codex generate better codes (Table 8). This further validates our claim
that our method is model-agnostic and can help a pre-trained code generation Transformer generate
better codes. Due to the limits of the OpenAI APIs, we are only able to test the algorithms on a
subset of data. We also show a concrete example where PG-TD outperforms beam search in the
following sections in Fig. 16.

Using sampling-based tree search. We could use a sampling approach in the evaluation step of
PG-TD instead of using beam search, which would be a more faithful implementation of MCTS.
We experimented with the two versions of PG-TD and find that overall using beam search indeed
has a better performance (Table 9). The gap could be caused by that we only do sampling once
to evaluate any node. We could estimate the value of nodes more accurately by sampling multiple
times. However, it would make our algorithm more computationally expensive.


                                                                                    16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


          Model                      Decoding Algorithm          Pass Rate (%)     Strict Accuracy (%)
          APPS GPT-2 (1.5B)          Beam Search                        11.65                       2
          APPS GPT-2 (1.5B)          PG-TD                              36.42                       6
          Codex (code-davinci-002)   Beam Search                        33.26                      14
          Codex (code-davinci-002)   PG-TD                              59.14                      31

Table 8: Comparison between using different Transformers (APPS and Codex) as the backbone for
code generation, evaluated on the first 100 APPS introductory problems.

               Decoding Algorithm                   Pass Rate (%)           Strict Accuracy (%)
               # of Transformer Generations    128        256        512    128      256     512
               PG-TD using Beam Search        36.19      37.71     38.57    14.4     14.8   15.6
               PG-TD using Sampling           33.95      35.67     37.87    13.8     15.4   17.2

Table 9: PG-TD using beam search vs. sampling in the evaluation step, evaluated on the first 500
APPS introductory problems.

                                                      Compilation Error (%)        Runtime Error (%)
          APPS GPT-2 (1.5B), Beam Search                                   5.58                 32.95
          APPS GPT-2 (1.5B), Sampling + Filtering                          4.68                 27.38
          APPS GPT-2 (1.5B), PG-TD                                         1.93                  19.5

Table 10: Failure case analysis. The percentages are averaged over the APPS introductory dataset.

                                                                    Strict Accuracy (%)
                      Beam Search                                                  26.82
                      PG-TD (using auto-generated test cases)                      74.53

Table 11: Comparison between beam search and TG-PD using automatically-generated test cases,
using the Codex model and evaluated on the HumanEval dataset.


Failure mode analysis. In Table 10, we report the average percentages of test cases where com-
pilation errors and runtime errors occur. We use the error analysis utility provided in the original
APPS codebase. As we expect, PG-TD executes the generated programs and finds the ones with
higher pass rates, so it dramatically reduces the percentage of both types of errors.

Assets and licenses. Our experiments are run on machines with two Intel(R) Xeon(R) Gold 6258R
CPUs (@ 2.70GHz), and one V100-SXM2 GPU. The APPS dataset (Hendrycks et al., 2021) is
released under MIT License 2 . The CodeContests dataset (Li et al., 2022) is released under Apache
License 2.0 3 . The Huggingface Transformer (Wolf et al., 2019) is released under Apache License
2.0 4 .


B       U SING AUTOMATICALLY-G ENERATED T EST C ASES

When human-specified test cases are not available, our algorithm can still rely on automatically-
generated test cases. We first follow Chen et al. (2022) to use the Codex model and evaluate the
code generation algorithms on the HumanEval dataset (Chen et al., 2021a). We adopt the same
procedure as Chen et al. (2022) to automatically generate test cases. Concretely, we use a prompt
that includes the natural language description of the problem and an assert statement at the end
of the prompt. We also removed the example input, output pairs in the problem description to avoid
    2
      https://github.com/hendrycks/apps/blob/main/LICENSE
    3
      https://github.com/deepmind/code_contests/blob/main/LICENSE
    4
      https://github.com/huggingface/transformers/blob/main/LICENSE


                                                    17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


the Transformer from directly copying the test cases in the problem description. The following is an
example of the prompt for test case generation.

from typing import List

def has_close_elements(numbers: List[float], threshold: float) -> bool:
    """ Check if in given list of numbers, are any two numbers closer to
    each other than given threshold.
    """
    pass

# check the correctness of has_close_elements
def check(candidate):
    assert candidate

Does Codex generate correct test cases? In the HumanEval dataset, the generated solutions are
evaluated by the test script by calling the check function. So we use the strict accuracy (pass@1)
metric that counts the percentage of the problems where the generated solutions pass the check
function. To evaluate the quality of the automatically-generated test cases, we compute the strict
accuracies of the sample solutions (correct solutions written by human programmers) on these test
cases. Clearly, the strict accuracies of the sample solutions on the ground-truth test cases should
be 100%. We evaluate the sample solutions on the automatically-generated test cases and find the
corresponding strict accuracy is 72.56%, which confirms that the automatically-generated test cases
are mostly correct.
Can PG-TD take advantage of the automatically-generated test cases? We report the average
strict accuracy of the generated programs on a subset of HumanEval problems in Table 11. We
confirm that the strict accuracy of PG-TD is higher as it uses high-quality automatically-generated
test cases to verify the generated programs.

C    P LANNING FOR OTHER C ODE G ENERATION O BJECTIVES
Besides the default reward function that optimizes the pass rate, we show the versatility of the pro-
posed algorithm by setting two new objectives, code length penalty and comment encouragement.
Code length penalty. We make the planner generate more concise codes by using the following
reward function
                               Rlength = p + λ1 × e−lc /t ,                             (1)
where p is the average pass rate on the public test case set and lc is the length of the code string. λ
and t are hyperparameters that control the weight of the code length penalty and are set to 0.1 and
20, respectively. As shown in Figure 9, the generated solution becomes more concise and the code
string length decreases from 187 to 78 while still passing all the test cases.
Comment encouragement. We can also generate solutions with more comments. We achieve this
goal by using the following reward function
                                                                       Ncm
                       Rcomment = p + λ1 × e−lc /t + λ2 × min(1,            ),                     (2)
                                                                       Nmax
where Ncm is the number of “#” in the code string and λ2 is set to 0.2, controlling the weights of
the comment lines. If we simply add λ2 × Ncm as the comment encouragement term, the planner
would generate code with repeated meaningless comment lines to get more rewards. To handle this
problem, we add the code length penalty term, λ1 × e−lc /t . We also upper-bound the rewards for the
number of comment lines by setting the comment encouragement term to be λ2 × min(1, NNmax      cm
                                                                                                   ),
where Nmax = 5 in the example shown in Figure 10. As shown in Figure 10, we can generate
solutions with more comment lines with this designed reward function.


                                                  18
     Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


     Problem Statement
     Takahashi loves palindromes. Non-palindromic strings are unacceptable to him. Each time he hugs
     a string, he can change one of its characters to any character of his choice. Given is a string S.
     Find the minimum number of hugs needed to make S palindromic.
     Constraints
          (1). S is a string consisting of lowercase English letters.
          (2). The length of S is between 1 and 100 (inclusive).
     Input
          Input is given from Standard Input in the following format:S.
     Output
          Print the minimum number of hugs needed to make S palindromic.
     Sample Test Input 1
          redcoder
     Sample Test Output 1
          1
     For example, we can change the fourth character to o and get a palindrome redooder.



 1   # cook up a palindrome                                       1   s=input()
 2   s=input()                                                    2   ans=0
 3   n=len(s)                                                     3   for i in range(len(s)//2):
 4   c=0                                                          4           if s[i]!=s[˜i]: ans+=1
 5   if n%2==0:                                                   5   print(ans)
 6           for i in range(n//2):                                6
 7                    if s[i]!=s[n-i-1]:
 8                            c+=1
 9           print(c)
10   else:
11           for i in range(n//2):
12                    if s[i]!=s[n-i-1]:
13                            c+=1
14           print(c)

     Default reward function (Pass Rate: 1.00, code string            Reward function with code length penalty (Pass
     length: 187).                                                    Rate: 1.00, code string length: 78).

     Figure 9: A code generation example with code length penalty. The problem description is shown
     on the top. The programs generated by default PG-TD and PG-TD with code length penalty are
     shown at the bottom. We can generate more concise code by code length penalty reward.


                                                             19
    Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


    Problem Statement
    A + B is often used as an example of the easiest problem possible to show some contest platform.
    However, some scientists have observed that sometimes this problem is not so easy to get accepted.
    Want to try?
    Input
        The input contains two integers a and b (0 ≤ a, b ≤ 103 ), separated by a single space.
    Output
        Output the sum of the given integers.
    Sample Test Input 1
        5 14
    Sample Test Output 1
        19
    Sample Test Input 2
        381 492
    Sample Test Output 2
        873



1   a, b = map(int, input().split())                    1   #!/usrbin/env python3
2   print(a + b)                                        2   # coding =utf-8 #py3 runs on py2
3                                                       3   a,b=map(int,input().split())
                                                        4   print(a+b)

               Default reward function.                     Reward function with comment encouragement
                                                                      (code with comments).

    Figure 10: A code generation example with code comment encouragement. We can generate codes
    with more comments by using the code comment encouragement reward.


                                                   20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


D     A LGORITHM D ETAILS
D.1   PG-TD

In this section, we describe our PG-TD algorithm in more details. We show our framework in Fig. 12
again for convenience. The algorithm maintains a search tree structure where nodes correspond to
states and edges correspond to actions. For each node s, it maintains the number of times that it
has been visited, denoted by s.visits. For a state, action pair, s, a (a stat, action pair corresponds
to an edge in the tree), the algorithm maintains a function Q(s, a), which is the maximum reward
obtained by starting in s and taking action a. Conventionally, Q(s, a) is the average return. Since
our code generation problem is deterministic (that is, there are no stochastic transitions), we find the
performance is better if we keep track of the pass rate of the best program generated from a node.
The algorithm first selects a node for expansion. It starts from the root node and selects subtrees
recursively until it reaches a node that has not been expanded before (with no children). A com-
mon node selection criterion is upper confidence bound (UCB) (Kocsis & Szepesvári, 2006), which
leverages between exploiting known-to-be-good states and exploring less-visited states, We adapt
the P-UCB heuristic used in Silver et al. (2017), which is a variation of UCB, as follows,
                                                                       p
                                                                          log(s.visits)
               P-UCB(s, a) = Q(s, a) + β(s) · PTransformer (a|s) ·                      ,         (3)
                                                                         1 + s′ .visits
where s′ is the state (deterministically) reached by taking action a in s; PTransformer (a|s) is the
probability that token a is the next token given the partial program s, which is provided by a Trans-
former model. β is the weight for exploration, which depends on the number of visits of s, defined
as
                                            s.visits + cbase + 1
                                β(s) = log(                       ) + c.                          (4)
                                                    cbase
The P UCB SELECT function in Alg. 1 returns the action that has the highest P-UCB value,
                           P UCB SELECT(s, c) = arg max P-UCB(s, a).                                (5)
                                                          a
Note that c parameterizes the exploration weight in Eq. 4. We omit it in Eq. 5 for notational con-
ciseness.
Intuitively, P UCB SELECT(s, c) would return an action a more often if 1) Q(s, a) is large, which
means that it has found high-quality programs starting from s, a; or 2) PTransformer (a|s) is large,
which means that the Transformer believes that a is a highly likely next token; or 3) s.visits is large
but s′ .visits is small, which means s′ is under-explored. We did a hyperparameter search and set
cbase = 10, and used c = 2, 4, 6 in our experiments.
In the following steps, the algorithm expands the node by adding its children to the tree and
evaluates the node using BEAM SEARCH, as we described in the main paper. Finally, the re-
ward of the completed program r is backpropagated to its parents recursively until it reaches
the root to update their Q values. For all state, action pairs, s′′ , a′′ , along the trajectory in the
tree from the root to the selected node, Q(s′′ , a′′ ) is updated accordingly using the new value:
Q(s′′ , a′′ ) ← max(Q(s′′ , a′′ ), r).

Comparison with the standard MCTS algorithm. It is worth noting that our implementation of
MCTS in PG-TD is different from the standard MCTS algorithm. If we use the standard MCTS
algorithm, it is computationally intractable to search the large space of possible programs to find
high-quality ones.
For comparison, we visualize the standard MCTS algorithm in Fig. 11. In the expansion step, MCTS
selects the next available action in the action set, and adds the state that can be reached by following
the action. In the example, action “b” is taken, and the new state that is added to the tree is “ab”. In
the evaluation step, MCTS evaluates the new state by executing a random policy from the new state
and computes the value of the policy.
It is impractical to apply the standard MCTS algorithm to domains with large state spaces or large
action spaces, as we cannot afford to try all possible actions in the expansion step. A random policy
in the evaluation step also has a high variance in estimating the value of the new state. In PG-TD,
we use a pre-trained Transformer to resolve these limitations of the standard MCTS algorithm.


                                                  21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                    Selection                                 Expansion                                     Evaluation                            Backpropagation

                        <PD>                                         <PD>                                        <PD>                                           <PD>

             a                  b                            a                      b                   a                       b                      a                    b

                a               b                            a                      b                       a                   b                          a                b
        a                            a               a                b                  a         a              b                  a            a                 b            a

        aa                      ba                   aa              ab             ba             aa           ab              ba                aa           ab       ba

                                                      Select the next                                             Generate a random policy
                                                      action in the action                                        and evaluate it
                                                      set


Figure 11: The standard Monte-Carlo tree search algorithm, without using a pre-trained Trans-
former. <PD> stands for problem description.


                        Selection                                Expansion                                      Evaluation                        Backpropagation

                         <PD>                                         <PD>                                        <PD>                                         <PD>

                    a                x                           a                   x                      a                    x                     a                x

                    a                x                           a                   x                      a                    x                     a                x
            =                             ,              =                ,               ,        =                 ,               ,          =               ,            ,

             a=                      x,                  a=           a,             x,                a=         a,            x,              a=             a,       x,
                                suggests next tokens
                                                                                                        a,b              a,\n
                                                                                                                                                           Evaluate on
        Transformer
                                                                                                            …


                                                                                                                          …


                                               generates complete programs                                                                                 public test cases
                                               using beam search


             Figure 12: Our proposed framework, PG-TD, repeated here for convenience.
                                                                 …


                                                                                                                                             …


                                                                 a,                                                                          a,


                                                     a,b                      a,c                                                    a,b

                                              a,b,       a,b=             a,c= a,c,                                         a,b,         a,b=
                                                     …


                                                                      …


                                                                                                                          …


                                                                                                                                         …


                                              Beam 1                 Beam 2                                       Beam 1             Beam 2

Figure 13: Illustration of an example where sequence caching may not return the correct sequence
when b > 1.



D.2   E FFICIENT I MPLEMENTATION BY I NFORMATION S HARING

As discussed in the main paper, there may be calls to the Transformer generation functions the
perform redundant computations. We have described tree structure caching in the main paper. We
provide more details on sequence caching in this section.


                                                                                              22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Algorithm 2 Sampling + Filtering.
Require: sample num: the number of samples to generate using Transformer.
 1: for i ← 1, 2, . . . , sample nums do
 2:     pi ← T RANSFORMER SAMPLE(⟨P D⟩, k = 5)
 3:     rewards[i] ← GET REWARD(pi )
 4: end for
 5: return pi with the largest rewards[i]



Sequence caching. The goal of sequence caching is to reduce the computational cost of the eval-
uation step of PG-TD. In the evaluation step, the Transformer beam search algorithm is called to
generate a complete program from the current node. These complete programs and their rewards are
both cached and used in a future iteration.
However, when b > 1, using cached sequences in the previous iterations may be suboptimal. Let’s
consider the example in Figure 13, where b = 2. Starting from “a,” (the left figure), suppose the
beam search algorithm returns a sequence by searching two beams with the prefixes of “a,b” and
“a,c”, respectively (the bold lines). In the next iteration (the right figure), to evaluate “a,b” using
the beam search algorithm, we may not use the sequence found in the previous iteration, which only
searches the subtree of “a,b” with one beam. In other words, we may find a sequence with a higher
likelihood by re-running the beam search algorithm with b = 2 starting from “a,b”.
Although using sequence caching with b > 1 may underestimate the values of programs in the
evaluation step in PG-TD, we still use sequence caching for all choices of b for the merits of com-
putational saving.

D.3   BASELINE A LGORITHMS

Sampling + Filtering. We have described the sampling algorithm in the main paper. The pseu-
docode is shown in Alg. 2.

Sequential Monte-Carlo-Guided Transformer Decoding. Sequential Monte-Carlo-Guided
Transformer Decoding (SMCG-TD) is another algorithm that we compare PG-TD with, which also
uses Transformer to evaluate partial programs. The pseudocode is shown in Alg. 3. One can think
of it from a view of genetic algorithms. SMCG-TD maintains a group of partial programs, called a
generation, and updates them iteratively. For each partial program in the generation, we sample the
next token using the Transformer and append it to the partial program, and put it in a new generation.
We then evaluate each partial program in the new generation in the same way as PG-TD: We use the
Transformer to generate a complete program from the partial program and compute its reward (pass
rate). We then use these rewards as the partial programs’ fitness scores. At the end of an iteration,
we re-sample from the partial programs according to their fitness. So partial programs with higher
fitness scores are more likely to remain in the generation. In the end, the algorithm outputs the
complete program it finds that has the largest reward.
One may notice that SMCG-TD resembles PG-TD on a higher level. It also uses the Transformer
and the public test cases to decide which next token to generate in the code generation process. The
key difference is that SMCG-TD uses a sampling-based approach and PG-TD uses a tree search
algorithm. So in our experiments, the performance of SMCG-TD is worse than PG-TD.
It is worth noting that sequence caching is also implemented for SMCG-TD when it calls
BEAM SEARCH . So even if multiple partial programs in a generation can be the same, the algo-
rithm would not call the Transformer to generate a complete program from the same prefix more
than once, which effectively reduces the number of times that it needs to call the Transformer and
saves the computation time.

D.4   F INETUNING

In our experiments, we use the samples generated by the PG-TD to further finetune the Transformer
model. We then generate solutions using the finetuned Transformer model by running beam search,


                                                  23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Algorithm 3 Sequential Monte Carlo-Guided Transformer Decoding (SMCG-TD).
Require: pop size: the population size
 1: generation ← [⟨P D⟩] ∗ pop size # initialize the population with the problem description
 2: f itness ← [1.0/pop size] ∗ pop size # uniform distribution
 3: t ← 0
 4: complete programs ← NEW LIST()
 5: while |population| > 0 and t < max steps do
 6:     new generation ← NEW LIST()
 7:     new f itness ← NEW LIST()
 8:     for i ← 1, . . . , LEN(generation) do
 9:         s ← sampled from generation, where generation[j] is selected with the probability of
    f itness[j]
10:         a ← sampled from PT ransf ormer (·|s)
11:         s′ ← CONCAT(s, a)
12:         if s′ [−1] = <|endoftext|> then
13:              # this sample finishes generation, save to output
14:              add s′ to complete programs
15:         else
16:              add s′ to new generation
17:              # BEAM SEARCH uses sequence cache as in PG-TD
18:              p ← BEAM SEARCH(s′ , b = 1)
19:              r ← GET REWARD(p)
20:              add r to new f itness
21:         end if
22:     end for
23:     normalize new f itness
24:     generation ← new generation
25:     f itness ← new f itness
26:     t←t+1
27: end while
28: return the program in complete programs that has the largest reward



and observe improvement in both pass rate and strict accuracy compared with running beam search
using the original model.
One challenge in our design is that solutions that PG-TD generates have different pass rates. We
could use only solutions with a pass rate of 100%. However, that largely limits the number of
samples we can use for finetuning. We instead collect all solutions that have pass rates larger than
80%. To make the Transformer aware of the different pass rates of training samples, we use the loss
function similar to Le et al. (2022),
                            L(θ) = −EW ∼pθ [r(W )∇θ log pθ (W |P D)],                              (6)
where W denotes a complete program; r(W ) is the pass rate of the program; P D is the program de-
scription. In future work, we will investigate different loss functions and compare their effectiveness
in improving the Transformer model’s performance.

E    I LLUSTRATIVE E XAMPLES
In this section, we provide more qualitative examples generated by our PG-TD and the baseline
methods, shown in Figure 14 and Figure 15. Our PG-TD algorithm generates solutions that have
higher pass rates than the baseline methods. We also show a concrete example where PG-TD out-
performs beam search in Fig. 16 using Codex as the backbone Transformer.
For a step-by-step illustration of PG-TD, please visit our project website at https://
codeaimcts.github.io.


                                                  24
     Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


     Problem Statement
           Takahashi is meeting up with Aoki. They have planned to meet at a place that is D meters away
     from Takahashi’s house in T minutes from now. Takahashi will leave his house now and go straight
     to the place at a speed of S meters per minute. Will he arrive in time?
     Constraints
           (1). 1 ≤ D ≤ 10000
           (2). 1 ≤ T ≤ 10000
           (3). 1 ≤ S ≤ 10000
           (4). All values in input are integers.
     Input
           Input is given from Standard Input in the following format: D T S
     Output
           If Takahashi will reach the place in time, print Y es; otherwise, print N o.
     Sample Test Input
           1000 15 80
     Sample Test Output
           Yes
     It takes 12.5 minutes to go 1000 meters to the place at a speed of 80 meters per minute. They have
     planned to meet in 15 minutes so he will arrive in time.



 1   # cook your dish here              1   # cook your dish here              1   n, t, s=map(int,
 2   try:                               2   d,t,s=list(map(int,                    ,→   input().split())
 3     a=list(map(int,                      ,→   input().split                 2   t1=n / s
       ,→   input().split(                  ,→   ()))                          3   if t1 <= t:
       ,→   )))                         3   if(d==t):                          4      print("Yes")
 4     if(a[2]==1):                     4      if(s*(s+1)/s==t):               5   else:
 5        print("Yes")                  5        print("Yes")                  6      print("No")
 6     else:                            6      else:                           7
 7        print("No")                   7        print("No")
 8   except:                            8   else:
 9     pass                             9      if(s*(s+1)/s>t):
10                                     10        print("Yes")
                                       11      else:
                                       12        print("No")

                                                                                     PG-TD (Pass Rate: 1.00).
     Beam Search (Pass Rate: 0.125).        Sampling + Filtering (Pass Rate:
                                                       0.625).

     Figure 14: A code generation example for competitive programming.The problem description is
     shown on the top. The programs generated by baseline algorithms and our PG-TD algorithm are
     shown at the bottom.


                                                          25
    Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


    Problem Statement
         Given is an integer r. How many times is the area of a circle of radius r larger than the area
    of a circle of radius 1? It can be proved that the answer is always an integer under the constraints
    given.
    Constraints
         (1). 1 ≤ r ≤ 100.
         (2). All values in input are integers.
    Input
         Input is given from Standard Input in the following format: r.
    Output
         Print the area of a circle of radius r, divided by the area of a circle of radius 1, as an integer..
    Sample Test Input
         2
    Sample Test Output
         4
    The area of a circle of radius 2 is 4 times larger than the area of a circle of radius 1. Note that
    output must be an integer - for example, 4.0 will not be accepted.



1   # cook your dish here             1   # cook your dish here              1   # cook your dish here
2   r=int(input())                    2   r=int(input())                     2   r=int( input() )
3   if(r>=2*r):                       3   if(r>=2*r):                        3   print(2*(r**2)-r**2)
4           print(r*r*2)              4           print(r*r*2)               4
5   else:                             5   else:
6           print(0)                  6           print(0)

    Beam Search (Pass Rate: 0.00).        Sampling + Filtering (Pass Rate:        PG-TD (Pass Rate: 1.00).
                                                      0.00).

    Figure 15: A code generation example for competitive programming. The problem description is
    shown on the top. The programs generated by baseline algorithms and our PG-TD algorithm are
    shown at the bottom.


                                                        26
    Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


    Problem Statement
    You are given an array a consisting of n integer numbers.
                                                           n         n
    Let instability of the array be the following value: max ai − min ai .
                                                           i=1       i=1
    You have to remove exactly one element from this array to minimize instability of the resulting
    (n − 1)-elements array. Your task is to calculate the minimum possible instability.
    Input
    The first line of the input contains one integer n (2 ≤ n ≤ 105 ) — the number of elements in the
    array a.
    The second line of the input contains n integers a1 , a2 , . . . , an (1 ≤ ai ≤ 105 ) — elements of the
    array a.
    Output
    Print one integer — the minimum possible instability of the array if you have to remove exactly one
    element from the array a.
    Examples
    Input
    4
    1337
    Output
    2
    Input
    2
    1 100000
    Output
    0
    Note
    In the first example you can remove 7 then instability of the remaining array will be 3 − 1 = 2.
    In the second example you can remove either 1 or 100000 then instability of the remaining array
    will be 100000 − 100000 = 0 and 1 − 1 = 0 correspondingly.



1   n = int(input())
2   a = list(map(int, input().split()))
3
4   print(max(a) - min(a) - 1)

                                         Beam search (Pass Rate 0.00).

1   def main():
2       n = int(input())
3       a = list(map(int, input().split()))
4       a.sort()
5       print(min(a[n-1] - a[1], a[n-2] - a[0]))
6
7   if __name__ == "__main__":
8       main()

                                           PG-TD (Pass Rate 1.00).

    Figure 16: A code generation example using Codex (code-davinci-002). Beam search finds an
    incorrect solution while PG-TD finds a correct solution. This result further confirms that PG-TD is
    model-agnostic and could be effective with different backbone Transformers (GPT-2 (1.5B), GPT-
    Neo (2.7B) and Codex).


                                                      27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


F   M ORE D ISCUSSIONS
Potential benefits. We have shown that our framework can not only help achieve higher pass rates
compared with using only the Transformer generation process, but also generate codes that opti-
mize different objectives. These are done without fine-tuning the pre-trained Transformer models.
Our framework makes a pre-trained Transformer more versatile and adapts it to different tasks by
designing different reward functions used by the planning algorithm. If we re-train or fine-tune
Transformers like GPT-2 used in this paper, we will need to train billions of parameters (Radford
et al., 2019). Our approach potentially saves the computational cost and energy consumption that is
needed to train or fine-tune Transformers for different tasks.

Potential negative social impacts. Automatic code generation makes it easier for anyone to gen-
erate programs that meet a specification. Our hope is that this development will relieve the burden
of software engineers and enable AI-assisted programming or even end-to-end automatic program-
ming. However, it may also make it easier to develop malware. Anyone that can specify a malicious
goal in a natural language can use an automatic code generation tool to generate codes that meet the
goal. When automatic code generation techniques become more mature, we may need a separate
module that screens the natural language description and rejects the code generation requests that
can lead to harmful codes.


                                                28
