Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


W HAT CAN BE LEARNT WITH WIDE CONVOLUTIONAL
NEURAL NETWORKS ?

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                             A BSTRACT

         Understanding how convolutional neural networks (CNNs) can efficiently learn
         high-dimensional functions remains a fundamental challenge. A popular belief is
         that these models harness the local and hierarchical structure of natural data such
         as images. Yet, we lack a quantitative understanding of how such structure affects
         performance, e.g. the rate of decay of the generalisation error with the number of
         training samples. In this paper, we study deep CNNs in the kernel regime. First,
         we show that the spectrum of the corresponding kernel inherits the hierarchical
         structure of the network, and we characterise its asymptotics. Then, we use this
         result together with generalisation bounds to prove that deep CNNs adapt to the
         spatial scale of the target function. In particular, we find that if the target function
         depends on low-dimensional subsets of adjacent input variables, then the rate of
         decay of the error is controlled by the effective dimensionality of these subsets.
         Conversely, if the target function depends on the full set of input variables, then
         the error rate is inversely proportional to the input dimension. We conclude by
         computing the rate when a deep CNN is trained on the output of another deep
         CNN with randomly-initialised parameters. Interestingly, we find that, despite
         their hierarchical structure, the functions generated by deep CNNs are too rich to
         be efficiently learnable in high dimension.



1   I NTRODUCTION

Deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) are particularly successful in certain tasks such as im-
age classification. Such tasks generally entail the approximation of functions of a large number of
variables, for instance the number of pixels which determine the content of an image. Learning a
generic high-dimensional function is plagued by the curse of dimensionality: the rate at which the
generalisation error ϵ decays with the number of training samples n vanishes as the dimensionality
d of the input space grows, i.e. ϵ(n) ∼ n−β with β = O(1/d) (Wainwright, 2019). Therefore,
the success of CNNs in classifying data whose dimension can be in the hundreds or more (Hest-
ness et al., 2017; Spigler et al., 2020) points to the existence of some underlying structure in the
task that CNNs can leverage. Understanding the structure of learnable tasks is arguably one of the
most fundamental problems in deep learning, and also one of central practical importance—as it
determines how many examples are required to learn up to a certain error. A popular hypothesis
is that learnable tasks are local and hierarchical: features at any scale are made of sub-features of
smaller scales. Although many works have investigated this hypothesis (Biederman, 1987; Poggio
et al., 2017; Kondor & Trivedi, 2018; Zhou et al., 2018; Deza et al., 2020; Kohler et al., 2020; Pog-
gio et al., 2020; Schmidt-Hieber, 2020; Finocchio & Schmidt-Hieber, 2021; Giordano et al., 2022),
there are no available predictions for the exponent β for deep CNNs trained on tasks with a varying
degree of locality or a truly hierarchical structure.
In this paper we perform such a computation in the overparameterised regime, where the width of
the hidden layer of the neural networks diverges and the network output is rescaled so as to converge
to that of a kernel method (Jacot et al., 2018; Lee et al., 2019). Although the deep networks deployed
in real scenarios do not generally operate in such regime, the connection with the theory of kernel
regression provides a recipe for computing the decay of the generalisation error with the number
of training examples. Namely, given an infinitely wide neural network, its generalisation abilities
depend on the spectrum of the corresponding kernel (Caponnetto & De Vito, 2007; Bordelon et al.,


                                                    1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


2020): the main challenge is then to characterise this spectrum, especially for deep CNNs whose
kernels are rather cumbersome and defined recursively (Arora et al., 2019). This characterisation is
the main result of our paper, together with the ensuing study of generalisation in deep CNNs.

1.1   O UR CONTRIBUTIONS

More specifically, this paper studies the generalisation properties of deep CNNs with non-
overlapping patches and no pooling (defined in Sec. 2, see Fig. 1 for an illustration), trained on
a target function f ∗ by empirical minimisation of the mean squared loss. We consider the infinite-
width limit (Sec. 3) where the model parameters change infinitesimally over training, thus the trained
network coincides with the predictor of kernel regression with the Neural Tangent Kernel (NTK) of
the network. Due to the equivalence with kernel methods, generalisation is fully characterised by the
spectrum of the integral operator of the kernel: in simple terms, the projections on the eigenfunc-
tions with larger eigenvalues can be learnt (up to a fixed generalisation error) with fewer training
points (see, e.g., Bach (2021)).

Spectrum of deep hierarchical kernels (Thm. 3.1). Due to the network architecture, the hidden
neurons of each layer depend only on a subset of the input variables, known as the receptive field of
that neuron (highlighted by coloured boxes in Fig. 1, left panel). We find that the eigenfunctions of
the NTK of a hierarchical CNN of depth L + 1 can be organised into sectors l = 1, . . . , L associated
with the hidden layers of the network (Thm. 3.1). The eigenfunctions of each sector depend only
on the receptive fields of the neurons of the corresponding hidden layer: if we denote with deff (l)
the size of the receptive fields of neurons in the l-th hidden layer, then the eigenfunctions of the l-th
sector are effectively functions of deff (l) variables. We characterise the asymptotic behaviour of the
NTK eigenvalues with the degree of the corresponding eigenfunctions (Thm. 3.1) and find that it is
controlled by deff (l). As a consequence, the eigenfunctions with the largest eigenvalues—the easiest
to learn—are those which depend on small subsets of the input variables and have low polynomial
degree. This is our main technical contribution and all of our conclusions follow from it.

Adaptivity to the spatial structure of the target (Cor. 4.1). We use the above result to prove
that deep CNNs can adapt to the spatial scale of the target function (Sec. 4). More specifically,
by using rigorous bounds from the theory of kernel ridge regression (Caponnetto & De Vito, 2007)
(reviewed in the first paragraph of Sec. 4), we show that when learning with the kernel of a CNN and
optimal regularisation, the decay of the error depends on the effective dimensionality of the target
f ∗ —i.e., if f ∗ only depends on deff adjacent coordinates of the d-dimensional input, then ϵ ∼ n−β
with β ≥ O(1/deff ) (Cor. 4.1, see Fig. 1 for a pictorial representation). We find a similar picture
in ridgeless regression by using non-rigorous results derived with the replica method (Bordelon
et al., 2020; Loureiro et al., 2021) (Sec. 5). Notice that for targets which are spatially localised (or
sums of spatially localised functions), the rates achieved with deep CNNs are much closer to the
Bayes-optimal rates—realised when the architecture is fine-tuned to the structure of the target—
than β = O(1/d) obtained with the kernel of a fully-connected network. Moreover, we find that
hierarchical functions generated by the output of deep CNNs are too rich to be efficiently learnable
in high dimensions (Lemma 5.1). We confirm these results through extensive numerical studies and
find them to hold even if the nonoverlapping patches assumption is relaxed (Subsec. G.4).

1.2   R ELATED WORK

The benefits of shallow CNNs in the kernel regime have been investigated by Bietti (2022); Favero
et al. (2021); Misiakiewicz & Mei (2021); Xiao & Pennington (2022); Xiao (2022); Geifman et al.
(2022). Favero et al. (2021), and later (Misiakiewicz & Mei, 2021; Xiao & Pennington, 2022),
studied generalisation properties of shallow CNNs, finding that they are able to beat the curse of di-
mensionality on local target functions. However, these architectures can only approximate functions
of single input patches or linear combinations thereof. Bietti (2022), in addition, includes generic
pooling layers and begins considering the role of depth by studying the approximation properties of
kernels which are integer powers of other kernels. We generalise this line of work by studying CNNs
of any depth with nonanalytic (ReLU) activations: we find that the depth and nonanalyticity of the re-
sulting kernel are crucial for understanding the inductive bias of deep CNNs. This result should also
be contrasted with the spectrum of the kernels of deep fully-connected networks, whose asymptotics


                                                   2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                                                      n −O(1/deff )
                                                                                                      n −O(1/deff )


                                                                    log ε
                                                                                                      n −O(1/deff )

                                                                                          log n

Figure 1: Left: Computational skeleton of a convolutional neural network of depth L + 1 = 4 (L = 3
hidden layers). The leaves of the graph (squares) correspond to input coordinates, and the root
(empty circle) to the output. All other nodes represent (infinitely wide layers of) hidden neurons.
We define as ‘meta-patches’ (i.e. patches of patches) the sets of input variables that share a common
ancestor node along the tree (such as the squares within each coloured rectangle). Each meta-
patch coincides with the receptive field of the neuron represented by this common ancestor node,
as indicated below the input coordinates. For each hidden layer l = 1, . . . , L, there is a family of
meta-patches having dimensionality deff (l). Right: Sketches of learning curves ϵ(n) obtained by
learning target functions of varying spatial scale with the network on the left. More specifically,
the target is a function of a 3-dimensional patch for the blue curve, a 6-dimensional patch for the
orange curve, and the full input for the green curve. We predict (and confirm empirically) that both
the decay of ϵ with n (full lines) and the rigorous upper bound (dashed lines) are controlled by the
effective dimensionality of the target.


do not depend on depth (Bietti & Bach, 2021). Furthermore, we extend the analysis of generalisation
to target functions that have a hierarchical structure similar to that of the networks themselves.
Geifman et al. (2022) derive bounds on the spectrum of the kernels of deep CNNs. However, they
consider only filters of size one in the first layer and do not include a theoretical analysis of gener-
alisation. Instead, we allow filters of general dimension and give tight estimates of the asymptotic
behaviour of eigenvalues, which allow us to predict generalisation properties. Xiao (2022) is the
closest to our work, as it also investigates the spectral bias of deep CNNs in the kernel regime.
However, it considers a different limit where both the input dimension and the number of train-
ing points diverge and does not characterise the asymptotic decay of generalisation error with the
number of training samples.
Paccolat et al. (2021); Malach & Shalev-Shwartz (2021); Abbe et al. (2022) use sparse target func-
tions which depend only on a few of the input variables to prove sample complexity separation re-
sults between networks operating in the kernel regime and in the feature regime—where the change
in parameters during training can be arbitrarily large. In this respect, our work shows that when the
few relevant input variables are adjacent, i.e. the target function is spatially localised, deep CNNs
achieve near-optimal performances even in the kernel regime.

2    N OTATION AND SETUP
Our work considers CNNs with nonoverlapping patches and no pooling layers. These networks are
fully characterised by the depth L + 1 (or number of hidden layers L) and a set of filters sizes {sl }l
(one per hidden layer). We call such networks hierarchical CNNs.
Definition√2.1 (L-hidden-layers hierarchical CNN) Denote by σ the normalised ReLU function,
σ(x) = 2 max(0, x). For each input x ∈ Rd 1 and s a divisor of d, denote by xi the i-th
   1
     Notice that all our results can be readily extended to image-like input signals {xij }i,j or tensorial objects
with an arbitrary number of indices.


                                                        3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


s-dimensional patch of x, xi = (x(i−1)×s+1 , . . . , xi×s ) for all i = 1, . . . , d/s. The output of a L-
hidden-layers hierarchical neural network can be defined recursively as follows.

    (1)            (1)
   fh,i (x) = σ wh · xi , ∀h ∈ [1 . . H1 ], ∀i ∈ [1 . . p1 ];
                                                  
                                 (l)      (l−1)
                
                     1         wh,h′ · fh′
    (l)
                           X
                                                 i
   fh,i (x) = σ  p                   √                , ∀h ∈ [1 . . Hl ], i ∈ [1 . . pl ], l ∈ [2 . . L];
                    Hl−1 ′              sl
                                h
                                   HL X pL  (L+1) (L)
                (L+1)           1 X        wh,i fh,i (x)
    f (x) = f           (x) = √                √         .                                            (1)
                                HL h=1 i=1       pL
Hl denotes the width of the l-th layer, sl the filter size (s1 = s), pl the number of patches
(p1 ≡ p = d/s). wh(1) ∈ Rs1 , wh,h
                               (l)      sl  (L+1)
                                   ′ ∈ R , wh,i   ∈ R.

Hierarchical CNNs are best visualised by considering their computational skeleton, i.e. the directed
acyclic graph obtained by setting Hl = 1 ∀ l (example in Fig. 1, left, with L = 3 hidden layers and
filter sizes (s1 , s2 , s3 ) = (3, 2, 2)). Having nonoverlapping patches, the computational skeleton is an
ordered tree, whose root is the output (empty circle at the top of the figure) and the leaves are the
input coordinates (squares at the bottom). All the other nodes represent neurons and all the neurons
belonging to the same hidden layer have the same distance from the input nodes. The tree structure
highlights that the post-activations fil of the l-th layer depend only on a subset of the input variables,
also known as the receptive field.
Since the first layer of a hierarchical CNN acts on s1 -dimensional patches of the input, it is conve-
nient to consider each d-dimensional input signal as the concatenation of p s-dimensional patches,
with s = s1 and p × s = d. We assume that each patch is normalised to 1 2 , so that the input space is
a product of p s-dimensional unit spheres (called multisphere in Geifman et al. (2022)):
                                                Yp
                                       p s−1
                                     M S     :=    Ss−1 ⊂ Sd−1 .                                   (2)
                                                  i=1
Notice that the s-dimensional patches are also the receptive fields of the first-hidden-layer neurons
(as in the blue rectangle in Fig. 1 for s = 3). In general, the receptive field of a neuron in the
                                              Ql
l-th hidden layer with l > 1 is a group of l′ =2 sl′ adjacent patches (as in the orange rectangle
of Fig. 1 for l = 2, s2 = 2 or the green rectangle for l = 3, s3 = s2 = 2), which we refer to as a
meta-patch. Due to the correspondence with the receptive fields, each meta-patch is identified with
one path on the computational skeleton: the path which connects the output node to the hidden
neuron whose receptive field coincides with the meta-patch. If such hidden neuron belongs to the
l-th hidden layer, the path is specified by a tuple of L − l + 1 indices, il+1→L+1 := iL+1 . . . il+1 ,
where each index indicates which branch to select when descending from the root     Q to the neuron
node. With this notation, xil+1 →iL+1 denotes one of the pl meta-patches of size l′ ≤l sl′ . Because
of the normalisation of the s1 -dimensional patches, each meta-patch has an effective dimensionality
which is lower than its size:
                           (
                  s1 −1      deff (1) := dim(xi2→L+1 ) = (s1 − 1),
     xi2→L+1 ∈ S        ⇒                                          Ql                              (3)
                             deff (l) := dim(xil+1→L+1 ) = (s1 − 1) l′ =2 sl′ , ∀l ∈ [2 . . L].

3    H IERARCHICAL KERNELS AND THEIR SPECTRA
We turn now to the infinite-width limit Hl → ∞: because of the aforementioned equivalence with
kernel methods, this limit allows us to deduce the generalisation properties of the network from the
spectrum of a kernel. In this section, we present the kernels corresponding to the hierarchical models
of Def. 2.1 and characterise the spectra of the associated integral operators.
We consider specifically two kernels: the Neural Tangent Kernel (NTK), corresponding to training
all the network parameters (Jacot et al., 2018); and the Random Feature Kernel (RFK), correspond-
ing to training only the weights of the linear output layer (Rahimi & Recht, 2007; Daniely et al.,
   2
     We show in Subsec. G.4 that our predictions remain true if the inputs are sampled uniformly in the d-
dimensional hypercube [0, 1]d or from a Gaussian distribution on Rd .


                                                    4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


2016). In both cases, the kernel reads:
                                                    X
                                  K(x, y) =                       ∂θ f (x)∂θ f (y).                          (4)
                                               trained params θ

The NTK and RFK of deep CNNs have been derived previously by Arora et al. (2019). In App. B we
report the functional forms of these kernels in the case of hierarchical CNNs. These kernels inherit
the hierarchical structure of the original architecture and their operations can be visualised again
via the tree graph of Fig. 1. In this case, the leaves represent products between the corresponding
elements of two inputs x and y., i.e. x1 y1 to xd yd , and the root the kernel output K(x, y). The
output can be built layer by layer by following the same recipe for each node: first sum the outputs
of the previous layer which are connected to the present node, then apply some nonlinear function
which depends on the activation function of the network. In particular, for each couple of inputs x
and y on the multisphere Mp Ss−1 , hierarchical kernels depend on x and y via the p dot products
between corresponding s-dimensional patches of x and y. As a comparison, Bietti & Bach (2021)
showed that the NTK and RFK of a fully-connected network of any depth depend on the full dot
product x·y, whereas those of a shallow CNN can be written as the sum of p kernels, each depending
on only one of the patch dot products (Favero et al., 2021).
Given the kernel, the associated integral operator reads
                                             Z
                              (TK f ) (x) :=        K(x, y)f (y)dp(y),                                       (5)
                                                    Ss−1
with dp(x) denoting the uniform distribution of input points on the multisphere. The spectrum
of this operator provides, via Mercer’s theorem (Mercer, 1909), an alternative representation of
the kernel K(x, y) and a basis for the space of functions that the kernel can approximate. The
asymptotic decay of the eigenvalues, in particular, is crucial for the generalisation properties of
the kernel, as it will be clarified at in Sec. 4. Since the input space is a product of s-dimensional
unit spheres and the kernel depends on the p scalar products between corresponding s-dimensional
patches of x and y, the eigenfunctions of TK are products of spherical harmonics acting on the
patches (see App. A for definitions and the relevant background). For the sake of clarity, we limit
the discussion in the main paper to the case s = 2, where, since each patch xi is entirely determined
by an angle θi , the multisphere Mp Ss−1 reduces to the p-dimensional torus and the eigenfunctions to
p-dimensional plane waves: eik·θ with θ := (θ1 , . . . , θp ) and label k := (k1 , . . . , kp ). In this case the
eigenvalues coincide with the p-dimensional Fourier transform of the kernel K (cos θ1 , . . . , cos θp )
and the large-k asymptotics are controlled by the nonanalyticities of the kernel (Widom, 1963). The
general case with patches of arbitrary dimension is presented in the appendix.

Theorem 3.1 (Spectrum of hierarchical kernels) Let TK be the integral operator associated with
a d-dimensional hierarchical kernel of depth L + 1, L > 1 and filter sizes (s1 , . . . , sL ) with s1 = 2.
Eigenvalues and eigenfunctions of TK can be organised into L sectors associated           Qwith   the hid-
                                                                                             l
den layers of the kernel/network. For each 1 ≤ l ≤ L, the l-th sector consists of ( l′ =1 sl′ )-local
eigenfunctions: functions of a single meta-patch xil+1→L+1 which cannot be written as linear com-
binations of functions of smaller meta-patches. The labels k of these eigenfunctions are such that
there is a meta-patch kil+1→L+1 of k with no vanishing sub-meta-patches and all the ki ’s outside
of kil+1→L+1 are 0 (because the eigenfunction is constant outside of xil+1→L+1 ). The correspond-
ing eigenvalue is degenerate with respect to the location of the meta-patch: we call it Λk(l)i →i .
                                                                                                      l+1   L+1
When ∥kil+1→L+1 ∥ → ∞, with k = ∥kil+1→L+1 ∥,

                            (l)
                          Λki            = C2,l k −2ν−deff (l) + o k −2ν−deff (l) ,                          (6)
                              l+1→L+1

with νNTK = 1/2, νRFK = 3/2 and deff the effective dimensionality of the meta-patches defined
in Eq. 3. C2,l is a strictly positive constant for l ≥ 2 whereas for l = 1 it can take two distinct strictly
positive values depending on the parity of ki2→L+1 .

The proof is in App. C, together with the extension to the s ≥ 3 case (Thm. C.1). It is useful to
compare the spectrum in the theorem with the limiting cases of a deep fully-connected network and
a shallow CNN. In the former case, the spectrum consists only of the L-th sector with pL = 1—the
                                              −2ν−p
global sector. The eigenvalues decay as ∥k∥         , with ν depending ultimately on the nonana-
lyticity of the network activation function (see Bietti & Bach (2021) or App. C) and p = deff (L)


                                                         5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


the effective dimensionality of the input. As a result, all eigenfunctions with the same ∥k∥ have
the same eigenvalue, even those depending on a subset of the input coordinates. For example, as-
sume that all the components of k are zero but k1 , i.e. the eigenfunction depends only on the first
2-dimensional patch: the eigenvalue is O(k1−2ν−p ). By contrast, for a hierarchical kernel, the eigen-
value is O(k1−2ν−1 ), much larger than the former as p > 1.
In the case of a shallow CNN the spectrum consists only of the first sector, so that each eigenfunction
depends only on one of the input patches. In this case only one of the k can be non-zero, say k1 ,
and the eigenvalue is O(k1−2ν−1 ). However, from (Favero et al., 2021), a kernel of this kind is only
able to approximate functions which depend on one of the input patches or linear combinations of
such functions. Instead, for a hierarchical kernel with pL = 1, the eigenfunctions of the L-th sector
are supported on the full input space. Then, if Λk > 0 for all k, hierarchical kernels are able to
approximate any function on the multisphere, dispensing with the need for fine-tuning the kernel to
the structure of the target function.
Overall, given an eigenfunction of a hierarchical kernel, the asymptotic scaling of the correspond-
ing eigenvalue depends on the spatial structure of the eigenfunction support. More specifically, the
effective dimensionality of the smallest meta-patch which contains all the variables that the eigen-
function depends on. In simple terms, the decay of an eigenvalue with k is slower if the associated
eigenfunction depends on a few adjacent patches—but not if the patches are far apart! This is a
property of hierarchical architectures which use nonlinear activation functions at all layers. Such a
feature disappears if all hidden layers apart from the first have polynomial (Bietti, 2022) or infinitely
smooth (Azevedo & Menegatto, 2015; Scetbon & Harchaoui, 2021) activation functions or if the
kernels are assumed to factorise over patches as in Geifman et al. (2022).


4   G ENERALISATION PROPERTIES AND ADAPTIVITY TO SPATIAL STRUCTURE

In this section, we study the implications of the peculiar spectra of hierarchical NTKs and RFKs
on the generalisation properties of and prove a form of adaptivity to the spatial structure of the
target function. We follow the classical analysis of Caponnetto & De Vito (2007) for kernel ridge
regression (see Bach (2021); Bietti (2022) for a modern treatment) and employ a spectral bias ansatz
for the ridgeless limit (Bordelon et al., 2020; Spigler et al., 2020).

Theory of kernel ridge regression and source-capacity conditions. Given a set of n training
                   n  i.i.d.
points {(xµ , yµ )}µ=1 ∼ p(x, y) for some probability density function p(x, y) and a regularisation
parameter λ > 0, the kernel ridge regression estimate of the functional relation between x’s and y’s,
or predictor, is
                                        (     n
                                                                            )
                                           1 X                  2
                      fλn (x) = argmin           (f (xµ ) − yµ ) + λ ∥f ∥H ,                      (7)
                                  f ∈H     n µ=1

where H is the Reproducing Kernel Hilbert Space (RKHS) of a (hierarchical) kernel K. If f (x)
denotes the model from which the kernel was obtained via Eq. 4, the space H is contained in the span
of the network features {∂θ f (x)}θ in the infinite-width limit. Alternatively, H can be defined via
the kernel’s eigenvalues Λk and eigenfunctions Yk : denoting with fk the projections of a function f
onto the kernel eigenfunctions, then f belongs to H if it belongs to the span of the eigenfunctions and
                                      2
                                           X
                                  ∥f ∥H =     (Λk )−1 |fk |2 < +∞.                                   (8)
                                            k≥0

The performance of the kernel is measured by the generalisation error and its expectation over
training sets of fixed size n (denoted with En )
                            Z
                                                       2
                   ϵ(fλn ) = dxdy p(x, y) (fλn (x) − y) , ϵ(λ, n) = En [ϵ(fλn )] ,         (9)

or the excess generalisation  error, obtained by subtracting from ϵ(λ, n) the error of the optimal
predictor f ∗ (x) = dy p(x, y)y. The decay of the error with n can be controlled via two exponents,
                   R
depending on the details of the kernel and the target function. Specifically, if α ≥ 1 and r ≥ 1 − 1/α


                                                   6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


satisfy the following conditions,
                                                 X
                                           1/α
                             capacity: Tr TK    =  (Λk )1/α < +∞,
                                                             k≥0
                                             1−r         2       X
                                source:    TK 2
                                                   f∗        =         (Λk )−r |fk∗ |2 < +∞,                  (10)
                                                         H
                                                                 k≥0

then, by choosing a n-dependent regularisation parameter λn ∼ n− /(αr + 1) , one gets the following
                                                                                      α


bound on generalisation (Caponnetto & De Vito, 2007):
                                                                             αr
                                          ϵ(λn , n) − ϵ(f ∗ ) ≤ C ′ n− αr+1 .                                 (11)

Spectral bias ansatz for ridgeless regression. The bound above is actually tight in the noisy
setting, for instance when having labels yµ = f ∗ (xµ ) + ξµ with ξµ Gaussian. In a noiseless problem
where yµ = f ∗ (xµ ) one expects to find the best performances in the ridgeless limit λ → 0, so
that the rate of Eq. 11 is only an upper bound. In the ridgeless case—where the correspondence
between kernel methods and infinitely-wide neural networks actually holds—there are unfortunately
no rigorous results for the decay of the generalisation error. Therefore, we provide a heuristic
derivation of the error decay based on a spectral bias ansatz. Consider the projections of the target
function f ∗ on the eigenfunctions of the student kernel Yk (fk∗ ) 3 and assume that kernel methods
learn only the n projections corresponding to the highest eigenvalues. Then, if the decay of fk∗ with
k is sufficiently slow, one has (recall that both λ and ϵ(f ∗ ) vanish in this setting)
                                                    X
                                       ϵ(n) ∼               |fk∗ |2 ,                             (12)
                                                        k s.t. Λk <Λ(n)

with Λ(n) the value of the n-th largest eigenvalue of the kernel. This result can be derived using
the replica method of statistical physics (see Canatar et al. (2021); Loureiro et al. (2021); Tomasini
et al. (2022) and App. E) or by assuming that input points lie on a lattice (Spigler et al., 2020).
These two approaches rely on the very same features of the problem, namely the asymptotic decay
of Λk and |fk∗ |2 —see also Cui et al. (2021). For instance, the capacity condition depends only on
the kernel spectrum: α ≥ 1 since Tr (TK ) is finite (Schölkopf et al., 2002); the specific value is
determined by the decay of the ordered eigenvalues with their rank, which in turn depends on the
scaling of Λk with k. Similarly, the power-law decay of the ordered eigenvalues with the rank deter-
mines the scaling of the n-th largest eigenvalue, Λ(n) ∼ n−α . The source condition characterises
the regularity of the target function relative to the kernel and depends explicitly of the decay of |fk∗ |2
with k, as does the right-hand side of Eq. 12. This condition was used by Bach (2021) to prove that
kernel methods are adaptive to the smoothness of the target function: the projections of smoother
targets on the eigenfunctions display a faster decay with k, thus allowing to choose a larger r and
leading to better generalisation performances. The following corollary of Thm. 3.1 (proof and ex-
tension to s1 ≥ 3 presented in App. D, Cor. D.1) shows that, since the spectrum can be partitioned
as in Thm. 3.1, hierarchical kernels display adaptivity to targets which depend only on a subset of
the input variables. Specific examples of bounds are considered explicitly in Sec. 5.
Corollary 4.1 (Adaptivity to spatial structure) Let TK be the integral operator of the kernel of a
hierarchical deep CNN as in Thm. 3.1 with s = 2. Then: i) the capacity exponent α is controlled by
the largest sector of the spectrum, i.e.

                                   1/α
                             Tr TK        < +∞ ⇔ α < 1 + 2ν/deff (L);                         (13)
ii) the source exponent r is controlled by the structure of the target function f ∗ , i.e., if there is
l ≤ L such that f ∗ depends only on some meta-patch xil+1→L+1 , then only the first l sectors of the
spectrum contribute to the source condition,
                       2      l                                     −r                 2
                1−r                                    ′
                                                        (l )
                            X      X         X
              TK 2 f ∗   =                            Λki               fk∗i ′           .        (14)
                            H                                             l′ +1→L+1            l +1→L+1
                                  l′ =1 il′ +1→L+1 ki ′
                                                        l +1→L+1

The same holds if f ∗ is a linear combination of such functions. As a result, when deff (L) is large
and α → 1, the decay of the error is controlled by the effective dimensionality of the target deff (l).
   3
       We are again limiting the presentation to the case s = 2 but the extension to the general case is immediate.


                                                             7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


5    E XAMPLES AND EXPERIMENTS
Source-capacity bound for functions of controlled smoothness and deff . Consider a target func-
tion f ∗ which only depends on the meta-patch xil+1→L+1 as in Cor. 4.1. Combining the source
condition (Eq. 14) with the asymptotic scaling of eigenvalues (Eq. 6), we get
                       1−r     2              X                           2
                     TK 2 f ∗    < +∞ ⇔           ∥k∥r(2ν+deff (l)) |fk∗ | < +∞,           (15)
                                 H
                                                  k
where ν = 1/2 (3/2) for the NTK (RFK) and k denotes the meta-patch kil+1→L+1 without the
subscript to ease notation. Since the eigenvalues depend on the norm of k, Eq. 15 is equivalent to a
finite-norm   condition for all the derivatives of f ∗ up to order m < r (2ν + deff (l))/2, ∥∆m/2 f ∗ ∥2 =
         2m ∗ 2
             |fk | < + ∞ with ∆ denoting the Laplace operator. As a result, if f ∗ has derivatives
P
   k ∥k∥
of finite norm up to the m-th, then the source exponent can be tuned to r = 2m/(2ν + deff (l)),
inversely proportional to the effective dimensionality of f ∗ . Since the exponent on the right-hand
side of Eq. 11 is an increasing function of r, the smaller the effective dimensionality of f ∗ the faster
the decay of the error—hence hierarchical kernels are adaptive to the spatial structure of f ∗ . In
particular, from Eq. 11 with α = 1 + 2ν/deff (L),
                                                          2m (2ν + deff (L))
                 ϵ(n) ≤ C ′ n−β with β =                                                   .           (16)
                                            2m (2ν + deff (L)) + (2ν + deff (l)) deff (L)
For instance, if pL = 1 then deff (L) = p = d/2 (the number of 2-dim. patches). Even when p ≫ 1,
if f ∗ depends only on a finite-dimensional meta-patch (or is a sum of such functions) the exponent
β converges to the finite value 2m/(2(m + ν) + deff (l)). In stark contrast, using a fully-connected
kernel to learn the same target results in r = 2m/(2ν + p), thus β = 2m/(2m + p)—vanishing as
1/p when p ≫ 1, thus cursed by dimensionality.

Rates from spectral bias ansatz. The same picture P        emerges when estimating the actual de-
cay of the error from Eq. 12. Λ(n) ∼ n−α , whereas k ∥k∥2m |fk∗ |2 < + ∞ implies |fk∗ |2 ≲
∥k∥−2m−deff (l) for a target supported on a deff (l)-dimensional meta-patch. Plugging such decays
in Eq. 12 we obtain (details in Subsec. F.1)
                                                      2m      2ν + deff (L)
                         ϵ(n) ∼ n−β with β =                                .                    (17)
                                                 2ν + deff (l) deff (L)
Again, with pL = 1 and deff (L) = p, the exponent remains finite for p ≫ 1. Notice that we recover
the results of Favero et al. (2021) by using a shallow local kernel if the target is supported on s-
dimensional patches. These results show that hierarchical kernels play significantly better with the
approximation-estimation trade-off than shallow local kernels, as they are able to approximate global
functions of the input while not being cursed when the target function has a local structure.

Numerical experiments. We test our predictions by training a hierarchical kernel (student) on
a random Gaussian function with zero mean and covariance given by another hierarchical kernel
(teacher). A learning problem is fully specified by the depths, sets of filter sizes, and smoothness
exponents ν of teacher and student kernels. In particular, the depth and the set of filter sizes of
the teacher kernel control the effective dimension of the target function. Fig. 2 shows the learning
curves (solid lines) together with the predictions from Eq. 17 (dashed lines), confirming the picture
emerging from our calculations. Panel (a) of Fig. 2 shows a depth-four student learning depth-
two, depth-three, and depth-four teachers. This student is not cursed in the first two cases and is
cursed in the third one, which corresponds to a global target function. Panel (b) illustrates the curse
of dimensionality with the effective input dimension deff (L) by comparing the learning curves of
depth-three students learning global target functions with an increasing number of variables. All
our simulations are in excellent agreement with the predictions of Eq. 17. The bounds coming
from Eq. 16 would display a slightly slower decay, as sketched in Fig. 1, right panel. All the details
of numerical experiments are reported in App. G, together with a comparison between the ridgeless
and optimally-regularised cases (Fig. S3) and additional results for: s1 ≥ 3 (Fig. S2); kernels with
overlapping patches (Fig. S5); different input spaces (Fig. S4) and the CIFAR-10 dataset (Fig. S6).
Notice that when the teacher kernel is a hierarchical RFK, the target is equivalent to the output
of a randomly-initialised, infinitely-wide CNN Novak et al. (2019). Although this target is highly
structured, it leads to the same rate that we would have obtained for a global non-hierarchical target:


                                                      8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


    a 100                                               b

              T: (2), S: (2, 2, 2)
     10 1       = 1s+1 ddeffeff
              T: (2, 2), S: (2, 2, 2)                    10 1       T, S: (2, 2)
                                                                    T, S: (2, 3)
                = (s1 1 +1)dseff2 deff                              T, S: (2, 4)
              T, S: (2, 2, 2)                                       T, S: (2, 5)
     10 2       = 1/deff                                              = 1/deff
                              103             104                                  103              104
                               n                                                    n
Figure 2: Learning curves for deep convolutional NTKs in a teacher-student setting. a. Depth-four
student learning depth-two, depth-three, and depth-four teachers. b. Depth-three models cursed by
the effective input dimensionality deff (L). The numbers inside brackets are the sequence of filter
sizes of the kernels. Solid lines are the results of experiments averaged over 16 realisations with
the shaded areas representing the empirical standard deviations. The predicted asymptotic scaling
ϵ ∼ n−β are reported as dashed lines. Details on the numerical experiments are reported in App. G.

Lemma 5.1 (Curse of dimensionality for hierarchical targets) The problem of regression of the
output of a randomly-initialised and infinitely-wide hierarchical network suffers from the curse of
dimensionality, in the sense that no methods using n examples can achieve a generalisation error
decaying faster than n−β with β = 3/deff (L).
This lemma is a simple consequence of the equivalence of the predictors of kernel ridgeless regres-
sion and Bayesian inference, which implies that the rate achieved when learning a Gaussian random
function with a kernel matching the covariance kernel of the function is Bayes-optimal (Kanagawa
et al., 2018). The optimal rate n−3/deff (L) comes from Eq. 17 with l = L and m = ν = 3/2. We
conclude that, despite their intrinsically hierarchical structure, these targets cannot be good models
of learnable tasks.

6      C ONCLUSIONS AND OUTLOOK
We have proved that deep CNNs can adapt to the spatial scale of the target function, thus beating the
curse of dimensionality if the target depends only on local groups of variables. Yet, if considered as
‘teachers’, they generate functions that cannot be learnt efficiently in high dimensions, even in the
Bayes-optimal setting where the student is matched to the teacher. Thus, the architectures we con-
sidered are not good models of the hierarchical structure of real data which are efficiently learnable.
Enforcing a stronger notion of compositionality is an interesting endeavour for the future. Follow-
ing Poggio et al. (2017), one may consider a much smaller family of functions of the form
   fil+1→L+1 (xil+1→L+1 ) = fil+1→L+1 (fil=1→L+1 (xil=1→L+1 ), . . . , fil=sl →L+1 (xil=sl →L+1 )). (18)
From an information theory viewpoint, Schmidt-Hieber (2020); Finocchio & Schmidt-Hieber (2021)
showed that it is possible to learn such functions efficiently. However, these arguments do not pro-
vide guarantees for any practical algorithm such as stochastic gradient descent. Moreover, prelimi-
nary results (not shown) assuming that the functions f ’s are random Gaussian functions suggest that
these tasks are not learnable efficiently by a hierarchical CNN in the kernel regime—see also Gior-
dano et al. (2022). It is unclear whether this remains true when the networks closely resemble the
structure of Eq. 18 as in Poggio et al. (2017), or when the networks are trained in a regime where
features can be learnt from data. Recently, for instance, Ingrosso & Goldt (2022) have observed that
under certain conditions locality can be learnt from scratch. It is not clear whether compositionality
can also be learnt, beyond some very stylised settings (Abbe et al., 2022).
Finally, another direction to explore is the stability of the task toward smooth transformations or
diffeomorphisms. This form of stability has been proposed as a key element to understanding how
the curse of dimensionality is beaten for image datasets (Bruna & Mallat, 2013; Petrini et al., 2021).
Such a property can be enforced with pooling operations (Bietti & Mairal, 2019; Bietti et al., 2021);
therefore diagonalising the NTK in this case as well would be of high interest.


                                                    9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


R EFERENCES
Emmanuel Abbe, Enric Boix Adsera, and Theodor Misiakiewicz. The merged-staircase property: a
  necessary and nearly sufficient condition for sgd learning of sparse functions on two-layer neu-
  ral networks. In Proceedings of Thirty Fifth Conference on Learning Theory, volume 178 of
  Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 4782–4887. PMLR, 02–05 Jul 2022.
Sanjeev Arora, Simon S Du, Wei Hu, Zhiyuan Li, Russ R Salakhutdinov, and Ruosong Wang. On
  exact computation with an infinitely wide neural net. Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 32, 2019.
Kendall Atkinson and Weimin Han. Spherical harmonics and approximations on the unit sphere:
  an introduction, volume 2044. Springer Science & Business Media, 2012.
Douglas Azevedo and Valdir A Menegatto. Eigenvalues of dot-product kernels on the sphere. Pro-
  ceeding Series of the Brazilian Society of Computational and Applied Mathematics, 3(1), 2015.
Francis Bach. Breaking the curse of dimensionality with convex neural networks. The Journal of
  Machine Learning Research, 18(1):629–681, 2017.
Francis Bach. Learning theory from first principles, 2021.
Irving Biederman. Recognition-by-components: a theory of human image understanding. Psycho-
   logical review, 94(2):115, 1987.
Alberto Bietti. Approximation and learning with deep convolutional models: a kernel perspective.
  In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2022.
Alberto Bietti and Francis Bach. Deep equals shallow for relu networks in kernel regimes. In ICLR
  2021-International Conference on Learning Representations, pp. 1–22, 2021.
Alberto Bietti and Julien Mairal. On the inductive bias of neural tangent kernels. Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 32, 2019.
Alberto Bietti, Luca Venturi, and Joan Bruna. On the sample complexity of learning under geometric
  stability. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:18673–18684, 2021.
Blake Bordelon, Abdulkadir Canatar, and Cengiz Pehlevan. Spectrum dependent learning curves in
  kernel regression and wide neural networks. In International Conference on Machine Learning,
  pp. 1024–1034. PMLR, 2020.
Joan Bruna and Stéphane Mallat. Invariant scattering convolution networks. IEEE transactions on
  pattern analysis and machine intelligence, 35(8):1872–1886, 2013.
Abdulkadir Canatar, Blake Bordelon, and Cengiz Pehlevan. Spectral bias and task-model alignment
  explain generalization in kernel regression and infinitely wide neural networks. Nature communi-
  cations, 12(1):1–12, 2021.
Andrea Caponnetto and Ernesto De Vito. Optimal rates for the regularized least-squares algorithm.
  Foundations of Computational Mathematics, 7(3):331–368, 2007.
Youngmin Cho and Lawrence K. Saul. Kernel methods for deep learning. In Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems 22, pp. 342–350. Curran Associates, Inc., 2009.
Hugo Cui, Bruno Loureiro, Florent Krzakala, and Lenka Zdeborova. Generalization error rates
  in kernel regression: The crossover from the noiseless to noisy regime. In Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 2021.
Amit Daniely, Roy Frostig, and Yoram Singer. Toward deeper understanding of neural networks:
 The power of initialization and a dual view on expressivity. Advances In Neural Information
 Processing Systems, 29, 2016.
Arturo Deza, Qianli Liao, Andrzej Banburski, and Tomaso Poggio. Hierarchically compositional
  tasks and deep convolutional networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.13915, 2020.


                                                 10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Costas Efthimiou and Christopher Frye. Spherical harmonics in p dimensions. World Scientific,
  2014.
Alessandro Favero, Francesco Cagnetta, and Matthieu Wyart. Locality defeats the curse of dimen-
  sionality in convolutional teacher-student scenarios. Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 34, 2021.
Gianluca Finocchio and Johannes Schmidt-Hieber. Posterior contraction for deep gaussian process
  priors. arXiv preprint arXiv:2105.07410, 2021.
Amnon Geifman, Meirav Galun, David Jacobs, and Ronen Basri. On the spectral bias of convolu-
 tional neural tangent and gaussian process kernels. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.09255, 2022.
Matteo Giordano, Kolyan Ray, and Johannes Schmidt-Hieber. On the inability of gaussian process
 regression to optimally learn compositional functions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.07764, 2022.
Joel Hestness, Sharan Narang, Newsha Ardalani, Gregory Diamos, Heewoo Jun, Hassan Kianinejad,
  Md Patwary, Mostofa Ali, Yang Yang, and Yanqi Zhou. Deep learning scaling is predictable,
  empirically. arXiv preprint arXiv:1712.00409, 2017.
Alessandro Ingrosso and Sebastian Goldt. Data-driven emergence of convolutional structure in
  neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.00565, 2022.
Arthur Jacot, Franck Gabriel, and Clément Hongler. Neural tangent kernel: Convergence and gen-
  eralization in neural networks. Advances in neural information processing systems, 31, 2018.
Arthur Jacot, Berfin Simsek, Francesco Spadaro, Clément Hongler, and Franck Gabriel. Implicit
  regularization of random feature models. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp.
  4631–4640. PMLR, 2020a.
Arthur Jacot, Berfin Simsek, Francesco Spadaro, Clément Hongler, and Franck Gabriel. Kernel
  alignment risk estimator: Risk prediction from training data. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 33, 2020b.
Motonobu Kanagawa, Philipp Hennig, Dino Sejdinovic, and Bharath K Sriperumbudur. Gaus-
 sian processes and kernel methods: A review on connections and equivalences. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:1807.02582, 2018.
Michael Kohler, A Krzyzak, and Benjamin Walter. On the rate of convergence of image classifiers
 based on convolutional neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.01526, 2020.
Risi Kondor and Shubhendu Trivedi. On the generalization of equivariance and convolution in neural
  networks to the action of compact groups. In International Conference on Machine Learning.
  PMLR, 2018.
Jaehoon Lee, Yasaman Bahri, Roman Novak, Samuel S Schoenholz, Jeffrey Pennington, and Jascha
  Sohl-Dickstein. Deep neural networks as gaussian processes. arXiv preprint arXiv:1711.00165,
  2017.
Jaehoon Lee, Lechao Xiao, Samuel Schoenholz, Yasaman Bahri, Roman Novak, Jascha Sohl-
  Dickstein, and Jeffrey Pennington. Wide neural networks of any depth evolve as linear models
  under gradient descent. Advances in neural information processing systems, 32, 2019.
Bruno Loureiro, Cedric Gerbelot, Hugo Cui, Sebastian Goldt, Florent Krzakala, Marc Mezard, and
  Lenka Zdeborová. Learning curves of generic features maps for realistic datasets with a teacher-
  student model. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:18137–18151, 2021.
Eran Malach and Shai Shalev-Shwartz. Computational separation between convolutional and fully-
  connected networks. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2021.
James Mercer. Xvi. functions of positive and negative type, and their connection the theory of
  integral equations. Philosophical transactions of the royal society of London. Series A, containing
  papers of a mathematical or physical character, 209(441-458):415–446, 1909.


                                                 11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Marc Mézard, Giorgio Parisi, and Miguel Angel Virasoro. Spin glass theory and beyond: An In-
 troduction to the Replica Method and Its Applications, volume 9. World Scientific Publishing
 Company, 1987.
Theodor Misiakiewicz and Song Mei. Learning with convolution and pooling operations in kernel
  methods. arXiv preprint arXiv:2111.08308, 2021.
Roman Novak, Lechao Xiao, Yasaman Bahri, Jaehoon Lee, Greg Yang, Daniel A. Abolafia, Jeffrey
  Pennington, and Jascha Sohl-dickstein. Bayesian deep convolutional networks with many chan-
  nels are gaussian processes. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2019.
Jonas Paccolat, Stefano Spigler, and Matthieu Wyart. How isotropic kernels perform on simple
  invariants. Machine Learning: Science and Technology, 2(2):025020, 2021.
Adam Paszke, Sam Gross, Francisco Massa, Adam Lerer, James Bradbury, Gregory Chanan, Trevor
  Killeen, Zeming Lin, Natalia Gimelshein, Luca Antiga, et al. Pytorch: An imperative style, high-
  performance deep learning library. Advances in neural information processing systems, 32, 2019.
Leonardo Petrini, Alessandro Favero, Mario Geiger, and Matthieu Wyart. Relative stability toward
  diffeomorphisms indicates performance in deep nets. Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 34, 2021.
Tomaso Poggio, Hrushikesh Mhaskar, Lorenzo Rosasco, Brando Miranda, and Qianli Liao. Why
  and when can deep-but not shallow-networks avoid the curse of dimensionality: a review. Inter-
  national Journal of Automation and Computing, 14(5):503–519, 2017.
Tomaso Poggio, Andrzej Banburski, and Qianli Liao. Theoretical issues in deep networks. Proceed-
  ings of the National Academy of Sciences, 117(48):30039–30045, 2020.
Ali Rahimi and Benjamin Recht. Random features for large-scale kernel machines. Advances in
  neural information processing systems, 20, 2007.
Meyer Scetbon and Zaid Harchaoui. A spectral analysis of dot-product kernels. In International
 Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pp. 3394–3402. PMLR, 2021.
Johannes Schmidt-Hieber. Nonparametric regression using deep neural networks with relu activation
  function. The Annals of Statistics, 48(4):1875–1897, 2020.
Bernhard Schölkopf, Alexander J Smola, Francis Bach, et al. Learning with kernels: support vector
  machines, regularization, optimization, and beyond. MIT press, 2002.
Alex Smola, Zoltán Ovári, and Robert C Williamson. Regularization with dot-product kernels.
  Advances in neural information processing systems, 13, 2000.
Stefano Spigler, Mario Geiger, and Matthieu Wyart. Asymptotic learning curves of kernel methods:
  empirical data versus teacher–student paradigm. Journal of Statistical Mechanics: Theory and
  Experiment, 2020(12):124001, 2020.
Umberto M. Tomasini, Antonio Sclocchi, and Matthieu Wyart. Failure and success of the spectral
 bias prediction for laplace kernel ridge regression: the case of low-dimensional data. In Proceed-
 ings of the 39th International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 162 of Proceedings of
 Machine Learning Research, pp. 21548–21583. PMLR, Jul 2022.
Martin J Wainwright. High-dimensional statistics: A non-asymptotic viewpoint, volume 48. Cam-
 bridge University Press, 2019.
Harold Widom. Asymptotic behavior of the eigenvalues of certain integral equations. Transactions
  of the American Mathematical Society, 109(2):278–295, 1963.
Lechao Xiao. Eigenspace restructuring: a principle of space and frequency in neural networks. In
  Conference on Learning Theory, pp. 4888–4944. PMLR, 2022.
Lechao Xiao and Jeffrey Pennington. Synergy and symmetry in deep learning: Interactions between
  the data, model, and inference algorithm. In Proceedings of the 39th International Conference on
  Machine Learning, volume 162, pp. 24347–24369. PMLR, 17–23 Jul 2022.


                                                12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Hao Henry Zhou, Yunyang Xiong, and Vikas Singh. Building bayesian neural networks with blocks:
  On structure, interpretability and uncertainty. arXiv preprint arXiv:1806.03563, 2018.


                                             13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


S UPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL

A Harmonic analysis on the sphere                                                                    14
    A.1 Dot-product kernels on the sphere . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        15
    A.2 Multi-dot-product kernels on the multi-sphere . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        16

B RFK and NTK of deep convolutional networks                                                         17

C Spectra of deep convolutional kernels                                                              18
    C.1 Singular expansion of hierarchical kernels . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       18
    C.2 Patches on the ring . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      21
    C.3 Patches on the s-dimensional hypersphere . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         22
    C.4 General depth . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      25

D Generalisation bounds for kernel regression and spatial adaptivity                                 25
    D.1 Classical generalisation bounds . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      25
    D.2 Extension of Cor. 4.1 to patches on the hypersphere . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        26
    D.3 Decay of eigenvalues with the rank . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       27

E Statistical mechanics of generalisation in kernel regression                                       28

F Examples                                                                                           29
    F.1   Rates from spectral bias ansatz . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    29

G Numerical experiments                                                                              29
    G.1 Experimental setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       29
    G.2 Teacher-student learning curves . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        29
    G.3 Illustration of different teacher-student scenarios    . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   30
    G.4 Extensions to different normalisations and overlapping patches . . . . . . . . . . .         33
    G.5 CIFAR-2 learning curves . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        34

A    H ARMONIC ANALYSIS ON THE SPHERE

This appendix collects some introductory background on spherical harmonics and dot-product ker-
nels on the sphere Smola et al. (2000). See Efthimiou & Frye (2014); Atkinson & Han (2012); Bach
(2017) for a complete description. Spherical harmonics are homogeneous polynomials on the sphere
Ss−1 = {x ∈ Rs | ∥x∥ = 1}, with ∥·∥ denoting the L2 norm. Given the polynomial degree k ∈ N,
there are Nk,s linearly independent spherical harmonics of degree k on Ss−1 , with
                                                    (
                                                       N0,d = 1 ∀d,

                           2k + s − 2 s + k − 3
                  Nk,s =                           ,                                        (S1)
                                k         k−1          Nk,d ∼ k d−2 for k ≫ 1.

Thus, we can introduce a set of Nk,s spherical harmonics Yk,ℓ for each k, with ℓ ranging in
1, . . . , Nk,s , which are orthonormal with respect to the uniform measure on the sphere dτ (x),
                                                Z
                         ⟨Yk,ℓ , Yk,ℓ′ ⟩Ss−1 :=    dτ (x) Yk,ℓ (x)Yk,ℓ′ (x) = δℓ,ℓ′ .             (S2)
                                            Ss−1


                                                   14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Because of the orthogonality of homogeneous polynomials with a different degree, the set {Yk,ℓ }k,ℓ
is a complete orthonormal basis for the space of square-integrable functions on the s-dimensional
unit sphere. Furthermore, spherical harmonics are eigenfunctions of the Laplace-Beltrami operator
∆, which is nothing but the restriction of the standard Laplace operator to Ss−1 .

                                      ∆Yk,ℓ = −k(k + s − 2)Yk,ℓ .                                             (S3)

The Laplace-Beltrami operator ∆ can also be used to characterise the differentiability of functions
f on the sphere via the L2 norm of some power of ∆ applied to f .
By fixing a direction y in Sd−1 one can select, for each k, the only spherical harmonic of degree k
which is invariant for rotations that leave y unchanged. This particular spherical harmonic is, in fact,
a function of x · y and is called the Legendre polynomial of degree k, Pk,s (x · y) (also referred to as
Gegenbauer polynomial). Legendre polynomials can be written as a combination of the orthonormal
spherical harmonics Yk,ℓ via the addition formula (Atkinson & Han, 2012, Thm. 2.9),

                                                        Nk,s
                                                  1 X
                                Pk,s (x · y) =        Yk,ℓ (x)Yk,ℓ (y).                                       (S4)
                                                 Nk,s
                                                        ℓ=1

Alternatively, Pk,s is given explicitly as a function of t = x · y ∈ [−1, +1] via the Rodrigues for-
mula (Atkinson & Han, 2012, Thm. 2.23),
                                  k
                                        Γ s−1

                                                                   dk

                               1             2             2
                                                               3−s              s−3
                                                                             2 k+ 2
                Pk,s (t) = −                         1 − t      2
                                                                       1 − t        .          (S5)
                                      Γ k + s−1

                               2               2
                                                                   dtk

Legendre polynomials are orthogonal on [−1, +1] with respect to the measure with density (1 −
t2 )(s−3)/2 , which is the probability density function of the scalar product between two points on
Ss−1 .
                         Z +1
                                           s−3                   |Ss−1 | δk,k′
                              dt 1 − t2 2 Pk,s (t)Pk′ ,s (t) = s−2             ,               (S6)
                          −1                                     |S | Nk,s

with |Ss−1 | denoting the surface area of the s-dimensional unit sphere.
To sum up, given x, y ∈ Ss−1 , functions of x or y can be expressed as a sum of projections on
the orthonormal spherical harmonics {Yk,ℓ }k,ℓ , whereas functions of x · y can be expressed as a
sum of projections on the Legendre polynomials {Pk,s (x · y)}k . The relationship between the two
expansions is elucidated in the Funk-Hecke formula (Atkinson & Han, 2012, Thm. 2.22),
                                                                  Z +1
                                                        |Ss−2 |
         Z
                                                                                       s−3
                  dτ (y) f (x · y)Yk,ℓ (y) = Yk,ℓ (x)                    dt 1 − t2      2
                                                                                             f (t)Pk,s (t).   (S7)
           Ss−1                                         |Ss−1 |    −1

If the function f has continuous derivatives up to the k-th order in [−1, +1], then one can plug
Rodrigues’ formula in the right-hand side of Funk-Hecke formula and get, after k integrations by
parts,

                                                       Γ s−1
                                                                     Z +1
                                            |Ss−2 |
   Z
                                                                                                k+ s−3
         dτ (y) f (x · y)Yk,ℓ (y) = Yk,ℓ (x) s−1 k           2
                                                               s−1
                                                                           dt f (k) (t) 1 − t2      2
                                                                                                       ,
    Ss−1                                    |S | 2 Γ k + 2            −1
                                                                                                      (S8)
with f (k) (t) denoting the k-th order derivative of f in t. This trick also applies to functions which
are not k times differentiable at ±1, provided the boundary terms due to integration by parts vanish.

A.1    D OT- PRODUCT KERNELS ON THE SPHERE

Dot-product kernels are kernels which depend on the two inputs x and y via their scalar product
x · y. When the inputs lie on the unit sphere Ss−1 , one can use the machinery introduced in the
previous section to arrive immediately at the Mercer’s decomposition of the kernel Smola et al.


                                                    15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


(2000).
                     X     |Ss−2 | +1
                                  Z
                                              2
                                                  s−3
          K(x · y) =   Nk,s s−1       dt 1 − t     2
                                                      K(t)Pk,s (t) Pk,s (x · y)
                           |S | −1
                        k≥0

                         X   |Ss−2 | Z +1                                             N k,s
                                                             2
                                                                   s−3                X
                    =                             dt 1 − t          2
                                                                         K(t)Pk,s (t)       Yk,ℓ (x)Yk,ℓ (y)    (S9)
                                |Ss−1 |      −1
                        k≥0                                                             ℓ=1
                                    Nk,s
                         X          X
                    :=         Λk          Yk,ℓ (x)Yk,ℓ (y).
                         k≥0        ℓ=1

In the first line we have just decomposed K into projections onto the Legendre polynomials, the
second line follows immediately from the addition formula, and the third is just a definition of the
eigenvalues Λk . Notice that the eigenfunctions of the kernel are orthonormal spherical harmonics
and the eigenvalues are degenerate with respect to the index ℓ. The Reproducing Kernel Hilbert
Space (RKHS) of K can be characterised as follows,
                                                                                   
                                                   X N    Xk,s
                                                                ⟨f, Yk,l ⟩
                                                                          2
                                                                           s−1
                                                                                    
             H = f : Ss−1 → R s. t. ∥f ∥H :=                              S
                                                                               < +∞ .         (S10)
                                                                    Λk             
                                                             k≥0,Λk ̸=0 ℓ=1


A.2    M ULTI - DOT- PRODUCT KERNELS ON THE MULTI - SPHERE

Mercer’s decomposition of dot-product kernels extends naturally to the case considered in this paper,
where the input space is the Cartesian product of p s-dimensional unit sphere,
                                                                                              p
                                                                                              ą
              Mp Ss−1 = {x = (x1 , . . . , xp ) xi ∈ Ss−1 ∀ i = 1, . . . , p =                      Ss−1       (S11)
                                                                                              i=1

which we refer to as the multi-sphere following the notation of Geifman et al. (2022). After defining
a scalar product between functions on Mp Ss−1 by direct extension of Eq. S2, one can immediately
find a set of orthonormal polynomials by taking products of spherical harmonics. With the multi-
index notation k = (k1 , . . . , kp ), ℓ = (ℓ1 , . . . , ℓp ), for all x ∈ Mp Ss−1
                p
               Y                                                            2ki + s − 2 s + ki − 3
   Ỹk,ℓ (x) =     Yki ,ℓi (xi ), with ki ≥ 0, ℓi = 1, . . . , Nki ,s =                             . (S12)
               i=1
                                                                                 ki       ki − 1

These product spherical harmonics Ỹk,ℓ (x) span the space of square-integrable functions on
Mp Ss−1 . Furthermore, as each spherical harmonic is an eigenfunction of the Laplace-Beltrami
operator, Ỹk,ℓ is an eigenfunction of the sum of Laplace-Beltrami operators on the p unit spheres,
                                p
                                      ! p              p
                                                                              !
                              X          Y            X
               ∆p,s Ỹk,ℓ :=       ∆i       Yki ,ℓi =     ((−ki )(ki + s − 2)) Ỹk,ℓ .         (S13)
                                    i=1        i=1                  i=1

We can thus characterise the differentiability of functions of the multi-sphere Xs,p via finiteness in
L2 norm of some power of ∆p,s .
Similarly, we can consider products of Legendre polynomials to obtain a set of orthogonal polynomi-
als on [−1, 1]p (see Geifman et al. (2022), appendix A). Then, any function f on Mp Ss−1 × Mp Ss−1
which depends only on the p scalar products between patches,
                                      f (x, y) = g(x1 · y1 , . . . , xp · yp ),                                (S14)
can be written as a sum of projections on products of Legendre polynomials
                                                             p
                                                             Y
                                              P̃k,s (t) :=         Pki ,s (ti ).                               (S15)
                                                             i=1

Following Geifman et al. (2022), we call such functions multi-dot-product kernels. When fixing one
of the two arguments of f (say x), f becomes a function on Mp Ss−1 × Mp Ss−1 and can be written


                                                             16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


as a sum of projections on the Ỹk,ℓ ’s. The two expansions are related by the following generalised
Funk-Hecke formula,

       p Z
                             !
       Y
                    dτ (yi ) g(x1 · y1 , . . . , xp · yp )Ỹk,ℓ (y) =
       i=1   Ss−1
                                                  p     p Z +1
                                                                                                        !                          (S16)
                                      |Ss−2 |
                                                        Y                           s−3
                     Ỹk,ℓ (y)                                      dti 1 − t2i      2
                                                                                          Pki ,s (ti )      g(t1 , . . . , tp ).
                                      |Ss−1 |           i=1   −1


Having introduced the product spherical harmonics Ỹk,ℓ as basis of Mp Ss−1 and the product Leg-
endre polynomials P̃k,s (t) as basis of [−1, +1]p , the Mercer’s decomposition of multi-dot-product
kernels follows immediately.

                              p                          Z +1                                       !
                       X      Y         |Ss−2 |                                   s−3
K ({xi · yi }i ) =                Nki ,s s−1                      dti 1 − t2i      2
                                                                                        Pki ,s (ti ) K ({ti }i ) Pk,s ({xi · yi }i )
                              i=1
                                        |S |                 −1
                       k≥0
                                  Nk,s
                       X          X
                   =         Λk          Yk,ℓ (x)Yk,ℓ (y).
                       k≥0        ℓ=1
                                                                                                                                   (S17)



B     RFK AND NTK OF DEEP CONVOLUTIONAL NETWORKS

This appendix gives the functional forms of the RFK and NTK of hierarchical CNNs. We refer the
reader to Arora et al. (2019) for the derivation.

                                                                                     Qp
Definition B.1 (RFK and NTK of hierarchical CNNs) Let x, y ∈ Mp Ss−1 = i=1 Ss−1 . De-
note tuples of the kind il il+1 . . . im with il→m for m ≥ l. For m < l, il→m denotes the empty tuple.
For each tuple i2→L+1 , denote with ti2→L+1 the scalar product between the s-dimensional patches
of x and y identified by the same tuple, i.e.

                                                 ti2→L+1 = xi2→L+1 · yi2→L+1                                                       (S18)


For 1 ≤ l ≤ L + 1, denote with ti2→L+1 i              the sequence of t’s obtained by letting the indices of
                                                  2→l
the tuple i2→l vary in their respective range. Consider a hierarchical CNN with L hidden layers,
                                                              (1)   (l)        (L+1)
filter sizes (s1 , . . . , sL ), pL ≥ 1 and all the weights wh,i , wh,h′ ,i , wh,i   initialised as Gaussian
random numbers with zero mean and unit variance.
                                                                               (L+1)
RFK. The corresponding RFK (or covariance kernel) is a function KRFK                 of the
p1 = d/s1 scalar products √tiL ...i1   which can be obtained recursively as follows.   With
κ1 (t) = (π − arccos t) t + 1 − t2 /π,

     (1)
    KRFK (ti2→L+1 ) = κ1 (ti2→L+1 );
                                                                  !
     (l)
                                     1 X (l−1)
    KRFK ti2→L+1 i           = κ1         KRFK   ti2→L+1 i          , ∀ l ∈ [2 . . L] if L > 1;
                      2→l            sl i                 2→l−1
                                                         l
                                                        pL
     (L+1)
                                                  1     X          (L)

    KRFK          ti2→L+1 i                  =                    KRFK     ti2→L+1 i                .                              (S19)
                              2→L+1              pL i                                     2→L
                                                        L+1 =1


                                                                    17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


NTK. The NTK of the same hierarchical CNN is also a function of the p1 = d/s1 scalar products
tiL ...i2 which can be obtained recursively as follows. With κ0 (t) = (π − arccos t) /π,
    (1)
  KNTK ti2→L+1 = κ1 (ti2→L+1 ) + ti2→L+1 κ0 (ti2→L+1 );
                                                                                                  !
    (l)

                                 (l)                        1 X (l−1)
  KNTK ti2→L+1 i             = KRFK ( ti2→L+1 i ) +                 KNTK      ti2→L+1 i
                       2→l                         2→l      sl i                         2→l−1
                                                                 l
                                                                           !
                                       1 X (l−1)
                               × κ0           KRFK      ti2→L+1 i            , ∀ l ∈ [2 . . L] if L > 1;
                                       sl i                        2→l−1
                                                l
                                           pL

  (L+1)
                                      1 X     (L)

 KNTK    ti2→L+1 i                 =         KNTK ti2→L+1 i      .                                   (S20)
                       2→L+1         pL i =1               2→L
                                          L+1


C     S PECTRA OF DEEP CONVOLUTIONAL KERNELS
In this section we state and prove a generalised version of Thm. 3.1 which includes non-binary
patches. Our proof strategy is to relate the asymptotic decay of eigenvalues to the singular behaviour
of the kernel, as it is customary in Fourier analysis and was done in Bietti & Bach (2021) for standard
dot-product kernel. In Subsec. C.1 we perform the singular expansion of hierarchical kernels,
in Subsec. C.2 we use this expansion to prove Thm. 3.1 with L = 2 (2 hidden layers) and s1 = 2
(patches on the ring), which we then generalise to general s1 in Subsec. C.3 and to general depth
in Subsec. C.4.

Theorem C.1 (Spectrum of hierarchical kernels) Let TK be the integral operator associated with
a d-dimensional hierarchical kernel of depth L + 1, L > 1 and filter sizes (s1 , . . . , sL ). Eigenvalues
and eigenfunctions of TK can be organised into L sectors associated
                                                                  Ql       with the hidden layers of the
kernel/network. For each 1 ≤ l ≤ L, the l-th sector consists of ( l′ =1 sl′ )-local eigenfunctions: func-
tions of a single meta-patch xil+1→L+1 which cannot be written as linear combinations of functions
of smaller meta-patches. The labels k of these eigenfunctions are such that there is a meta-patch
kil+1→L+1 of k with no vanishing sub-meta-patches and all the ki ’s outside of kil+1→L+1 are 0 (be-
cause the eigenfunction is constant outside of xil+1→L+1 ). The corresponding eigenvalue is degener-
ate with respect to the location of the meta-patch: we call it Λk(l)i →i . When ∥kil+1→L+1 ∥ → ∞,
                                                                      l+1   L+1
with k = ∥kil+1→L+1 ∥,

      i. if s1 = 2, then

                                   (l)
                               Λki             = C2,l k −2ν−deff (l) + o k −2ν−deff (l) ,            (S21)
                                     l+1→L+1


         with νNTK = 1/2, νRFK = 3/2 and deff the effective dimensionality of the meta-patches
         defined in Eq. 3. C2,l is a strictly positive constant for l ≥ 2 whereas for l = 1 it can take
         two distinct strictly positive values depending on the parity of ki2→L+1 .

      ii. if s1 ≥ 3, then for fixed non-zero angles k/k,

                        (l)                   kil+1→L+1
                      Λki          = Cs1 ,l               k −2ν−deff (l) + o k −2ν−deff (l) ,        (S22)
                           l+1→L+1                k
         where Cs1 ,l is a positive function for l ≥ 2, whereas for l = 1 it is a strictly positive constant
         which depends on the parity of ki2→L+1 .

C.1   S INGULAR EXPANSION OF HIERARCHICAL KERNELS

Both the RFK and NTK of ReLU networks, whether deep or shallow, are built by applying the two
functions κ0 and κ1 Cho & Saul (2009) (see also Def. B.1),
                                                                      √
                          (π − arccos t)            (π − arccos t) t + 1 − t2
                 κ0 (t) =                , κ1 (t) =                           .         (S23)
                                π                               π

                                                       18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


The functions κ0 and κ1 are non-analytic in t = ± 1, with the following singular expansion Bietti &
Bach (2021). Near t = 1, with u = 1 − t
                                              √
                                                  2 1/2
                           κ0 (1 − u) = 1 −        u + O(u3/2 ),
                           
                           
                                                π √                                           (S24)
                           κ1 (1 − u) = 1 − u + 2 2 u3/2 + O(u5/2 ).
                           
                           
                                                      3π
Near t = − 1, with u = 1 + t,
                                               √
                                                   2 1/2
                              κ0 (−1 + u) =         u + O(u3/2 ),
                              
                              
                                                  π√                                          (S25)
                              
                              κ1 (−1 + u) =    2    2  3/2      5/2
                                                       u + O(u ).
                              
                                                  3π
As a result, hierarchical kernels have a singular expansion when the ti2→L+1 ’s are close to ±1. In
particular, the following expansions are relevant for computing the asymptotic scaling of eigenval-
ues.

Proposition C.1 (RFK when x = y) The RFK of a hierarchical network of depth L + 1, filter
sizes (s1 , . . . , sL ) and pL ≥ 1 has the following singular expansion when all ti2→L+1 → 1. With
                                  √              Q
ui2→L+1 = 1 − ti2→L+1 , c = 2 2/(3π), and l∈I sl := 1 if I is the empty set,
    (L+1)
                                                        1            X
   KRFK           1 − ui2→L+1 i          =1−                            ui2→L+1
                                 2→L+1
                                                    Y              i2→L+1
                                                         sl′  pL
                                                       2≤l′ ≤L
                                                                                                                   3/2
                                                                           P            
                                                 L                   X  i ′ ui2→L+1 
                                                                                        
                                             c X       1                       2→l
                                          +                              
                                                                                     
                                            pL ′                il′ +1→L+1
                                                                                         
                                               l =1   Y                        Y        
                                                        sl′′                   sl′′ 
                                                                                       
                                                           l′ <l′′ ≤L                               2≤l′′ ≤l′
                                                     5/2
                                          + O(ui2→L+1 )
                                                                                                                     (S26)

Proof. With L = 1 one has (recall that i2→1+1 = i2→2 reduces to a single index)
                             (1)                                    3/2           5/2
                     KRFK (1 − ui2 ) = 1 − ui2 + cui2 + O(ui2 ) ⇒
                 (1+1)                      1 X          c X 3/2      5/2
                KRFK {1 − ui2 }i2 = 1 −           ui2 +      ui2 + O(ui2 ).                                          (S27)
                                           p1 i         p1 i
                                                            2                     2

With L = 2,
                                                                                        !
   (2)                                 1 X                 c X 3/2               5/2
  KRFK    {1 − ui2 }i2       = κ1 1 −           ui2 ,i3 +          ui2 ,i3 + O(ui2 ,i3 )
                                       s2 i               s2 i
                                            2                  2
                                                                                          !3/2
                                  1 X                 c X 3/2               1 X                     5/2
                             =1−         ui2 ,i3 +          ui2 ,i3 + c           ui2 ,i3      + O(ui2 ,i3 ),
                                  s2 i               s2 i                   s2 i
                                          2                     2                       2
                                                                                                                     (S28)
therefore
                                                                                                                       !3/2
  (2+1)
                                          1 X                 c 1 X 3/2            c X                  1 X
KRFK {1 − ui2 ,i3 }i2 ,i3 =1 −                     ui2 ,i3 +            ui2 ,i3 +                            ui2 ,i3
                                        s2 p2 i ,i           p2 s2 i ,i           p2 i                  s2 i
                                               2   3                      2   3                 3               2

                                         5/2
                                    + O(ui2 ,i3 ).                                       (S29)
The proof of the general case follows by induction by applying the function κ1 to the singular
expansion of the kernel with L − 1 hidden layers, then using Eq. S24.


                                                           19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Proposition C.2 (RFK when x = − y) The RFK of a hierarchical network of depth L + 1, filter
sizes (s1 , . . . , sL ) and pL ≥ 1 has the following singular expansion when all ti2→L+1 → −1. With
                                   √             Q
ui2→L+1 = 1 + ti2→L+1 , c = 2 2/(3π) and l∈I sl := 1 if I is the empty set,
    (L+1)
                                                          cL           X 3/2              5/2
  KRFK          −1 + ui2→L+1 i             = bL +                         ui2→L+1 + O(ui2→L+1 ),
                                  2→L+1
                                                       Y             i2→L+1
                                                           sl′  pL
                                                             2≤l′ ≤L
                                                                                                            (S30)
with bL = κ1 (bL−1 ), b1 = 0; and cL = cL−1 κ′1 (bL−1 ), c1 = c.

Proof. This can be proved again by induction. For L = 1,
                                        (1)                           3/2            5/2
                                     KRFK (−1 + ui2 ) = cui2 + O(ui2 ) ⇒
                                 (1+1)                   c X 3/2        5/2
                                KRFK {−1 + ui2 }i2 =          ui2 + O(ui2 ).                                (S31)
                                                        p1 i
                                                                        2

Thus, for L = 2,
                                                                                        !
                 (2)
                                                            c X 3/2             5/2
                KRFK       {−1 + ui2 ,i3 }i2        = κ1           ui2 ,i3 + O(ui2 ,i3 )
                                                           s2 i
                                                                2
                                                                                       !
                                                                ′          c X 3/2          5/2
                                                    = κ1 (0) + κ1 (0)          ui2 ,i3 + O(ui2 ,i3 ),       (S32)
                                                                          s2 i
                                                                                     2

so that
                  (2+1)
                                                               κ′ (0)c X 3/2           5/2
                 KRFK          {−1 + ui2 ,i3 }i2 ,i3 = κ1 (0) + 1         u       + O(ui2 ,i3 ).            (S33)
                                                                s2 p2 i ,i i2 ,i3
                                                                                    2    3

The proof is completed by applying the function κ1 to the singular expansion of the kernel with
L − 1 hidden layers.

Proposition C.3 (NTK when x = y) The NTK of a hierarchical network of depth L + 1, filter
sizes (s1 , . . . , sL ) and pL ≥ 1 has the following singular expansion when all ti2→L+1 → 1. With
                                 √         Q
ui2→L+1 = 1 − ti2→L+1 , c = 2π, and l∈I sl := 1 if I is the empty set,
                                                                  L
  (L+1)
                                                            c X       l′
KNTK           1 − ui2→L+1 i                  =L+1−                          
                                  2→L+1                    pL ′
                                                              l =1   Y
                                                                        sl′′ 
                                                                            l′ <l′′ ≤L
                                                                                            1/2
                                                                                     
                                                                                     
                                                    X         1         X                               3/2
                                              ×            
                                                                           ui2→L+1 
                                                                                                   + O(ui2→L+1 )
                                                il′ +1→L+1   Y         i2→l′         
                                                               sl′′                
                                                                  2≤l′′ ≤l′
                                                                                                            (S34)

Proposition C.4 (NTK when x = − y) The NTK of a hierarchical network of depth L + 1, filter
sizes (s1 , . . . , sL ) and pL ≥ 1 has the following singular expansion when all ti2→L+1 → −1. With
                                 √           Q
ui2→L+1 = 1 + ti2→L+1 , c = 2/π and l∈I sl := 1 if I is the empty set,
    (L+1)
                                                          cL            X 3/2             5/2
  KNTK          −1 + ui2→L+1 i            = aL +                           ui2→L+1 + O(ui2→L+1 ),
                                  2→L+1
                                                        Y             i2→L+1
                                                            sl′  pL
                                                             2≤l′ ≤L
                                                                                                            (S35)


                                                             20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


with aL = bL + bL−1 κ0 (bL−1 ), bL = κ1 (bL−1 ), b1 = 0; and cL = cL−1 κ0 (bL−1 ), c1 = c. Notice that
both κ1 and κ0 are positive and strictly increasing in [0, 1] and κ1 (1) = κ0 (1) = 1, thus bL ∈ (0, 1)
and cL < cL−1 .

The proofs of the two propositions above are omitted, as they follow the exact same steps as the
previous two proofs.

C.2   PATCHES ON THE RING

In this section, we prove a restricted version of Thm. 3.1 for the case of 2-dimensional input patches,
since the reduction of spherical harmonics to the Fourier basis simplifies the proof significantly. We
also consider, for convenience, hierarchical kernels of depth 3 with the filter size of the second
hidden layer set to p = d/2, the total number of 2-patches of the input. Once this case is understood,
extension to arbitrary filter size and arbitrary depth is trivial.

Theorem C.2 (Spectrum of depth-3 kernels on 2-patches) Let TK be the integral operator as-
sociated with a d-dimensional hierarchical kernel of depth 3, (2 hidden layers), with filter sizes
(s1 = 2, s2 ) and p2 = 1, such that 2s2 = d and s2 = p (the number of 2-patches). Eigenvalues and
eigenfunctions of TK can be organised into 2 sectors associated with the hidden layers of the ker-
nel/network.

      i. The first sector consists of s1 -local eigenfunctions, which are functions of a single patch xi
         for i = 1, . . . , p. The labels k, ℓ of local eigenfunctions are such that all the kj ’s with j ̸= i
         are zero (because the eigenfunction is constant outside xi ). The corresponding eigenvalue
         is degenerate with respect to the location of the patch: we call it Λ(1) ki . When ki → ∞,
                                           (1)
                                          Λki = C2,1 k −2ν−1 + o k −2ν−1 ,

                                                                                                        (S36)
         with νNTK = 1/2, νRFK = 3/2. C2,l can take two distinct strictly positive values depend-
         ing on the parity of ki ;
      ii. The second sector consists of global eigenfunctions, which are functions of the whole input
          x. The labels k, ℓ of global eigenfunctions are such that at least two of the ki ’s are non-
          zero. We call the corresponding eigenvalue Λ(2)
                                                       k . When ∥k∥ → ∞, with k = ∥k∥,
                                       (2)
                                     Λk = C2,2 k −2ν−p + o k −2ν−p ,

                                                                                                 (S37)

Proof. If we consider binary patches in the first layer, the input space becomes the Cartesian product
                                                     Qd
of two-dimensional unit spheres, i.e. circles, X = i=1 S1 . Then, each patch xi corresponds to an
angle θi and the spherical harmonics are equivalent to Fourier atoms,
                    Y0 (θ) = 1,     Yk,1 (θ) = eikθ ,     Yk,2 (θ) = e−ikθ ,   ∀k ≥ 1.                 (S38)
Therefore, solving the eigenvalue problem for a dot-product kernel K(x · y) = K (cos(θx − θy ))
with x, y ∈ S1 reduces to computing its Fourier transform. With |S0 | = 2 and |S1 | = 2π,
      Z π                                                         Z π
    1                              ±ikθx        ±ikθy          1
           dθx K (cos(θx − θy )) e       = Λk e       ⇒ Λk =           dθ K (cos θ) e±ikθ , (S39)
   2π −π                                                      2π −π
where we denoted with θ the difference between the two angles. Similarly, for a multi-dot-product
kernel, the eigenvalues coincide with the p-dimensional Fourier transform of the kernel, where p is
the number of patches,
                                             p
                                    Z π Y                     !
                                1
                        Λk =                    dθi e ±iki θi
                                                                K ({cos θi }pi=1 )
                              (2π)p −π i=1
                                    Z π
                                1
                           =              dp θ e±ik·θ K ({cos θi }pi=1 ) ,                   (S40)
                              (2π)p −π
with k = (k1 , . . . , kp )⊤ the vector of the patch wavevectors and θ = (θ1 , . . . , θp )⊤ the vector of
the patch angle differences θi = θx,i − θy,i .


                                                     21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


The nonanaliticity of the kernel at ti = 1 for all i moves to θi = 0 for all i, whereas those in ti = − 1
move to θi = π and −π. The corresponding singular expansion is obtained from Eq. S26 after
replacing ti with cos (θi ) and expanding cos (θi ) as 1 − θi2 /2, resulting in
                                   p               p           √         p
                                                                                !3/2     p
   (2)           p             1 X 2         1 X           3  2 2 1 X θi2              X
 KRFK ({cos θi }i=1 ) = 1 −           θi +            |θi | +                        +     O(θi4 ). (S41)
                              2p i=1        3πp i=1            3π     p i=1 2          i=1
                                                        √   P          3/2
                                 1
                                       Pp         3    2 2 1  p   θi2
The first nonanalytic terms are 3πp      i=1 |θi | and 3π  p  i=1  2       . After recalling that the
                                                                        −2ν−p
Fourier transform of ∥θ∥2ν with θ ∈ R decays asymptotically as ∥k∥
                                           p
                                                                               Widom (1963), one
has (ν = 3/2)
                   Z π                  p             p
               1        p     ±ik·θ 1
                                       X
                                                 3
                                                     X
                                                           −4
                                                              Y
                       d  θ e              |θ i |  ∼     ki     δkj ,0 , for ∥k∥ → ∞      (S42)
             (2π)p −π              3πp i=1           i=1        j̸=i

and
                             Z π
                       1
                                   dp θ e±ik·θ ∥θ∥3 ∼ ∥k∥−p−3 ,        for ∥k∥ → ∞.                 (S43)
                     (2π)p    −π

All the other terms in the kernel expansion will result in subleading contributions in the Fourier
transform. Therefore, the former of the two equations above yields the asymptotic scaling of eigen-
values of the local sector, whereas the latter yields the asymptotic scaling of the global sector.
The proof for the NTK case is analogous to the RFK case, except that the singular expansion near
θi = 0 is given by
                                       p        √      p
                                                             !1/2      p
           (2)          p           1 X |θi |     2 1 X θi2           X       3/2
         KNTK ({cos θi }i=1 ) = 3 −           −                    +       O(θi ).         (S44)
                                    p i=1 2     π   p i=1 2           i=1


C.3   PATCHES ON THE s- DIMENSIONAL HYPERSPHERE

In this section, we make an additional step towards Thm. 3.1 by extending Thm. C.2 to the case of
s-dimensional input patches. We still consider hierarchical kernels of depth 3 with the filter size of
the second hidden layer set to p = d/s (the total number of s-patches of the input) so as to ease the
presentation. The extension to general depth and filter sizes is presented in Subsec. C.4.

Theorem C.3 (Spectrum of depth-3 kernels on s-patches) Let TK be the integral operator as-
sociated with a d-dimensional hierarchical kernel of depth 3, (2 hidden layers), with filter sizes
(s1 = s, s2 ) and p2 = 1, such that 2s2 = d and s2 = p (the number of s-patches). Eigenvalues and
eigenfunctions of TK can be organised into 2 sectors associated with the hidden layers of the ker-
nel/network.

      i. The first sector consists of s1 -local eigenfunctions, which are functions of a single patch
         xi for i = 1, . . . , p. The labels k, ℓ of local eigenfunctions are such that all the kj ’s with
         j ̸= i are zero (because the eigenfunction is constant outside of xi ). The corresponding
         eigenvalue is degenerate with respect to the location of the patch: we call it Λ(1)   ki . When
         ki → ∞,
                                      (1)
                                    Λki = Cs,1 k −2ν−(s−1) + o k −2ν−(s−1) ,                        (S45)
         with νNTK = 1/2, νRFK = 3/2. Cs,1 can take two distinct strictly positive values depend-
         ing on the parity of ki ;
      ii. The second sector consists of global eigenfunctions, which are functions of the whole input
          x. The labels k, ℓ of global eigenfunctions are such that at least two of the ki ’s are non-
          zero. We call the corresponding eigenvalue Λ(2)
                                                       k . When k ≡ ∥k∥ → ∞, for fixed non-zero
          angles k/k,
                               (2)           k
                             Λk = Cs,2         k −2ν−p(s−1) + o k −2ν−p(s−1) ,                   (S46)
                                             k
          where Cs,2 is a positive function.


                                                   22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Proof. A hierarchical RFK/NTK is a multi-dot-product
                                             Qp            kernel, therefore its eigenfunctions are
products of spherical harmonics Ỹk,ℓ (x) = i=1 Yki ,ℓi (xi ) and the eigenvalues of K are given
by Eq. S17,
                          p
                                                                       !
                             |Ss−2 | +1
                                    Z
                         Y
                                                   2
                                                       s−3
                 Λk =                     dti 1 − ti    2
                                                           Pki ,s (ti ) K ({ti }i ) .         (S47)
                         i=1
                             |Ss−1 | −1
The proof follows the following strategy: first, we show that the infinitely differentiable part of K
results in eigenvalues which decay faster than any polynomial of the degrees ki . We then show that
the decay is controlled by the most singular term of the singular expansion of the kernel and finally
compute such decay by relating it to the number of derivatives of the kernel having a finite l2 norm.
When K is infinitely differentiable in [−1, +1]p , we can plug Rodrigues’ formula Eq. S5 for each
Pki ,s (ti ) and get
               p                               ! Z +1                p
                                 k                                                                 !
                  |Ss−2 |     1 i Γ s−1                                 dki

              Y
                                          2
                                                                   Y
                                                                                       2
                                                                                          ki + s−3
  Λk =                      −                            dt K (t)               1 − ti           2
                                                                                                     , (S48)
                                   Γ ki + s−1

              i=1
                  |Ss−1 |     2              2       −1            i=1
                                                                        dtki i
      R +1
with −1 dt denoting integration over the p-dimensional hypercube [−1, +1]p . We can simplify the
integral further via integration by parts, so as to obtain
                 p                             ! Z +1                   p
                               k                                                                 !
                 Y  |Ss−2 | 1 i Γ s−1                                  Y                k  + s−3
                                          2
                                                         dt K(k) (t)          1 − t2i
                                                                                         i
                                                                                              2
     Λk =             s−1 |                 s−1
                                                                                                   ,   (S49)
                i=1
                    |S        2    Γ k i +   2       −1                i=1

where K(k) denotes the partial derivative of order k1 with respect to t1 , k2 with respect to t2 and
                                                                      d−3
so on until kp with respect to tp . Notice that the function (1 − t2 ) 2 is proportional to the proba-
bility measure of the scalar product t between two points sampled uniformly at random on the unit
sphere (Atkinson & Han, 2012, Sec. 1.3),
                 Z +1
                                                         |Sd−1 | +1
                                        Z                        Z
                                    d−3                                           d−3
       |Sd−1 | =       dt (1 − t2 ) 2          dS d−2 ⇒ d−2           dt (1 − t2 ) 2 = 1.        (S50)
                  −1                     S d−2           |S    |  −1

This probability measure converges weakly to a Dirac mass δ(t) when d → R∞. Recall, in addition,
                                                                         ∞
that |Sd−1 | = 2π d/2 /Γ(d/2), where Γ denotes the Gamma function Γ(x) = 0 dx xz−1 e−x . Thus,
with converges weakly to a Dirac measure δ(t) as c → ∞, once properly rescaled. In particular,
choosing ki such that ki + (s − 3)/2 = (d − 3)/2, one has
                                   Γ ki + 2s

                                                          k + s−3
                           lim √            s−1
                                                  1 − t2i i 2 = δ(ti ).                   (S51)
                          ki →∞   πΓ ki + 2
As a result, when K is infinitely differentiable, one has the following equivalence in the limit where
all ki ’s are large,
                                   p              k              !
                                  Y   |Ss−2 | 1 i Γ s−1
                        Λk ∼             s−1 |
                                                             2
                                                               s
                                                                   K(k) (0) ,                    (S52)
                                  i=1
                                      |S        2     Γ  k i + 2
which implies that, when K is infinitely differentiable, the eigenvalues decay exponentially or faster
with the ki .
Let us now consider the nonanalytic part of K. There are three kinds of terms appearing in the
singular expansion of depth-3 kernels (cf. Subsec. C.1):

     ia) c+ i (1 − ti )ν near ti = + 1;
             P

     ib) c− i (1 + ti )ν near ti = − 1;
             P
                  P              ν
      ii) c+,all ( i (1 − ti )/p) near ti = + 1 for all i;

where the exponent ν is 1/2 for the NTK and 3/2 for the RFK. We will not consider terms of the
kind ib) explicitly, as the analysis is equivalentPto that of terms of the kind ia). After replacing ti
with cos(θi ), as in Subsec. C.2, we get again i |θi |2ν and ∥θ∥2ν as leading nonanalytic terms.
Therefore, we can rewrite the nonanalytic part of the kernel as follows,
                                          X
                              Kn.a. (θ) =    f1 (|θi |) + f2 (∥θ∥) + K̃(θ),                      (S53)
                                            i


                                                    23
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


where f1 , f2 are single-variable functions which behave as θ2ν near zero and have compact support,
whereas K̃ has a singular expansion near θi = 0 analogous to that of K but with leading nonanalyt-
icities controlled by an exponent ν ′ ≥ν + 1.
Let us look at the contribution to the eigenvalue Λk due to the term f1 (|θi |):
                                                             
         p    s−2 Z π
        Y   |S    |                     s−2
                       dθj (sin (θj ))     Pkj ,s (cos (θj )) f1 (|θi |)
        j=1
            |Ss−1 | 0
                                                                                                 (S54)
                      s−2 Z π
        Y           |S   |                  s−2
                                                                               Y
  =  δkj ,0  s−1             dθ (sin (θ))       Pki ,s (cos (θ))f1 (|θ|) =  δkj ,0  (f1 )k1 ,
                    |S | 0
       j̸=i                                                                    j̸=i

where we have introduced (f1 )k as the projection of f1 (θ) on the k-th Legendre polynomial. The
asymptotic decay of (f1 )k is strictly related to the differentiability of f1 , which is in turn controlled
by action of the Laplace-Beltrami operator ∆ on f1 . As a function on the sphere Ss−1 , f1 depends
only on one angle, therefore the Laplace-Beltrami operator acts as follows,

                       1      d            s−2 df1                              cos (θ) ′
       ∆f1 (θ) =                    sin (θ)         (θ) = f1′′ (θ) + (d − 2)           f (θ).        (S55)
                  sin (θ)
                         s−2 dθ                 dθ                              sin (θ) 1

In terms of singular behaviour near θ = 0, f1 (θ) ∼ |θ|2ν implies ∆f1 (θ) ∼ |θ|2ν−2 , thus
∆m f1 (θ) ∼ |θ|2(ν−m) . Given ν, repeated applications of ∆ eventually result in a function whose l2
norm on the sphere diverges. On the one hand,
                                        Z π
                         ∥∆ m/2     2
                                f1 ∥ =      dθ sind−2 (θ)f1 (θ)∆m f1 (θ).                     (S56)
                                                 0

The integrand behaves as |θ|d−2+4ν−2m near 0, thus the integral diverges for m ≥ 2ν + (d − 1)/2.
On the other hand, from Eq. S3,
                                     X                         m
                       ∥∆m/2 f1 ∥2 =    Nk,s (k(k + s − 2)) |(f1 )k |2 .                   (S57)
                                                k

              s−2
As Nk,s ∼ k      and the sum must converge for m < 2ν + (d − 1)/2 and diverge otherwise, (f1 )k ∼
k −2ν−(s−1) . The projections of all the other terms in K on Legendre polynomials of one of the p
angles θi display a faster decay with k, therefore the above results imply the asymptotic scaling of
local eigenvalues. Notice that such scaling matches with the result of Bietti & Bach (2021), which
was obtained with a different argument.
Finally, let us look at the contribution to the eigenvalue Λk due to the term f2 (∥θ∥):
                                                                      
                  p    s−2 Z π
                 Y   |S    |                     s−2
              
                       s−1 |
                                 dθj (sin (θj ))     Pkj ,s (cos (θj )) f2 (∥θ∥) = (f2 )k ,         (S58)
                 j=1
                     |S       0


where we have introduced (f2 )k as the projection of f2 (∥θ∥) on the multi-Legendre polynomial
with multi-degree k. The asymptotic decay of (f2 )k is again related to the differentiability of f2 ,
controlled by action of the multi-sphere Laplace-Beltrami operator ∆p,s in Eq. S13. As f2 depends
only on one angle per sphere,
                                   p
                                 X                             cos (θi )
                ∆p,s f2 (∥θ∥) =        ∂θ2i f2 (∥θ∥) + (s − 2)           ∂θi f2 (∥θ∥) .       (S59)
                                  i=1
                                                               sin (θi )

Further simplifications occur since f2 depends only on the norm of θ. In terms of the singular
behaviour near ∥θ∥ = 0, f2 ∼ ∥θ∥2ν implies ∆mp,s f2 ∼ ∥θ∥
                                                          2(ν−m)
                                                                 , thus
                              Z                 p
                                                Y
              ∥∆m/2     2
                                         dp θ         sins−2 (θi ) f2 (∥θ∥)∆m

                p,s f2 ∥ =                                                  p,s f2 (∥θ∥) < +∞        (S60)
                                [0,π]p          i=1


                                                         24
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


requires m < 2ν + p(s − 1)/2 (compare with m < 2ν + (s − 1)/2 for the local contributions).
Therefore, one has
                   p
                             ! p                 !m
               X Y             X
   m/2     2
∥∆p,s f1 ∥ =          Nki ,s      ki (ki + s − 2)   |(f2 )k |2 < +∞ ∀ m < 2ν+p(s−1)/2,
                 k     i=1          i=1
                                                                                          (S61)
while the sum diverges for m ≥ 2ν + p(s − 1)/2. In addition, since f2 is a radial function of
θ which is homogeneous (or scale-invariant) near ∥θ∥ = 0, (f2 )k can be factorised in the large-
∥k∥ limit into a power of the norm ∥k∥α and a finite angular part C(k/∥k∥). By plugging the
factorisation into Eq. S61, we get
                                                   p
                                                                !             !
                                        X         Y
                           −2ν−p(s−1)                       s−2             2
   (f2 )k ∼ C(k/∥k∥)∥k∥               ,              (ki /k)      C(k/∥k∥)      < +∞ (S62)
                                           k,∥k∥=k      i=1

The projections of all the other terms in K on multi-Legendre polynomials display a faster decay
with ∥k∥, therefore the above results imply the asymptotic scaling of global eigenvalues.

C.4   G ENERAL DEPTH

The generalisation to arbitrary depth is trivial once the depth-3 case is understood. For global and
s1 -local eigenvalues, the analysis of the previous section carries over unaltered. All the other inter-
mediate sectors correspond to the other terms singular expansion of the kernel: from Subsec. C.1,
these terms can be written as
                                                                                   ν
                                                                        
                                                                        
               c    1                 X    1         X                  
                                                      1 − t i2→L+1  ,
                                                                                                 (S63)
              pL   Y
                                        
                             il′ +1→L+1   Y         i2→l′               
                     sl′′                 sl′′                      
                     l′ <l′′ ≤L                   2≤l′′ ≤l′

for someQl′ = 2, . . . , L − 1 and fractional ν. In practice,        Q this term is a sum over the
pl′ = pL l′ <l′′ ≤L sl′′ meta-patches of t having size s2→l′ := 2≤l′′ ≤l′ sl′′ . Each summand is
the fractional power ν of the average of the ti ’s within a meta-patch. When plugging such term
into Eq. S47, the integrals over the ti ’s which do not belong to that meta-patch yield Kronecker
deltas for the corresponding ki ’s. The integrals over the ti ’s within the meta-patch, instead, can be
written as in Eq. S58 with the product and the norm restricted over the elements of that meta-patch,
               P                 1/2
                         2
i.e., ∥θ∥ →       i2→l′ θi2→L+1      . Therefore, the scaling of the eigenvalue with k is given again
                                                                    Q
by Eq. S63, but with p replaced by the size of the meta-patch 2≤l′′ ≤l′ sl′′ , so that the effective
dimension of Eq. 3 appears at the exponent.

D     G ENERALISATION BOUNDS FOR KERNEL REGRESSION AND SPATIAL
      ADAPTIVITY

This appendix provides an introduction to classical generalisation bounds for kernel regression and
extends Cor. 4.1 to patches on the hypersphere.

D.1   C LASSICAL GENERALISATION BOUNDS

Consider the regression setting detailed in Sec. 4 of the main text. First, assume that the target
function f ∗ belongs to the RKHS H of the kernel K. Then, without further assumptions on K,
we have the following dimension-free bound on the excess risk, based on Rademacher complexity
(Bach, 2021, Chs. 4, 7), Bietti (2022),
                                                         r
                                            ∗        ∗     Tr(TK )
                               ϵ(λ, n) − ϵ(f ) ≤ C ∥f ∥H           ,                        (S64)
                                                              n

                                                  25
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


where TK is the integral operator associated to K. For a hierarchical kernel, having a target with more
power in the local sectors can result in a smaller ∥f ∗ ∥H , hence a smaller excess risk. However, this
gain is only a constant factor in terms of sample complexity and, more importantly, being in the
RKHS requires an order of smoothness which typically is of the order of the dimension, which is a
very-restrictive assumption in high-dimensional settings. This result can be extended by including
more details about the kernel and the target function.
In particular, (Bach, 2021, Prop. 7.2) states that, for f ∗ in the closure of H, regularisation λ ≤ 1
and n ≥ λ5 (1 + log(1/λ)), one has
                      σ2                                                                24
ϵ(λ, n) − ϵ(f ∗ ) ≤ 16   Tr (TK + λI)−1 TK + 16 inf ∥f − f ∗ ∥2L2 + λ∥f ∥2H + 2 ∥f ∗ ∥L∞ ,

                      n                               f ∈H                              n
                                                                      h                  i   (S65)
                                                                                    2
where σ 2 bounds the conditional variance of the labels, i.e. E(x,y)∼p (y − f ∗ (x)) | x < σ 2 .

Then, let us consider the following standard assumptions in the kernel literature Caponnetto &
De Vito (2007),
                                         XX
                                   1/α
                    capacity: Tr TK      =        (Λk )1/α < +∞,
                                                          k≥0         ℓ
                                          1−r        2          XX
                            source:    TK  2
                                                f∗        =                    (Λk )−r (fk,ℓ
                                                                                         ∗ 2
                                                                                             ) < +∞.                               (S66)
                                                     H
                                                              k≥0         ℓ

In short, the first assumption characterises the ‘size’ of the RKHS (the larger α, the smaller the
number of functions in the RKHS), while the second assumption defines the regularity of the target
function relative to that of the kernel (when r = 1, f ∗ ∈ H; when r < 1, f ∗ is less smooth; when
r > 1, f ∗ is smoother). Combining these assumptions with Eq. S65, one gets
                                                     σ2                      24
                         ϵ(λ, n) − ϵ(f ∗ ) ≤ 16         C1 λ−1/α + 16 C2 λr + 2 ∥f ∗ ∥L∞ .                                         (S67)
                                                     n                       n
Optimising for λ results in
                                                                                 α
                                                              C1 σ 2
                                                                                αr+1
                                                λn =                                   ,                                           (S68)
                                                             α r C2 n
and the bound becomes
                                                                                  αr
                                                                      C1 σ 2
                                                                                 αr+1
                                            ∗
                                                           2
                                                                                               1
                           ϵ(λn , n) − ϵ(f ) ≲ C2        αr+1
                                                                                           +      ∥f ∗ ∥L∞ .                       (S69)
                                                                       n                       n2
Finally, when r > (α − 1)/α, n ≥ λ5n (1 + log(1/λn )) is always satisfied for n large enough.

D.2     E XTENSION OF C OR . 4.1 TO PATCHES ON THE HYPERSPHERE

Corollary D.1 (Adaptivity to spatial structure) Let TK be the integral operator of the kernel of a
hierarchical deep CNN as in Thm. 3.1. Then: i) the capacity exponent α is controlled by the largest
sector of the spectrum, i.e.

                                 1/α
                             Tr TK     < +∞ ⇔ α < 1 + 2ν/deff (L);                           (S70)

ii) the source exponent r is controlled by the structure of the target function f ∗ , i.e., if there is
l ≤ L such that f ∗ depends only on some meta-patch xil+1→L+1 , then only the first l sectors of the
spectrum contribute to the source condition,
                 2       l                                                        −r                                       2
        1−r
                                                              (l′ )
                         X      X           X
      TK 2 f ∗       =                                       Λki                           fk∗i ′          , ℓi ′              .   (S71)
                 H                                               l′ +1→L+1                      l +1→L+1       l +1→L+1
                         l′ =1 il′ +1→L+1 ki ′
                                            l +1→L+1
                                          ℓi ′
                                          l +1→L+1


The same holds if f ∗ is a linear combination of such functions. As a result, when deff (L) is large
and α → 1, the decay of the error is controlled by the effective dimensionality of the target deff (l).


                                                                26
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


D.3   D ECAY OF EIGENVALUES WITH THE RANK

Shallow kernels. Consider a depth-two kernel with filters of size s. Our goal is to compute the
scaling of the eigenvalues of the kernel Λk with their rank ρ. The eigenvalues decay with k as
                                                        p
                                                                       −2νS −(s−1)
                                                        X                             Y
                                               Λk ∼                ki                        δkj ,0 .                     (S72)
                                                         i=1                          j̸=i

In order to take into account their algebraic multiplicity, we introduce the eigenvalue density D(Λ),
whose asymptotic form for small eigenvalues is
                             X
                    D(Λ) =       δ(Λ − Λk )
                                  k, ℓ
                                   p
                                                                   !           p
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                       −2ν−(s−1)
                                 X Y                                            X                       Y
                             ∼                       kis−2             δ Λ −         ki                       δkj ,0 
                                    k          i=1                              i=1                     j̸=i
                                 p X
                                                                            −2ν−(s−1)
                                 X
                             ∼                      kis−2 δ Λ − ki
                                  i=1 ki
                                 Z ∞
                             ∼                 dk k s−2 δ Λ − k −2ν−(s−1)
                                    1
                                          s−1
                                    −1− 2ν+(s−1)
                             ∼Λ                                .                                                          (S73)
Thus, the scaling of Λ(ρ) can be determined self-consistently,
                       Z Λ(1)
                                                   s−1                2ν
                   ρ=         dΛ D(Λ) ∼ Λ(ρ)− sν+(s−1) ⇒ Λ(ρ) ∼ ρ−1− s−1 .                                                (S74)
                             Λ(ρ)


Deep kernels. Consider a kernel of depth L + 1 with filter sizes (s1 , . . . , sL ) and pL = 1. For
each sector l, one can compute the density of eigenvalues D(l) (Λ). Depending on s1 , there are two
different cases.
If s1 = 2,
                                                           (l)
                                 X
                D(l) (Λ) =              δ(Λ − Λk )
                                  k
                                       X                X
                            ∼                                           δ Λ − C2,l ∥kil+1→L+1 ∥−2ν−deff (l)
                                 il+1→L+1 kil+1→L+1
                                 Z ∞
                            ∼                dk k deff (l)−1 δ Λ − C2,l k −2ν−deff (l)
                                   1
                                           eff  d    (l)
                                    −1− 2ν+d
                            ∼Λ                       eff (l)   .                                                          (S75)

If s1 ≥ 3,
                                       (l)
                   X
      D(l) (Λ) =          δ(Λ − Λk )
                   k, ℓ

                     X                 X                             kil+1→L+1
              ∼                                      δ Λ − Cs1 ,l                  ∥kil+1→L+1 ∥−2ν−deff (l)
                   il+1→L+1 kil+1→L+1 ,
                                                                    ∥kil+1→L+1 ∥
                            ℓil+1→L+1
                             d
                           eff   (l)
                    −1− 2ν+d
              ∼Λ                 eff (l)   .                                                                              (S76)

When summing
       P      over all layers l’s, the asymptotic behaviour of the total density of eigenvalues
D(Λ) = l D(l) (Λ) is dictated by the density of the sector with the slowest decay, i.e. the last one.
Hence,
                                                                                d
                                                                                eff   (L)
                                                                         −1− 2ν+d
                                                     D(Λ) ∼ Λ                       eff (L)   .                           (S77)


                                                                          27
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Therefore, similarly to the shallow case, one finds self-consistently that the ρ-th eigenvalue of the
kernel decays as
                                                 −1− d 2ν(L)
                                       Λ(ρ) ∼ ρ        eff   .                                 (S78)


E    S TATISTICAL MECHANICS OF GENERALISATION IN KERNEL REGRESSION
In Bordelon et al. (2020); Canatar et al. (2021), the authors derived a heuristic expression for
the average-case mean-squared error of kernel (ridge) regression with the replica method of sta-
tistical physics Mézard et al. (1987). Denoting with {ϕρ (x), Λρ }ρ≥1 the eigenfunctions and
          P of the kernel and with cρ the coefficients of the target function in this basis, i.e.
eigenvalues
f ∗ (x) = ρ≥1 cρ ϕρ (x), one has
                                                       κλ (n)2

                                       κλ (n) X                        2
                        ϵ(λ, n) = ∂λ                              2 E[cρ ],                (S79)
                                         n     ρ   (nΛ ρ + κλ (n))
where λ is the ridge and κ(n) satisfies the implicit equation
                               κλ (n)          1 X Λρ κλ (n)/n
                                       =λ+                       .                              (S80)
                                  n            n ρ Λρ + κλ (n)/n
In short, the replica calculation used to obtain these equations consists in defining an energy func-
tional E(f ) related to the empirical MSE and assigning to the predictor f a Boltzmann measure,
i.e. P (f ) ∝ e−βE(f ) . When β → ∞, the measure concentrates around the minimum of E(f ),
which coincides with the minimiser of the empirical MSE. Then, since E(f ) depends only quadrat-
ically on the projections cρ , computing the average over data that appears in the definition of the
generalisation error, reduces to computing Gaussian integrals. While non-rigorous, this method has
been successfully used in physics—to study disordered systems—and in machine learning theory.
In particular, the predictions obtained with Eq. S79 and Eq. S80 have been validated numerically for
both synthetic and real datasets.
In Eq. S79, κλ (n)/n plays the role of a threshold: the modal contributions to the error tend to 0
for ρ such that Λρ ≫ κλ (n)/n, and to E[c2ρ ] for ρ such that Λρ ≪ κλ (n)/n. This is equivalent
to saying that kernel regression can capture only the modes corresponding to the eigenvalues larger
than κλ (n)/n (see also Jacot et al. (2020a;b)).
In the ridgeless limit λ → 0+ , this threshold asymptotically tends to the n-th eigenvalue of the stu-
dent, resulting in the intuitive picture presented in the main text. Namely, given n training points,
ridgeless regression learns the n projections corresponding to the highest eigenvalues. In particular,
assume that the kernel spectrum and the target function projections decay as power laws. Namely,
Λρ ∼ ρ−a and E[cρ 2 ] ∼ ρ−b , with 2a > b − 1. Furthermore, we can approximate the summa-
tions over modes with an integral by using the Euler-MacLaurin formula. Hence, we substitute the
eigenvalues with their asymptotic limit Λρ = Aρ−a . Since, κ0 (n)/n → 0 as n → ∞, these two
operations result in an error which is asymptotically independent of n. In particular,
                                      Z ∞
                                                  Aρ−a

                 κ0 (n)    κ0 (n) 1
                        =                                     dρ +  O(1)
                   n          n n       0    Aρ−a + κ0 (n)/n
                                                 − a1 Z ∞ 1 −1 1 −1                !
                           κ0 (n) 1      κ0 (n)           σa Aa a
                        =                                               dσ + O(1) .             (S81)
                              n n          n           0     1+σ
Since the integration over σ is finite and independent of n, we obtain that κ0 (n)/n = O(n−a ).
Similarly, we find that the mode-independent prefactor ∂λ (κλ (n)/n) |λ=0 = O(1).
As a result, we have
                                         X         n−2a      2
                                ϵ(n) ∼                  2 E[cρ ].                               (S82)
                                                 −a  −a
                                              (Aρ + n )
                                          ρ
Following the intuitive argument about the thresholding action of κ0 (n)/n ∼ n−a , we can split the
summation in Eq. S82 into modes where Λρ ≫ κ0 (P )/n, Λρ ∼ κ0 (n)/n and Λρ ≪ κ0 (n)/n,
                             X n−2a                  X1             X
                                               2              2
                      ϵ(n) ∼                E[cρ ] +       E[cρ ] +     E[c2ρ ].            (S83)
                                  (Aρ −a )2              2
                             ρ≪n                     ρ∼n            ρ≫n


                                                 28
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Finally, Eq. 12 is obtained by noticing that, under the assumption on the decay of E[c2ρ ], the con-
tribution of the summation over ρ ≪ n is subleading in n, whereas the other two can be merged
together.


F     E XAMPLES

F.1    R ATES FROM SPECTRAL BIAS ANSATZ

Consider a target function f ∗ which only depends on the meta-patch xil+1→L+1 and with square-
integrable derivatives up to order m, i.e. ∥∆m/2 f ∗ ∥2 < +∞, with ∆ denoting the Laplace operator.
Moreover, consider a hierarchical kernel of depth L + 1 with filter sizes (s1 , . . . , sL ) and pL = 1.
We want to compute the asymptotic scaling of the error by using Eq. 12, i.e.
                                                 X
                                                             ∗ 2
                                    ϵ(n) ∼                 |fk,ℓ | .                               (S84)
                                                   k,ℓ s.t. Λk <Λ(n)

In the previous section, we showed that the n-th eigenvalue of the kernel Λ(n) decays as
                                                          −1− d 2ν(L)
                                               Λ(n) ∼ n           eff   .                         (S85)
Since by construction the target function depends only on a meta-patch of the l-th sector, the only
non-zero projections will be the ones on eigenfunctions of the first l sectors. Thus, all the k’s
corresponding to the sectors of layers with l′ > l do not contribute to the sum. In particular, the sum
is dominated by the k’s of the largest sector and the set {k s.t. Λk < Λ(n)} is the set of kil+1→L+1 ’s
                                2ν+deff (L)
with norm larger than n (2ν+deff (l)) deff (L) .
Finally, we notice that the finite-norm condition on the derivatives,
                                      p
                                               ! p                    !m
                               X Y                X
                 m/2 ∗ 2                                                   ∗ 2
             ∥∆      f ∥ =              Nki ,s        ki (ki + s − 2)    |fk,ℓ | < +∞,            (S86)
                                   k     i=1             i=1

          ∗ 2
implies |fk,ℓ | ≲ ∥k∥−2m−deff (L) (see Subsec. C.3).
Hence, plugging everything in Eq. S84 we find
                                                         2m       2ν+deff (L)
                                                    − 2ν+d
                                         ϵ(n) ∼ n           (l)
                                                            eff     deff (L)
                                                                                .                 (S87)


G     N UMERICAL EXPERIMENTS

G.1    E XPERIMENTAL SETUP

Experiments were run on a high-performance computing cluster with nodes having Intel Xeon Gold
processors with 20 cores and 192 GB of DDR4 RAM. All codes are written in PyTorch Paszke et al.
(2019).

G.2    T EACHER - STUDENT LEARNING CURVES

In order to obtain the learning curves, we generate n + ntest random points uni-
formly distributed on the product of hyperspheres over the patches.                We use n ∈
{128, 256, 512, 1024, 2048, 4096, 8192} and ntest = 8192. For each value of n, we sam-
ple a Gaussian random field with zero mean and covariance given by the teacher kernel. Then, we
compute the kernel regression predictor of the student kernel, and we estimate the generalisation
error as the mean squared error of the obtained predictor on the ntest unseen example. The expecta-
tion over the teacher randomness is obtained by averaging over 16 independent sets of random input
points and realisations of the Gaussian random fields. As teacher and student kernels, we use the
analytical forms of the neural tangent kernels of hierarchical convolutional networks, with different
combinations of depths and filter sizes.


                                                         29
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


 a                                                        b
                                                          10 1
   10 2


               T: (2), S: (2)                             10 2       T: (2), S: (2, 2)
   10 3          = s1 1 1                                              = 1s+1 ddeffeff
               T: (2), S: (2, 2)                                     T, S: (2, 2)
                 = 1s+1 ddeffeff                                       = 1/deff
   10 4                                                   10 3
                              103              104                                  103               104
                                   n                                                     n
Figure S1: Learning curves for deep convolutional NTKs (ν = 1/2) in a teacher-student setting. a.
Depth-two teachers learned by depth-two (matched) and depth-three (mismatched) students. Both
these students are not cursed by the input dimension. b. Depth-three students learning depth-two
and depth-three teachers. These students are cursed only in the second case. The numbers inside
brackets are the sequence of filter sizes of the kernels. Solid lines are the results of experiments
averaged over 16 realisations with the shaded areas representing the empirical standard deviations.
The predicted asymptotic scaling ϵ ∼ n−β are reported as dashed lines.


Depth-two and depth-three architectures. Fig. S1 reports the learning curves of depth-two and
depth-three kernels with binary filters at all layers. Depth-three students defeat the curse of dimen-
sionality when learning depth-two teachers, achieving a similar performance of depth-two students
matched to the teacher’s structure. However, as we predict, these students encounter the curse of
dimensionality when learning depth-three teachers.

Ternary filters. Fig. S2 reports the learning curves for kernels with 3-dimensional filters and con-
firms our predictions in the s1 ≥ 3 case.

Comparison with the noisy and optimally-regularised case. Panel (a) of Fig. S3 compares the
learning curves obtained in the optimally-regularised and ridgeless cases for noisy and noiseless
data, respectively. The first case corresponds to the setting studied in Caponnetto & De Vito (2007),
in which the source-capacity formalism applies. In contrast with the second setting—which is the
one used in the teacher-student scenarios and where it holds the correspondence between kernel
methods and neural networks—i) we add to the labels a Gaussian random noise with standard devi-
ation σ = 0.1, ii) for each n, we select the ridge resulting in the best generalisation performance. We
observe that the decay obtained in the bound derived from the source-capacity conditions is exactly
the one found numerically, i.e. the rate of the bound is tight. As a further check, panel (b) shows
that the optimal ridge decays as prescribed.

G.3       I LLUSTRATION OF DIFFERENT TEACHER - STUDENT SCENARIOS

In this subsection, we comment on the results obtained in the different teacher-student scenarios of
Fig. 2, panel (a), and Fig. S1, panel (a). To ease notation, in the following we always consider the
NTK for both teacher and student kernels, i.e. smoothness exponent νT = νS = 1/2. However,
we point out that when the teacher kernel is a hierarchical RFK (νT = 3/2), the target function
corresponds to the output of an infinitely-wide, deep hierarchical network at initialisation4 . The
error rates are obtained from Eq. 17, after setting the smoothness exponent m = νT (the smoothness
exponent of the teacher covariance kernel).


    4
      See, e.g, Lee et al. (2017) for the equivalence between infinitely-wide networks and Gaussian random
fields with covariance given by the RFK.


                                                     30
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


 a                                                                b
                                                                       100


  10 1       T: (3), S: (3, 3)                                               T: (3), S: (3, 3, 3)
               = 1s+1 ddeffeff                                               T: (3, 3), S: (3, 3, 3)
             T, S: (3, 3)                                             10 1   T, S: (3, 3, 3)
               = 1/deff                                                        = (1 +1d+effd(l))d
                                                                                             eff(L)
                                                                                                  eff(L)

                            103                        104                                     103                           104
                                 n                                                               n
Figure S2: Learning curves for deep convolutional NTKs (ν = 1/2) with filters of size 3 in a
teacher-student setting. a. Depth-three students learning depth-two and depth-three teachers. These
students are cursed only in the second case. b. Depth-three models are cursed by the effective input
dimensionality. The numbers inside brackets are the sequence of filter sizes of the kernels. Solid
lines are the results of experiments averaged over 16 realisations with the shaded areas representing
the empirical standard deviations. The predicted asymptotic scaling ϵ ∼ n−β are reported as dashed
lines.


 a                                   Noisy
                                                                  b10 4
                                                                                                           n = n /( r + 1)
                                      = 1/(1 + deff)
                                     Noiseless
  10 1                                = 1/deff
                                                                      10 5
                                                                  n


                                                                      10 6
                            103                        104                                     103                           104
                                 n                                                               n
Figure S3: Noisy (optimally-regularised) vs noiseless (ridgeless) learning curves for depth-three
deep convolutional NTKs (ν = 1/2) in a teacher-student setting. a. Comparison between the
learning curves in the noisy and noiseless case. Dashed lines represent the rates predicted with
source-capacity bounds and replica calculations, respectively. Shaded areas represent the empirical
standard deviations. b. Decay of the optimal ridge with the number of training points.


                                                             31
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


The first case we consider consists of one-hidden-layer convolutional teacher (left) and student
(right) kernels.


                                                                                                      1
                                                                                  ϵ(n) ∼ n− s1 −1

x1   x2   x3    x4             xd   x1        x2        x3    x4         xd



As highlighted in blue, the output of the teacher is a linear combination (dashed lines indicate the
linear output weights) of s1 -dimensional functions of the input patches. If the structure of the student
is matched to the one of the teacher, the learning problem becomes effectively (s1 − 1)-dimensional
and the error decays as n−1/(s1 −1) , instead of n−1/deff , with deff the total input dimension with
the number of spherical constraints subtracted (one per patch). Notice that the role of the student’s
structure, i.e. the algorithm, is as crucial as the role of the teacher, i.e. the task. Indeed, using a
fully-connected student with no prior on the task’s locality would result in an error’s decay cursed
by dimensionality. However, in contrast to fully-connected students, shallow convolutional students
are only able to learn tasks with the same structure. In particular, any task entailing non-linear
interactions between patches—which are arguably crucial in order to learn image data—belongs to
their null space.
As we illustrated in the main text, to solve this strong constraint on the hypothesis space, one has
to consider deep convolutional architectures. In particular, consider the same shallow teacher of the
previous paragraph (left) learnt by a depth-four convolutional student (right).


                                                                                                    1+deff (3)
                                                                                            − s1
                                                                                ϵ(n) ∼ n       1     deff (3)


x1   x2   x3    x4             xd   x1        x2        x3    x4         xd



Remarkably, this student is able to learn the teacher without being cursed by input dimensionality.
Indeed, as the number of patches diverges, the error decay asymptotes to n−1/s1 . This rate is slightly
worse than the one obtained by the student matched with the teacher, which is proven to be the
Bayes-optimal case, but far from being cursed. Intuitively, this fast rate is obtained because the
student eigenfunctions of the first sector, i.e. constant outside a single patch, correspond to large
eigenvalues and bias the learning dynamics towards s1 -local functions. Yet, this student is also able
to represent functions which are considerably more complex.
Now consider a depth-three teacher (left) learned by a depth-four student (right).


                                                                                                       1+deff (3)
                                                                                         − 1+d 1 (2)
                                                                              ϵ(n) ∼ n        eff       deff (3)


x1   x2   x3   x4         xd             x1        x2    x3    x4        xd



As highlighted in orange, the output of the teacher is a linear combination of a composition of non-
linear functions acting on patches and coupling them. In this setting, the error decay is controlled by
the effective dimension of the second layer. In fact, when the number of patches diverges, the error


                                                                    32
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


decay asymptotes to n−1/deff (2) . In general, this behaviour is a result of what we called ‘adaptivity
to the spatial structure’ of the target.
Finally, consider both teacher and student with the complete hierarchy, i.e. the receptive fields of the
neurons in the penultimate layers coincide with the full input.


                                                                                                       1
                                                                                                −d
                                                                                     ϵ(n) ∼ n        eff (3)


x1     x2    x3    x4          xd     x1    x2    x3       x4          xd



In this case, we show that the error decays as n−1/deff (3) , i.e. the rate is cursed by the input di-
mension. The physical meaning of this result is that the hierarchical structure we are considering is
still too complex and cannot be learnt efficiently. In other words, these hierarchical convolutional
networks are excellent students, since they can adapt to the spatial structure of the task, but bad
teachers, since they generate global functions which are too complex to be learnt efficiently.

G.4          E XTENSIONS TO DIFFERENT NORMALISATIONS AND OVERLAPPING PATCHES

This section investigates the robustness of our results to changes in the input distribution, i.e., for
data outside the multisphere Mp Ss−1 , and relaxes the non-overlapping patches assumption.
Inputs in Rd . While our analysis requires that each patch of the input data is normalised to lie on a
unit sphere, this normalisation is not the standard one used for neural networks. Therefore, in this
section we investigate the robustness of our predictions to the data distribution. In particular, we
consider data uniformly distributed in the unit hypercube, i.e., x ∈ [0, 1]d , and data with standard
Gaussian distribution, i.e., x ∼ N (0, Id ). First, we extend the definition of the RFK and NTK to
inputs in Rd .

Definition G.1 (RFK and NTK of hierarchical CNNs for inputs in Rd ) Let x, y ∈ Rd . Denote
tuples of the kind il il+1 . . . im with il→m for m ≥ l. For m < l, il→m denotes the empty tuple. For
each tuple i2→L+1 and s a divisor of d, denote with ti2→L+1 the angle between the s-dimensional
patches of x and y identified by the same tuple, i.e.
                                                    xi2→L+1 · yi2→L+1
                                       ti2→L+1 =                                                        (S88)
                                                   ∥xi2→L+1 ∥∥yi2→L+1 ∥

For 1 ≤ l ≤ L + 1, denote with xi2→L+1 , yi2→L+1 i               the sequence of patches obtained by letting
                                                            2→l
the indices of the tuple i2→l vary in their respective range. Consider a hierarchical CNN with filter
                                                      (1)    (l)        (L+1)
sizes (s1 , . . . , sL ), pL ≥ 1 and all the weights wh,i , wh,h′ ,i , wh,i   initialised as Gaussian random
numbers with zero mean and unit variance.
RFK. The corresponding RFK √ (or covariance
                                            kernel) can be obtained recursively as follows. With
κ1 (t) = (π − arccos t) t + 1 − t2 /π,
       (1)
     KRFK (xi2→L+1 , yi2→L+1 ) = ∥xi2→L+1 ∥∥yi2→L+1 ∥ κ1 (ti2→L+1 );
                                       s1 X                       s
                                                                     1 X
      (l)                                                       2
     KRFK xi2→L+1 , yi2→L+1 i         =             ∥xil→L+1 ∥               ∥yil→L+1 ∥2
                                 2→l       sl i                      sl i
                                                 l                        l
                                        P                                                   
                                         1          (l−1)
                                        sl       K
                                               il RFK        xi2→L+1   , y i2→L+1 i
                                                                                      2→l−1
                                  × κ1  q P                        q P                      ;
                                            1                     2    1                   2
                                            sl     il ∥x il→L+1 ∥     sl     il ∥y il→L+1 ∥
                                                                 pL
       (L+1)
                                                             1 X     (L)

     KRFK           xi2→L+1 , yi2→L+1 i                =            KRFK xi2→L+1 , yi2→L+1 i       . (S89)
                                          2→L+1             pL i =1                          2→L
                                                                L+1


                                                                33
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


 a                                                                     b
     100                                                               10 1



                                                                       10 2
   10 1         Ga. T: (2, 4), S: (2, 4)                                      Ga. T: (2), S: (2, 4)
                MS. T: (2, 4), S: (2, 4)                                      MS. T: (2), S: (2, 4)
                Cb. T: (2, 4), S: (2, 4)                                      Cb. T: (2), S: (2, 4)
                                                                       10 3
                               103                         104                               103      104
                                n                                                             n
Figure S4: Learning curves for deep convolutional NTKs (ν = 1/2) in a teacher-student setting with
different input normalisations. In particular, we consider inputs on the multisphere Mp Ss−1 (MS.),
uniformly-distributed in the unit d-hypercube [0, 1]d (Cb.), and with standard Gaussian distribution
N (0, Id ) (Ga.). The numbers inside brackets are the sequence of filter sizes of the kernels. Solid
lines are the results of experiments averaged over 16 realisations with the shaded areas representing
the empirical standard deviations. The asymptotic scaling ϵ ∼ n−β predicted for inputs on the
multisphere are reported as dashed lines.


NTK. The NTK of the same hierarchical CNN can be obtained recursively as follows. With
κ0 (t) = (π − arccos t) /π,
    (1)
 KNTK xi2→L+1 , yi2→L+1 = ∥xi2→L+1 ∥∥yi2→L+1 ∥ κ1 (ti2→L+1 ) + xi2→L+1 · yi2→L+1 κ0 (ti2→L+1 );

    (l)                                    (l)
 KNTK xi2→L+1 , yi2→L+1 i           = KRFK ( xi2→L+1 , yi2→L+1 i )
                              2→l                                             2→l
                                                                                              !
                                    1 X         (l−1)

                              +              KNTK           xi2→L+1 , yi2→L+1 i
                                    sl i                                            2→l−1
                                         l
                                      P                                                         
                                       1               (l−1)
                                       sl       i l
                                                    K  RFK       xi 2→L+1
                                                                          , yi 2→L+1     i2→l−1
                              × κ0  q P                               q P                       ;
                                              1                      2    1                    2
                                             sl       il ∥x i l→L+1
                                                                    ∥    sl     il ∥y i l→L+1
                                                                                              ∥
                                                                  pL
     (L+1)
                                                            1 X     (L)

 KNTK          xi2→L+1 , yi2→L+1 i                     =           KNTK xi2→L+1 , yi2→L+1 i       . (S90)
                                           2→L+1           pL i =1                          2→L
                                                                 L+1



Fig. S4 reports the learning curve of different teacher-student scenarios with the kernels defined in
Def. G.1 and inputs i) on the multisphere Mp Ss−1 , ii) uniformly-distributed in the unit d-hypercube
[0, 1]d , and iii) with standard Gaussian distribution N (0, Id ). Remarkably, our predictions are in
excellent agreement with the different input normalisations.
Overlapping patches. Fig. S5 shows the comparison between convolutional kernels with non-
overlapping patches, i.e., stride corresponding to the filter size, and overlapping patches, i.e., stride
1, for inputs uniform in the d-dimensional hypercube. Despite our theoretical analysis requires the
patches to be non-overlapping, our predictions are still confirmed for architectures with overlapping
patches.

G.5        CIFAR-2 LEARNING CURVES

Fig. S6 shows the learning curves of the neural tangent kernels of different architectures applied to
pairs of classes of the CIFAR-10 dataset. In particular, the task is built by selecting two CIFAR-10
classes, e.g. plane and car, and assigning label +1 to the elements belonging to one class and label
−1 to the remaining ones. Learning is again achieved by minimising the empirical mean squared
error using a ‘student’ kernel. We find that the kernels with the worst performance are the ones
corresponding to shallow fully-connected and convolutional architectures. Instead, for all the pairs
of classes considered here, deep hierarchical convolutional kernels achieve the best performance.


                                                                 34
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                10 1



                                10 2
                                       NO. T: (2, 4), S: (2, 4)
                                       Ov. T: (2, 4), S: (2, 4)
                                       NO. T: (2), S: (2, 4)
                                       Ov. T: (2), S: (2, 4)
                                10 3
                                                      103                104
                                                        n
Figure S5: Learning curves for deep convolutional NTKs (ν = 1/2) with non-overlapping (NO.) and
overlapping (Ov.) patches in a teacher-student setting with inputs normalised in the d-hypercube.
The numbers inside brackets are the sequence of filter sizes of the kernels. Solid lines are the
results of experiments averaged over 16 realisations with the shaded areas representing the empirical
standard deviations. The asymptotic scaling ϵ ∼ n−β predicted for kernels with non-overlapping
patches are reported as dashed lines.


 a                                                       b
  0.60                                                      0.90
  0.50
                                                            0.80
  0.40       C-NTK fsz=(8)                                         C-NTK fsz=(8)
             C-NTK fsz=(8, 2)                               0.70   C-NTK fsz=(8, 2)
             C-NTK fsz=(8, 2, 2)                                   C-NTK fsz=(8, 2, 2)
             F-NTK (L=2)                                           F-NTK (L=2)
  0.30       F-NTK (L=3)                                           F-NTK (L=3)
                                                            0.60
                          103                104                                103              104
                           n                                                     n
Figure S6: Learning curves of the neural tangent kernels of fully-connected (F-NTK) and con-
volutional (C-NTK) networks with various depths learning to classify two CIFAR-10 classes in a
regression setting. Deep hierarchical convolutional kernels achieve the best performance. Shaded
areas represent the empirical standard deviations obtained averaging over different training sets. a.
Plane vs car. b. Cat vs bird.


                                                   35
