Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


I MPROVING I NFORMATION R ETENTION IN L ARGE
S CALE O NLINE C ONTINUAL L EARNING
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                             A BSTRACT
         Given a stream of data sampled from non-stationary distributions, online continual
         learning (OCL) aims to adapt efficiently to new data while retaining existing
         knowledge. The typical approach to address information retention (the ability to
         retain previous knowledge) is keeping a replay buffer of a fixed size and computing
         gradients using a mixture of new data and the replay buffer. Surprisingly, the recent
         work (Cai et al., 2021) suggests that information retention remains a problem in
         large scale OCL even when the replay buffer is unlimited, i.e., the gradients are
         computed using all past data. This paper focuses on this peculiarity to understand
         and address information retention. To pinpoint the source of this problem, we
         theoretically show that, given limited computation budgets at each time step, even
         without strict storage limit, naively applying SGD with constant or constantly
         decreasing learning rates fails to optimize information retention in the long term.
         We propose using a moving average family of methods to improve optimization
         for non-stationary objectives. Specifically, we design an adaptive moving average
         (AMA) optimizer and a moving-average-based learning rate schedule (MALR).
         We demonstrate the effectiveness of AMA+MALR on large-scale benchmarks,
         including Continual Localization (CLOC), Google Landmarks, and ImageNet.
         Code will be released upon publication.


1    I NTRODUCTION
Supervised learning commonly assumes that the data is independent and identically distributed
(iid.). This assumption is violated in practice when the data comes from a non-stationary distribution
that evolves over time. Continual learning aims to solve this problem by designing algorithms that
efficiently learn and retain knowledge over time from a data stream. Continual learning can be
classified into online and offline. The offline setting (Li & Hoiem, 2017) mainly limits the storage:
only a fixed amount of training data can be stored at each time step. The computation is not limited
in offline continual learning: the model can be trained from scratch until convergence at each step. In
contrast, the online setting only allows a limited amount of storage and computation at each time step.
A number of metrics can be used to evaluate a continual learner. If the model is directly evaluated
on the incoming data, the objective is learning efficacy; this evaluates the ability to efficiently adapt
to new data. If the model is evaluated on historical data, the objective is information retention; this
evaluates the ability to retain existing knowledge. These two objectives are in conflict, and their
trade-off is known as the plasticity-stability dilemma (McCloskey & Cohen, 1989).
Following recent counterintuitive results, we single out information retention in this work. A common
assumption in the continual learning literature is that information retention is only a problem due to
the storage constraint. Take replay-buffer-based methods as an exemplar. It is tacitly understood that
since they cannot store the entire history, they forget past knowledge which is not stored. However,
this intuition is challenged by recent empirical results. For example, Cai et al. (2021) show that the
information retention problem persists even when past data is stored in its entirety. We argue that, at
least in part, the culprit for information loss is optimization.
Direct application of SGD to a continual data stream is problematic. Informally, consider the learning
rate (i.e., step size). It needs to decrease to zero over time to guarantee convergence (Ghadimi &
Lan, 2013). However, this cannot be applied to a continual and non-iid. stream since infinitesimal
learning rates would simply ignore the new information and fail to adapt, resulting in underfitting.


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


This underfitting would worsen over time as the distribution continues to shift. We formalize this
problem and further show that there is no straightforward method to control this trade-off, and this
issue holds even when common adaptive learning rate heuristics are applied.
Orthogonal to continual learning, one recently proposed remedy to guarantee SGD convergence with
high learning rates is using the moving average of SGD iterates (Mandt et al., 2016; Tarvainen &
Valpola, 2017). Informally, SGD with large learning rates bounces around the optimum. Averaging
its trajectory dampens the bouncing and tracks the optimum better (Mandt et al., 2016). We apply
these ideas to OCL for the first time to improve information retention.
To summarize, we theoretically analyze the behavior of SGD for OCL. Following this analysis, we
propose a moving average strategy to optimize information retention. Our method uses SGD with
large learning rates to adapt to non-stationarity, and utilizes the average of SGD iterates for better
convergence. We propose an adaptive moving average (AMA) algorithm to control the moving
average weight over time. Based on the statistics of the SGD and AMA models, we further propose a
moving-average-based learning rate schedule (MALR) to better control the learning rate. Experiments
on Continual Localization (CLOC) (Cai et al., 2021), Google Landmarks (Weyand et al., 2020), and
ImageNet (Deng et al., 2009) demonstrate superior information retention and long-term transfer for
large-scale OCL.


2   R ELATED W ORK

Optimization in OCL. OCL methods typically focus on improving learning efficacy. Cai et al. (2021)
proposed several strategies, including adaptive learning rates, adaptive replay buffer sizes, and small
batch sizes. Hu et al. (2020) proposed a new optimizer, ConGrad, which, at each time step, adaptively
controls the number of online gradient descent steps (Hazan, 2019) to balance generalization and
training loss reduction. Our work instead focuses on information retention and proposes a new
optimizer and learning rate schedule that trade off learning efficacy to improve long-term transfer.
In terms of replay buffer strategies, mixed replay (Chaudhry et al., 2019), originating from offline
continual learning, forms a minibatch by sampling half of the data from the online stream and the
other half from the history. It has been applied in OCL to optimize learning efficacy (Cai et al., 2021).
Our work uses pure replay instead to optimize information retention, where a minibatch is formed by
sampling uniformly from all history.
Continual learning algorithms. We focus on the optimization aspect of OCL. Other aspects, such as
the data integration (Aljundi et al., 2019b) and the sampling procedure of the replay buffer (Aljundi
et al., 2019a; Chrysakis & Moens, 2020), are complementary and orthogonal to our study. These
aspects are critical for a successful OCL strategy and can potentially be used in conjuction with our
optimizers. Offline continual learning (Li & Hoiem, 2017; Kirkpatrick et al., 2017) aims to improve
information retention with limited storage. Unlike the online setting, SGD works in this case since
the model can be retrained until convergence at each time step. We refer the readers to Delange et al.
(2021) for a detailed survey of offline continual learning algorithms.
Moving average in optimization. We propose a new moving-average-based optimizer for OCL.
Although we are the first to apply this idea to OCL, moving average optimizers have been widely
utilized for convex (Ruppert, 1988; Polyak & Juditsky, 1992) and non-convex optimization (Izmailov
et al., 2018; Maddox et al., 2019; He et al., 2020). Beyond supervised learning (Izmailov et al., 2018;
Maddox et al., 2019), the moving average model has also been used as a teacher of the SGD model
in semi-supervised (Tarvainen & Valpola, 2017) and self-supervised learning (He et al., 2020). The
moving average of stochastic gradients (rather than model weights) has also been widely used in
ADAM-based optimizers (Kingma & Ba, 2014).
Continual learning benchmarks. We need a large-scale and realistic benchmark to evaluate OCL.
For language modeling, Hu et al. (2020) created the Firehose benchmark using a large stream of
Twitter posts. The task of Firehose is continual per-user tweet prediction, which is self-supervised
and multi-task. For visual recognition, Lin et al. (2021) created the CLEAR benchmark by manually
labeling images on a subset of YFCC100M (Thomee et al., 2016). Though the images are ordered
in time, the number of labeled images is small (33K). Cai et al. (2021) proposed the continual
localization (CLOC) benchmark using a subset of YFCC100M with time stamps and geographic
locations. The task of CLOC is geolocalization, which is formulated as image classification. CLOC


                                                   2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


has significant scale (39 million images taken over more than 8 years) compared to other benchmarks.
Due to the large scale and natural distribution shifts, we use CLOC as the main dataset to study OCL.

3   P RELIMINARIES
In this section, we formalize the online continual learning problem and introduce our notation. We
then discuss the dataset and the metrics we use.
Problem definition. Given the input domain X and the label space Y, online continual learning
learns a parametric function f (·|θ) : X → Y that maps an input x ∈ X to the corresponding label
y ∈ Y. At each time step t ∈ {1, 2, ..., ∞} the learner interacts with the environment as follows:
      1. The environment samples the data {Xt , Yt } ∼ πt and reveals the inputs Xt to the learner.
      2. The learner predicts the label for each datum xitt ∈ Xt via ŷtit = f (xitt |θt−1 ).
      3. The environment reveals the true labels Yt and the learner integrates {Xt , Yt } into the data
         pool St via St = update(St−1 , {Xt , Yt }).
      4. The learner updates the model θt using St .
Dataset. Due to the large scale, the smooth data stream, and natural distribution shifts, we mainly use
the Continual Localization (CLOC) benchmark (Cai et al., 2021) to study OCL. CLOC formulates
image geolocalization as a classification problem. It contains 39 million labeled images for training, 39
thousand images for performance evaluation, and another 2 million images for initial hyperparameter
tuning. The images are ordered according to their time stamps, so that images taken earlier are seen
by the model first. Images for training and performance evaluation cover the same time span and are
sampled uniformly over time. Images for hyperparameter tuning are from a different time span that
does not overlap with the training and evaluation data. We refer to the 39 million training images as
the training data, the 39 thousand evaluation images as the evaluation data, and the 2 million images
for initial hyperparameter tuning as the preprocessing data.
Evaluation protocol. We evaluate OCL algorithms using the following metrics.
Learning Efficacy: For online learning applications, the model θt is deployed for inference on data
from the next time step, i.e., Xt+1 . In this case, we measure the ability to adapt to new data as
                                              t
                                           1X
                               PLE (t) =         acc({Xj+1 , Yj+1 }, θj ),                            (1)
                                           t j=1

where acc(S, θ) is the average accuracy of the model θ on a set of data S.
Information Retention: When the data for inference comes from the history, we measure the ability
to retain previous knowledge as
                                               t
                                             n [      t
                                                      [    o
                               PIR (t) = acc     XE
                                                  j ,   YjE , θt ,                                    (2)
                                                    j=1    j=1

 where {XE       E
            j , Yj } is the evaluation data from time step j, which has the same distribution as
{Xj , Yj } but unseen by the model. PIR (t) measures the generalization of θt to historical data.
Forward Transfer: When long-term predictions are required, we measure ability to generalize from
current time (t) to future time steps (t + k1 to t + k2 , k2 > k1 ≥ 1) as
                                           n t+k
                                              [2      t+k2
                                                       [      o
                            PF T (t) = acc       XE
                                                  j ,      YjE , θt .                                 (3)
                                                  j=t+k1   j=t+k1


4   M ETHOD
We consider replay-based methods, where the common choice for continual learning is mixed
replay (Chaudhry et al., 2019). The objective of mixed replay at time step t is
                              minimize l({Xt , Yt }, θ) + l(St−1 , θ),                                (4)
                                 θ∈Rd



                                                      3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


where {Xt , Yt } is the data received at time t, St−1 is the historical data accumulated in the replay
buffer, and l(·, θ) is the loss function. Mixed replay constructs a minibatch of training data by
sampling half from the current time step t and another half from the history (from t − Bt to t − 1
where Bt decides the time range). In offline continual learning (Chaudhry et al., 2019), Bt is set to
t − 1 for full coverage. Cai et al. (2021) adaptively choose Bt to optimize learning efficacy in OCL.
In this paper, we focus on information retention, more specifically its optimization. A reasonable
objective for pure information retention is pure replay, which is defined as follows at each time step t:
                                              minimize l(St , θ).                                              (5)
                                                θ∈Rd

Pure replay constructs a minibatch of training data by sampling uniformly from all historical time
steps, i.e., from 1 to t, which encourages remembering all historical knowledge. As shown in
Appx. C.6, optimizing (5) (as opposed to (4)) improves both information retention and forward
transfer by sacrificing learning efficacy.

4.1    O PTIMIZING I NFORMATION R ETENTION
When the distribution of St remains unchanged over time (i.e., the loss function is stationary), the
standard optimizer for problem (5) is Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD). This choice is typically
carried over to continual learning. At each update iteration k (k ̸= t if multiple updates are allowed
at each time step of continual learning), SGD updates the model via
                                        θk ← θk−1 − αk gk (θk−1 ),                                             (6)
where αk is the learning rate and gk (θk−1 ) is the stochastic gradient of the objective at iteration k.
Although the convergence behavior of SGD is well understood for the case of stationary losses, its
implications for OCL are not clear. Hence, we extend the analysis of SGD (Ghadimi & Lan, 2013) to
the continual learning case. Denote the loss function at iteration k by lk (θ) and assume:
      A1 ∥▽lk (θ) − ▽lk (θ ′ )∥ ≤ L ∥θ − θ ′ ∥ , ∀θ, θ ′ ∈ Rd and k (Lipschitz smoothness).
      A2 E[gk (θ)] = ▽lk (θ), ∀θ ∈ Rd and k (Unbiased gradient estimates).
                              2
      A3 ∥▽lk (θ) − gk (θ)∥ ≤ ρ2 , ∀θ ∈ Rd (Bounded gradient noise).
      A4 |lk+1 (θ) − lk (θ)| ≤ χk , ∀θ and k (Bounded non-stationarity).

A1 to A3 extend the standard assumptions for SGD analysis (Ghadimi & Lan, 2013) from the
stationary case to the non-stationary case. And A4 bounds the degree of non-stationarity between
consecutive iterations. The expectations are taken over the randomness of the stochastic gradient
noise. With these assumptions, we state the following theorem and defer its proof to Appx. A.2 (also
see Appx. A.2 for details about how to interpret this result under limited storage):
Theorem 1. Assume A1 to A4, and let αk < L2 ,
                                                              2
                                  min        E[∥▽lj+1 (θj )∥ ] ≤ T1 + T2 + T3 ,                                (7)
                             j∈{0,1,...,k}

                                                   Lρ2
                                                         Pk     2                            Pk
                                                           j=0 αj+1                      2 j=0 χj+1
where T1 = 2(l (θ )−E[lk+2 (θk+1 )])
            P1k 0
                        −Lα2 )
                                     , T2 = Pk                    2      , and T3 = Pk              2      .
                  (2α
                 j=0   j+1        j+1              j=0 (2αj+1 −Lαj+1 )               j=0 (2αj+1 −Lαj+1 )

Therorem 1 bounds the minimum gradient norm achievable by SGD during OCL. A similar bound in
the stationary case (Theorem 2 in Appx. A.1) has only the terms T1 and T2 . Hence, T3 is the cost of
the non-stationarity. In the stationary case (when T3 = 0), we can simply find the optimal learning
rate by trading off between T1 and T2 . Specifically, for a constant learning rate, T1 converges to 0
at a linear rate, but T2 is constant. Hence, the strategy for convergence is reducing learning rates to
control T2 simultaneously with T1 . This result supports the effectiveness of the standard “reduce-
when-plateau” (RWP) learning rate heuristic in the stationary case. Since the access to the true
gradient norm is not practical, RWP often uses the validation accuracy/loss as a surrogate to control
the learning rate αk , where we reduce αk by a certain factor β once the validation accuracy/loss
plateaus (Goodfellow et al., 2016; He et al., 2016).
In the continual learning setting (when T3 ̸= 0), RWP can be less effective. For example, if
χk ≥ χ > 0 for a constant χ, i.e., the loss function lk (·) changes at least at a linear rate, then T3
can grow linearly when the learning rate is reduced to 0. Hence in OCL, there can be cases where


                                                         4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


simultaneous convergence of T1 , T2 , and T3 are not possible. Controlling T3 requires a reasonably
large learning rate, whereas using a large learning rate increases T2 . Finally, the χk term can cause
the learning rate annealing signal in RWP, i.e., the gradient norm or the validation loss/accuracy, to
be unstable in OCL. We argue that these are the core obstacles in application of SGD to OCL.
In summary, the major issues hindering the performance of OCL when optimized with SGD are:
      P1 OCL needs large learning rates due to non-stationarity. However, convergence requires
         smaller learning rates.
      P2 RWP allows the learning rate to be infinitesimal, which prevents the model from adapting to
         new data.
      P3 The validation performance is not always indicative of learning. E.g., due to the distribution
         shift of OCL, the validation accuracy can decrease, even when the model is still improving.
To address P1, we propose an Adaptive Moving Average (AMA) optimizer in Sec. 4.2. Then, to
address P2 and P3, we introduce a moving-average-based learning rate (MALR) schedule in Sec. 4.3.

4.2    A DAPTIVE M OVING AVERAGE

Our Adaptive Moving Average (AMA) optimizer extends Exponential Moving Average (EMA) (Tar-
vainen & Valpola, 2017). Moving average optimizers maintain two models: the SGD model θk and
the MA model θkM A . At each iteration k, θk is first updated with (6). Then, θkM A is updated via
                                   θkM A ← γk θk−1
                                               MA
                                                   + (1 − γk )θk ,                                  (8)
where the MA weight γk ∈ [0, 1] is a hyperparameter. In EMA, γk is a constant. In AMA, we adapt
γk over time using population-based search (Jaderberg et al., 2017) to improve the performance.
Why does AMA help information retention? Given stationary losses, SGD can converge to local
optima by reducing the learning rate. In this case, the final solution found by AMA will not be very
different from SGD as we validate in Appx. C.10. In the non-stationary case, SGD needs reasonably
large learning rates to track the shifting optimum over time. However, the variance (T2 in (7)) of
SGD increases with large learning rates, hurting convergence.
The advantage of AMA is to reduce the variance of SGD. Given stationary losses, Mandt et al. (2016)
have shown that SGD with a constant learning rate will eventually bounce around a region centered
at the optimum. Averaging the SGD trajectory with uniform weights estimates the region center,
i.e., the optimal solution. This observation inspires the design of AMA. Informally, SGD with large
learning rates would follow and bounce around the shifting optimum in OCL. The moving average of
these high-variance iterates tracks the shifting optimum better. As a further informal justification,
consider the unfolded AMA update rule (8):                                  
                                         k−1
                                         X                   k
                                                             Y                  k
                                                                                Y
                θkM A = (1 − γk ) θk +         (1 − γi )        γ j  θi +        γ j  θ0 ,      (9)
                                         i=1             j=i+1              j=1

where θ0 is the initial solution of SGD and AMA. (9) shows that the AMA model θkM A is a linear
combination of the SGD trajectory {θ0 , ..., θk }. Since γk ∈ [0, 1], θkM A lies inside the convex hull
of {θ0 , ..., θk }. The population-based search aims to find the best point within the convex hull by
adapting γk .
We summarize our method in Alg. 1. To adapt γk over time, we maintain two MA models, θ M A1
and θ M A2 , and update them using different weights, γ M A1 and γ M A2 (Line 4). To decide the best
model and weight, we use the validation accuracy Acc1 and Acc2 (Line 5), which we define next.
Once every KW iterations, we copy the parameter of the best MA model to the other one, and adapt
the MA weights (Line 7 to 10). In all our experiments, we set the initial MA weight γ0 to 0.99, the
MA weight adjustment coefficient δ to 5, and the interval KW to adjust weights to 10000 iterations.
We continuously track a validation metric for adaptation. At each time step t, a holdout information
retention validation set SVt is updated, which has the same distribution as St . To maintain SVt online,
whenever new data {Xt , Yt } is received, we put a random subset (5% in all experiments) into SVt
and put the rest into St . We compute the information retention validation accuracy/loss on SVt in an
online fashion (described in Appx. B). In this way, we can parallelize validation with model updates,


                                                     5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Algorithm 1 Adaptive Moving Average (AMA)
Require: Initial model θ0 , initial moving average weight γ0 , MA weight adjustment coefficient
    δ(> 0), MA weight update interval KW .
 1: θ M A1 ← θ0 , θ M A2 ← θ0 , γ M A1 ← γ0 , γ M A2 ← γδ0 , Acc1 ← 0, Acc2 ← 0, ibest ← 1
 2: for k ∈ {1, 2, 3, ..., ∞} do
 3:     Update the SGD model θk
 4:     Update θ M A1 using γ M A1 and θ M A2 using γ M A2
 5:     Update validation accuracy Acc1 and Acc2 online
 6:     If Acc1 > Acc2 then ibest = 1 else ibest = 2
 7:     if k mod KW = 0 then
 8:         Copy the weights of θ M Aibest to the other. Acc1 ← 0, Acc2 ← 0.
 9:         Increase γ M A1 &γ M A2 by a factor of δ if ibest = 1, and decrease otherwise.
10:     end if
11: end for


and choose the best MA model for inference anytime during OCL. We use the information retention
validation accuracy/loss both in Algorithm 1 and later for learning rate control.
We propose several strategies to reduce the overhead of MA and population-based search. The
overhead from MA lies in 1) updating the MA model and 2) recomputing the batch normalization
(BN) statistics (Ioffe & Szegedy, 2015). To solve 1, we perform the MA update only every KM
iterations. We set KM = 10 in all experiments and do not observe a performance drop. To solve 2,
we replace BN with group normalization (GN) + weight standardization (WS) (Qiao et al., 2019),
which does not store normalization statistics. We evaluate its impact in Appx. C.1. The overhead
from population-based search lies in the online validation operation (Line 5). Each operation requires
one forward pass on a batch of validation data. To reduce the overhead, we execute Line 5 every
KV = 20 iterations. See Appx. B for a detailed version of Algorithm 1 with the above strategies.

4.3   M OVING -AVERAGE - BASED L EARNING R ATE S CHEDULE (MALR)

As discussed in (P3), monitoring only the validation accuracy is not sufficient for learning rate control
as the effects of learning and distribution shifts counteract each other. Interestingly, AMA provides a
better signal for learning rate control as a by-product. Specifically, we use the difference between
information retention validation loss/accuracy of the MA model θ M Aibest and the SGD model θk .
We denote this difference at iteration k by σk . Intuitively, since AMA performs better than SGD
given non-minimal learning rates, σk can be used to estimate the performance gain obtainable by
learning rate reduction. To control the learning rate reduction speed, we do not reduce learning rates
unless σk plateaus, indicating that we cannot achieve better long-term performance gain. On the
other hand, when the learning rate is too small, potentially incapable of adapting to new data, σk will
also be very small. Hence, we do not reduce the learning rate unless σk exceeds a certain threshold.
In summary, MALR reduces the learning rate when the following conditions are satisfied. C1: The
information retention validation performance (of the MA model) does not improve for KR iterations.
(This is the original RWP condition.) C2: σk does not increase for KR iterations. C3: σk > ϵ.
Computational complexity. The average computational complexity of SGD+RWP per iteration
is cSGD+RWP = ( KK  V +1
                      V
                          )cF + cG + cU , where cF is the complexity of one forward pass, KV
is the interval to do one online validation step, cG and cU are respectively the complexity for
computing the gradient and updating the model. The complexity of AMA+MALR is cAMA+MALR =
( KK
   V +3
    V
        )cF + cG + ( KK M +2
                         M
                             )cU , where KM is the interval to do one MA update step. When KV and
KM are large, the overhead of AMA+MALR is small.

5     E XPERIMENTS
Implementation details. We mainly use CLOC (Cai et al., 2021) to study OCL at large scale. Similar
to the setting of Cai et al. (2021), the model receives 256 images at each time step. We use the
ResNet-50 architecture, a batch size of 256 and tune the initial hyperparameters on the preprocessing
data. We set the initial learning rate α0 to 0.025, the momentum of SGD to 0.9, the weight decay to


                                                   6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                                               10 1                                                                6.0                                                                  5.25                                                                               9
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          AMA+MALR


Information Retention (%)
                            40
                                                                                               10 5                                                                                                                                     5.00                                                                               8
                            35                                                                                                                                     5.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           7


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Val Acc Diff (%)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Validation Loss
                                                                                                                                                 Validation Loss
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        4.75


                                                                               Learning Rate
                            30                                                                 10 9
                                                                                                                                                                   5.0                                 AMA+MALR                                                         AMA+MALR                                           6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        4.50
                            25        AMA+MALR                                                 10 13                                                                                                   AMA+CLR                                                          AMA+CLR                                            5
                                      AMA+MALR (SGD Model)                                                                                                         4.5                                 AMA+RWP                          4.25                            AMA+RWP
                            20                                                                 10 17                                                                                                   SGD+RWP                                                          SGD+RWP                                            4
                                      AMA+CLR                                                                AMA+MALR                                                                                                                   4.00
                            15        SGD+CLR                                                  10 21         AMA+CLR                                                                                                                                                                                                       3
                                                                                                                                                                   4.0
                            10        AMA+RWP                                                                AMA+RWP                                                                                                                    3.75                                                                               2
                                      SGD+RWP                                                  10 25         SGD+RWP                                               3.5                                                                  3.50                                                                               1
                             5
                                 0    1    2   3    4    5   6       7                                 0     1   2   3    4   5   6    7                                 0    1    2   3       4   5    6   7                                  0.0    0.2   0.4   0.6     0.8   1.0   1.2   1.4                                0    1   2    3    4   5    6       7
                                     Number of Training Iterations       1e6                               Number of Training Iterations   1e6                               Number of Training Iterations      1e6                                  Number of Training Iterations                1e6                              Number of Training Iterations       1e6



   (a) Information reten- (b) Log-scaled learn- (c) Validation loss (d) Validation loss                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        (e) σk over time.
   tion over time. (↑) ing rate over time. over time. (↓)           (zoomed view). (↓)
Figure 1: Results on CLOC. (a): AMA+MALR outperformed all competitors. Among optimizers,
AMA outperformed SGD in both RWP and MALR. (b): MALR effectively annealed the learning
rate over time, outperforming RWP and CLR. (c) & (d): Under distribution shifts, the validation loss
increased for constant learning rates in both long and short terms. This made RWP reduce the learning
rate too fast. (e): Given a constant learning rate, σk in MALR first increased and then plateaued. σk
declined with the learning rate reduction. This trend was stable even under distribution shifts.


1e − 4, and the loss to cross-entropy. For RWP, we reduce the learning rate by half if the information
retention validation loss stops decreasing for KR = 60000 training iterations. For MALR, we set
σk as the difference of the information retention validation accuracy between the MA and the SGD
models, and set ϵ in C3 to 3.0%. To decouple the effect of the storage limit and better focus on
studying the problem of limited computation in large scale OCL, we use a replay buffer size of 40
million images in main experiments. Appx. C.4 ablates the effect of replay buffer sizes and shows
that large scale OCL only requires a reasonably large replay buffer (4 million images for CLOC).
We use the same set of hyperparameters introduced by AMA/MALR in all experiments to verify
their robustness. (See Appx. C.11 for further details.) All models are trained with 8 Nvidia Geforce
Rtx 2080 Ti GPUs. We refer to the information retention validation loss/accuracy throughout the
experiments as the validation loss/accuracy. The arrows (↑/↓) in the caption of each figure point
towards the direction of improvement.

5.1                                       M AIN R ESULT: E FFECTIVENESS OF AMA AND MALR

To study the effectiveness of AMA + MALR, we compare it against SGD + RWP (SGD is used
as the base optimizer due to high performance, see Appx. C.5 for similar experiments on ADAM).
To separate the effects of optimizers and learning rate schedules, we also compare against AMA
+ RWP, AMA + constant learning rate (CLR), the SGD model in AMA+MALR, and SGD+CLR
(using training + validation data for training since no online hyperparameter adaptation is needed).
We allow 80 training iterations per time step, so that the number of training iterations is large enough
and learning rate annealing is necessary. We evaluate information retention using PIR (t).
As shown in Fig. 1a, AMA+MALR outperformed all competitors. The “jumps” of the performance
curves were due to the learning rate change in RWP or MALR. Note that the information retention in
Fig. 1a was not monotonically increasing because of the distribution shifts. In terms of the optimizer,
AMA was better than SGD in all learning rate schedules. Moreover, the performance gap was
especially large for large learning rates, validating P1. In terms of the learning rate schedule, MALR
outperformed both RWP and CLR. Specifically, the distribution shift made the validation loss increase
over time for constant learning rates (Fig. 1c and 1d). This phenomenon caused RWP to reduce the
learning rate too fast (Fig. 1b). As a result, AMA+RWP and SGD+RWP performed even worse than
SGD+CLR in the long term. In contrast, MALR effectively controlled the learning rate reduction
speed and the minimum learning rate with the help of the new signal σk (Fig. 1e), which was more
robust to distribution shifts than the validation loss/accuracy.

5.2                                       A BLATIONS

MALR extends RWP by introducing C2 and C3. To understand the effect of each condition, we
compare AMA+MALR to versions where C2 is removed (AMA+MALR+No C2), C3 is removed
(AMA+MALR+No C3), and both are removed (AMA+RWP).
As shown in Fig. 2a, AMA+MALR+No C3 failed to limit the minimum learning rate (P2), and
performed worse than AMA+MALR in the long term. AMA+MALR+No C2 reduced the learning
rate too quickly (P3) at the early stage compared to AMA+MALR. With both C2 and C3 removed,
AMA+RWP performed the worst in all methods. As shown in Fig. 2c, the performance of all
competitors dropped when σk was too low, which happened when the learning rate was too small


                                                                                                                                                                                           7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                                                                                                                                                           10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 AMA+MALR


   Information Retention (%)
                               40                                                                                              10 3
                                                                                                                                                                                                            8                                    AMA+MALR (No C3)
                               35                                                                                              10 6                                                                                                              AMA+MALR (No C2)


                                                                                                                                                                                        Val Acc Diff (%)
                                                                                                               Learning Rate
                                                                                                                               10 9                                                                         6                                    AMA+RWP
                               30
                                                                                                                               10 12                                                                        4
                               25
                                                                AMA+MALR                                                       10 15       AMA+MALR                                                         2
                               20                               AMA+MALR (No C3)                                               10 18       AMA+MALR (No C3)
                                                                AMA+MALR (No C2)                                                           AMA+MALR (No C2)                                                 0
                               15                               AMA+RWP                                                        10 21       AMA+RWP
                                     0                               1       2       3       4   5   6                                 0   1     2    3       4            5      6                                 0        1       2       3         4       5   6
           Number of Training Iterations                                                             1e6                            Number of Training Iterations                 1e6                                   Number of Training Iterations 1e6
 (a) Information retention over time. (↑)                                                                                      (b) Learning rate over time.                                                              (c) σk over time.
Figure 2: Ablation for MALR. AMA+MALR outperformed all competitors. AMA+MALR+No C2
reduced the learning rate too fast at early stages, causing P3. AMA+MALR+No C3 did not limit the
minimum learning rate, causing P2. AMA+RWP performed worst.
                                                                42                                                                                                        1.000
                                    Information Retention (%)


                                                                40
                                                                                                                                                                          0.998
                                                                38


                                                                                                                                                              MA weight
                                                                                                                                                                          0.996
                                                                36
                                                                34                                                                                                        0.994

                                                                32
                                                                                                                                                                          0.992
                                                                30                                             AMA                                                                                                                                   AMA
                                                                                                               EMA                                                        0.990
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     EMA
                                                                         0       1       2   3   4   5     6               7                                                      0          1                  2        3       4       5       6         7
                                          Number of Training Iterations 1e5                                                                                                        Number of Training Iterations 1e5
                                (a) Information retention over time. (↑)                                                                                                       (b) MA weight over time.
Figure 3: AMA vs EMA. AMA performed better than EMA by adapting the MA weight over time.

(Fig. 2b). Hence, σk is an effective learning rate annealing signal for OCL. Appx. C.2 further
analyzes the effect of using suboptimal learning rates. To summarize, large learning rates led to poor
convergence and hurt performance on data from all time ranges. On the other hand, small learning
rates prevented the model from adapting to new data.
AMA vs EMA. We study the effect of population-based MA weight adaptation. We compare AMA
with EMA and use the learning rate generated by AMA+MALR on both models to remove the
effect of learning rate annealing. Due to resource limitations, we train EMA only for 700 thousand
iterations. As shown in Fig. 3, AMA outperformed EMA by adapting the MA weight over time.
Further analyses in the appendix. Due to the space limit, we provide the following analyses in
the appendix. Effect of batch sizes in Appx. C.3: Heavy parallelization by increasing batch sizes
and decreasing the number of training iterations has negative impact on all OCL metrics. Effect
of training objectives, i.e., (5) vs (4), in Appx. C.6: Optimizing information retention (using (5)) is
more suitable for both information retention and long-term forward transfer, at the cost of sacrificing
learning efficacy. More importantly, increasing the computation budget for optimizing information
retention improved all OCL metrics, whereas increasing the computation budget for optimizing
learning efficacy (using (4)) hurt information retention and forward transfer.

5.2.1                               E FFECTIVENESS OF AMA BEYOND CLOC

Google Landmarks. We apply AMA+MALR to Google Landmarks v2 (Weyand et al., 2020), which
contains images from different landmarks (each representing a class). We construct our continual
dataset using a subset of 580 thousand training images with time stamps. We refer to the constructed
dataset as Continual Google LandMarks (CGLM). Similar to CLOC, 256 new images are revealed
at each time step, and 80 training iterations are allowed per time step (see Appx. C.7 for more
implementation details). As shown in Fig. 4-a, AMA performed better than SGD in CGLM. Since
CGLM is small-scale, the learning rate of both RWP and MALR remained constant throughout most
of the training. Hence, we only reported the performance of AMA+MALR and the SGD model. To
further check this limitation, we also looked at the first 580K images of CLOC in Figs. 4-c and 4-d.
Similar to CGLM, the relative merit of different learning rate schedules was unclear. Hence, a
large-scale dataset is necessary for analyzing OCL learning rate schedules.
ImageNet. We test our method on task-based benchmarks synthesized from ImageNet. Specifically,
we create a 100-task continual learning problem by randomly dividing ImageNet classes, so that each
                                                                      t|
task contains data from 10 classes. During training, we allow 120|X
                                                                  256    training iterations per task,


                                                                                                                                               8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023



                                                                                                                                                                                          42                                                                            0.0250
                            80         AMA+MALR (SGD Model)                                                       AMA+MALR


                                                                                                                                                              Information Retention (%)
Information Retention (%)
                                                                                                     0.13
                            70         AMA+MALR                                                                                                                                           40                                                                            0.0225
                                                                                                     0.12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0.0200


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Learning Rate
                                                                                     Learning Rate
                            60                                                                                                                                                            38
                                                                                                     0.11                                                                                                            AMA+MALR                                           0.0175
                            50                                                                                                                                                                                       AMA+MALR (SGD Model)
                                                                                                                                                                                          36
                            40                                                                       0.10                                                                                                            AMA+RWP                                            0.0150
                                                                                                                                                                                          34                         SGD+RWP
                            30                                                                       0.09                                                                                                                                                               0.0125
                            20                                                                       0.08
                                                                                                                                                                                          32
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0.0100          AMA+MALR
                                                                                                                                                                                          30                                                                                            AMA+RWP
                            10                                                                       0.07                                                                                                                                                               0.0075          SGD+RWP
                                 0   25000 50000 75000 100000 125000 150000 175000                          0    25000 50000 75000 100000125000150000175000                                    0   25000 50000 75000 100000 125000 150000 175000                                 0    25000 50000 75000 100000125000150000175000
                                     Number of Training Iterations                                               Number of Training Iterations                                                     Number of Training Iterations                                                     Number of Training Iterations
     (a) Information retention (b) Learning rate over (c) Information retention on (d) Learning rate for the first
     on CGLM (↑).              time on CGLM.          the first 580K CLOC images. 580K images of CLOC.
Figure 4: Results on the CGLM. AMA performed better than SGD. Given only 580K images, the
difference of learning rate schedules are unclear for CGLM ((a) & (b)) and CLOC ((c) & (d)).
                                                                        AMA+MALR                     SGD+Cyclic                       GDumb                                      ER                           MIR                   SGD+RWP                                Supervised Learning Val Acc
                                       Information Retention (%)


                                                                   80

                                                                   60

                                                                   40

                                                                   20

                                                                    0
                                                                        0                                   20                                    40                                                            60                                 80                                                100
                                                                                                                                                                               Task ID
Figure 5: ImageNet results (↑). AMA+MALR out-performed both SGD+RWP and SGD+Cyclic.
The final validation accuracy is close to the supervised learning model. Due to the implicit computa-
tion increase in each model update iteration, OCL methods performed worse than simple SGD+Cyclic
when the memory is sufficiently large and the computation is explicitly limited.
where |Xt | is the number of images of task t and 256 is the training batch size. In this setting, the total
number of SGD steps of a continual learner trained on all tasks is the same as the standard supervised
learning model trained for 120 epochs. During evaluation, we compute the average accuracy on
validation data from all revealed tasks. To demonstrate the online performance, we perform multiple
evaluations during each task. Since clear task boundaries are available, we also compare against
SGD+Cyclic, where the cosine learning rate schedule is used in each task. We further compare against
methods designed for handling storage limitations: GDumb (Prabhu et al., 2020), ER (Aljundi et al.,
2018), and MIR (Aljundi et al., 2019a). We explicitly limit the computation budget of ER, GDumb,
and MIR to be similar to other methods. See Appx. C.8 for more details about the experimental setup
and hyperparameter settings.
As shown in Fig. 5, AMA+MALR outperformed both SGD+RWP and SGD+Cyclic. Comparing
to SGD+Cyclic, AMA+MALR had better intermediate and final performance during each task,
making it more suitable for online applications. Using the same number of SGD steps, the final
validation accuracy of AMA+MALR was close to supervised learning. On the other hand, ER, MIR,
and GDumb performed worse than SGD+Cyclic since implicit computation increase in each model
update step made them require more computation/time to converge. Note that here we allow the
replay buffer to store all past data. This result demonstrates that limited computation and limited
storage are orthogonal problems in OCL. The are both important and require dedicated treatments.
See Appx. C.9 for similar results with limited storage.

6                                    C ONCLUSION
We studied the problem of improving information retention in online continual learning (OCL). We
proposed to use pure replay as the objective for optimizing information retention. We provided theo-
retical analysis of the convergence of SGD in OCL. We also proposed an Adaptive Moving Average
(AMA) Optimizer and a Moving-Average-based Learning Rate Schedule (MALR) to optimize the
pure replay objective online. Experiments on several large-scale continual learning benchmarks
demonstrate the effectiveness of AMA+MALR. In terms of limitations and future work, we used
two MA models to adapt the MA weights, which increases the GPU memory footprint to store the
network weights for MA models (but not the gradient information as in the SGD model). Designing
more memory-efficient techniques to adapt MA weights is an interesting future research direction.
Furthermore, this work mainly focused on studying the problem of limited computation in OCL. De-
veloping effective solutions to address the computation and storage aspects together is an interesting
and important future direction.


                                                                                                                                                                                     9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


R EFERENCES
Rahaf Aljundi, Francesca Babiloni, Mohamed Elhoseiny, Marcus Rohrbach, and Tinne Tuytelaars.
  Memory aware synapses: Learning what (not) to forget. In Proceedings of the European Conference
  on Computer Vision (ECCV), pp. 139–154, 2018. 9
Rahaf Aljundi, Lucas Caccia, Eugene Belilovsky, Massimo Caccia, Min Lin, Laurent Charlin, and
  Tinne Tuytelaars. Online continual learning with maximally interfered retrieval. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1908.04742, 2019a. 2, 9
Rahaf Aljundi, Min Lin, Baptiste Goujaud, and Yoshua Bengio. Gradient based sample selection for
  online continual learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1903.08671, 2019b. 2
Omar Besbes, Yonatan Gur, and Assaf Zeevi. Non-stationary stochastic optimization. Operations
 research, 63(5):1227–1244, 2015. 13
Zhipeng Cai, Ozan Sener, and Vladlen Koltun. Online continual learning with natural distribution
  shifts: An empirical study with visual data. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International
  Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 8281–8290, 2021. 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 16, 17
Arslan Chaudhry, Marcus Rohrbach, Mohamed Elhoseiny, Thalaiyasingam Ajanthan, Puneet K
  Dokania, Philip HS Torr, and Marc’Aurelio Ranzato. On tiny episodic memories in continual
  learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1902.10486, 2019. 2, 3, 4, 15, 17
Aristotelis Chrysakis and Marie-Francine Moens. Online continual learning from imbalanced data.
  In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 1952–1961. PMLR, 2020. 2
Matthias Delange, Rahaf Aljundi, Marc Masana, Sarah Parisot, Xu Jia, Ales Leonardis, Greg
 Slabaugh, and Tinne Tuytelaars. A continual learning survey: Defying forgetting in classification
 tasks. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 2021. 2
Jia Deng, Wei Dong, Richard Socher, Li-Jia Li, Kai Li, and Li Fei-Fei. Imagenet: A large-scale
   hierarchical image database. In 2009 IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition,
   pp. 248–255. Ieee, 2009. 2
Saeed Ghadimi and Guanghui Lan. Stochastic first-and zeroth-order methods for nonconvex stochastic
  programming. SIAM Journal on Optimization, 23(4):2341–2368, 2013. 1, 4, 12
Ian Goodfellow, Yoshua Bengio, and Aaron Courville. Deep learning. MIT press, 2016. 4
Elad Hazan. Introduction to online convex optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.05207, 2019. 2
Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image
  recognition. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition,
  pp. 770–778, 2016. 4
Kaiming He, Haoqi Fan, Yuxin Wu, Saining Xie, and Ross Girshick. Momentum contrast for
  unsupervised visual representation learning. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
  Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 9729–9738, 2020. 2
Hexiang Hu, Ozan Sener, Fei Sha, and Vladlen Koltun. Drinking from a firehose: Continual learning
  with web-scale natural language. arXiv preprint arXiv:2007.09335, 2020. 2, 18
Sergey Ioffe and Christian Szegedy. Batch normalization: Accelerating deep network training by
  reducing internal covariate shift. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 448–456.
  PMLR, 2015. 6
Pavel Izmailov, Dmitrii Podoprikhin, Timur Garipov, Dmitry Vetrov, and Andrew Gordon Wilson. Av-
  eraging weights leads to wider optima and better generalization. arXiv preprint arXiv:1803.05407,
  2018. 2
Max Jaderberg, Valentin Dalibard, Simon Osindero, Wojciech M Czarnecki, Jeff Donahue, Ali
 Razavi, Oriol Vinyals, Tim Green, Iain Dunning, Karen Simonyan, et al. Population based training
 of neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1711.09846, 2017. 5


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Diederik P Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1412.6980, 2014. 2

James Kirkpatrick, Razvan Pascanu, Neil Rabinowitz, Joel Veness, Guillaume Desjardins, Andrei A
  Rusu, Kieran Milan, John Quan, Tiago Ramalho, Agnieszka Grabska-Barwinska, et al. Overcoming
  catastrophic forgetting in neural networks. Proceedings of the national academy of sciences, 114
  (13):3521–3526, 2017. 2

Zhizhong Li and Derek Hoiem. Learning without forgetting. IEEE transactions on pattern analysis
  and machine intelligence, 40(12):2935–2947, 2017. 1, 2

Zhiqiu Lin, Jia Shi, Deepak Pathak, and Deva Ramanan. The clear benchmark: Continual learning on
  real-world imagery. In Thirty-fifth Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems Datasets
  and Benchmarks Track (Round 2), 2021. 2

Wesley J Maddox, Pavel Izmailov, Timur Garipov, Dmitry P Vetrov, and Andrew Gordon Wilson.
 A simple baseline for bayesian uncertainty in deep learning. Advances in Neural Information
 Processing Systems, 32:13153–13164, 2019. 2

Stephan Mandt, Matthew Hoffman, and David Blei. A variational analysis of stochastic gradient
  algorithms. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 354–363. PMLR, 2016. 2, 5

Michael McCloskey and Neal J Cohen. Catastrophic interference in connectionist networks: The
 sequential learning problem. In Psychology of learning and motivation, volume 24, pp. 109–165.
 Elsevier, 1989. 1

Yurii Nesterov. Introductory lectures on convex programming volume i: Basic course. Lecture notes,
  3(4):5, 1998. 14

Boris T Polyak and Anatoli B Juditsky. Acceleration of stochastic approximation by averaging. SIAM
  journal on control and optimization, 30(4):838–855, 1992. 2

Ameya Prabhu, Philip HS Torr, and Puneet K Dokania. Gdumb: A simple approach that questions
 our progress in continual learning. In European conference on computer vision, pp. 524–540.
 Springer, 2020. 9

Siyuan Qiao, Huiyu Wang, Chenxi Liu, Wei Shen, and Alan Yuille. Micro-batch training with
  batch-channel normalization and weight standardization. arXiv preprint arXiv:1903.10520, 2019.
  6

David Ruppert. Efficient estimations from a slowly convergent robbins-monro process. Technical
  report, Cornell University Operations Research and Industrial Engineering, 1988. 2

Antti Tarvainen and Harri Valpola. Mean teachers are better role models: Weight-averaged consistency
  targets improve semi-supervised deep learning results. arXiv preprint arXiv:1703.01780, 2017. 2,
  5

Bart Thomee, David A Shamma, Gerald Friedland, Benjamin Elizalde, Karl Ni, Douglas Poland,
  Damian Borth, and Li-Jia Li. Yfcc100m: The new data in multimedia research. Communications
  of the ACM, 59(2):64–73, 2016. 2

Tobias Weyand, Andre Araujo, Bingyi Cao, and Jack Sim. Google landmarks dataset v2-a large-scale
  benchmark for instance-level recognition and retrieval. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference
  on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 2575–2584, 2020. 2, 8, 18


A    C ONVERGENCE A NALYSIS OF SGD

This section analyzes the convergence of SGD in both supervised learning (SL) and online continual
learning (OCL). The purpose of the analysis is to demonstrate the difference between the optimization
problem in SL and OCL, and explain intuitively why SGD+RWP works in SL but can fail in OCL.


                                                 11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A.1     C ONVERGENCE ANALYSIS IN S UPERVISED L EARNING

In supervised learning, we are given a fixed set of training data, and we solve the following stationary
optimization problem
                                               minimize l(θ).                                            (10)
                                                   θ∈Rd

In each iteration k, SGD updates the model θk using the stochastic gradient, from a batch of training
data, via,
                                        θk ← θk−1 − αk g(θk−1 |Ek ),                                     (11)
where Ek denotes the random variable that determines the noise of the stochastic gradient.
The standard assumptions (Ghadimi & Lan, 2013) for analyzing the non-convex case of supervised
learning is

       A5 Lipschitz Smoothness with constant L ≥ 0 : ∥▽l(θ) − ▽l(θ ′ )∥ ≤ L ∥θ − θ ′ ∥ , ∀θ, θ ′ ∈
          Rd , where ∥·∥ is the Euclidean Norm.
       A6 Unbiased gradient estimation: EE [g(θ|E)] = ▽l(θ), ∀θ ∈ Rd .
                                                                                   2
       A7 Bounded gradient noise with constant ρ ≥ 0: ∥▽l(θ) − g(θ|E)∥ ≤ ρ2 , ∀θ ∈ Rd .

Under these assumptions, we re-produce the standard convergence result of SGD in the non-convex
SL case:
Theorem 2. Assume A5 to A7, and let αk < L2 ,
                                                                                 Pk
                              2    2(l(θ0 ) − EE1 ,...,Ek+1 [l(θk+1 )])      Lρ2 j=0 αj+1
                                                                                        2
    min EE1 ,...,Ej [∥▽l(θj )∥ ] ≤     Pk                               + Pk                    .
                                                               2                          2
                                         j=0 (2αj+1 − Lαj+1 )              j=0 (2αj+1 − Lαj+1 )
 j∈{0,...,k}

                                                                                              (12)

Proof. Following the proof of Theorem 2.1 until (2.11) in (Ghadimi & Lan, 2013), we have
  k
  X                                                                                       k
                                                                                          X
               2                          2
    (2αj+1 − Lαj+1 )EE1 ,...,Ej [∥▽l(θj )∥ ] ≤ 2(l(θ0 ) − EE1 ,...,Ek+1 [l(θk+1 )]) + Lρ2    2
                                                                                            αj+1 .
  j=0                                                                                             j=0
                                                                                                         (13)
And since
 k
 X                                                                  k
                                                                    X
             2                                                 2                 2                          2
( (2αj+1 − Lαj+1 ))         min        EE1 ,...,El [∥▽l(θl )∥ ] ≤     (2αj+1 − Lαj+1 )EE1 ,...,Ej [∥▽l(θj )∥ ],
                         l∈{0,...,k}
 j=0                                                                j=0
                                                                                                         (14)
                                                                                             Pk
we immediately have (12) by combining (13) with (14) and dividing both sides by                 j=0 (2αj+1 −
   2
Lαj+1 ).

Theorem 2 tells us that the convergence of SGD can be guaranteed P
                                                                 by properly setting the learning
                        2(l(θ0 )−EE1 ,...,Ek+1 [l(θk+1 )])            Lρ2 k       2
                                                                             j=0 αj+1
rate αk . Denote T4 =       Pk                   2         and T5 = Pk              2    as the first and the
                               j=0 (2αj+1 −Lαj+1 )                   j=0 (2αj+1 −Lαj+1 )
second terms at the right hand side of (12), which are of the same form as T1 and T2 of (7). To ensure
that T4 goes to 0, we need to make sure that
                                             k
                                             X
                                                          2
                                       lim     (2αj+1 − Lαj+1 ) = ∞.                                     (15)
                                   k→∞
                                             j=0

And to ensure that T5 goes to 0, we need to ensure that
                                            Pk      2
                                              j=0 αj+1
                                 lim Pk                      = 0.                                        (16)
                                                        2
                                        j=0 (2αj+1 − Lαj+1 )
                                k→∞


                                                          12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023



                                       √
For example, one can set αk = O( k) so that both (15) and (16) are satisfied. Theorem 2 also
provides insights of why RWP is effective in SL. Given a constant learning rate αk = α, we can see
that T4 = O( k1 ) after k iterations, i.e., it converges with linear speed. However, the second term
               2
       Lρ α
T5 = 2−Lα    is a constant over time. Hence, the gradient norm will first decrease and then converge to
a constant given a constant learning rate. And the plateau of the gradient norm is a signal that we
need to reduce the learning rate to further improve the model. In practice, the validation loss/accuracy
is often used as a surrogate of the gradient norm.


A.2       C ONVERGENCE ANALYSIS IN OCL

We provide a proof of Theorem 1 in this section. Before the proof, we first re-state the problem, the
assumptions and the theory in a more detailed format.
At each iteration k, we are given a non-stationary objective

                                                   minimize lk (θ).                                                  (17)
                                                         θ


In each iteration k, SGD updates the model θk using the stochastic gradient gk (θk−1 |Ek ) on lk (θk−1 ),
from a batch of training data, via,

                                           θk ← θk−1 − αk gk (θk−1 |Ek ),                                            (18)

where Ek denotes the random variable that decides the noise of the stochastic gradient.
It is unsurprising that no algorithm can achieve a reasonable performance if lk (·) can change arbitrarily
between consecutive iterations, since we can change the training data in a completely adversarial
fasion. One reasonable assumption is that lk (·) does not change significantly between consecutive
time steps. For example, when we want to optimize information retention, the training data pool St
does not change significantly between consecutive iterations. Given this intuition, we formalize our
assumptions in the non-stationary case, with the definition of the mean operation E (which is omitted
in the main paper) as follows:

      A1 Lipschitz Smoothness with constant L ≥ 0 : ∥▽lk (θ) − ▽lk (θ ′ )∥ ≤ L ∥θ − θ ′ ∥ , ∀θ, θ ′ ∈
         Rd and k.

      A2 Unbiased gradient estimation: EE [gk (θ|E)] = ▽lk (θ), ∀θ ∈ Rd and k.
                                                                                               2
      A3 Bounded gradient noise with constant ρ ≥ 0: ∥▽lk (θ) − gk (θ|E)∥ ≤ ρ2 , ∀θ ∈ Rd and k.

      A4 Bounded non-stationarity with constants χk ≥ 0: |lk (θ) − lk+1 (θ)| ≤ χk , ∀θ ∈ Rd and k.

Intuitively, A1 to A3 extend A5 to A7 to non-stationary objectives, and A4 constraints the change of
the objective function value between consecutive iterations, which is similar to the analysis of SGD
in the convex case (Besbes et al., 2015). Note that lk (θ) is computed over the replay data, i.e., not
on the discarded historical data when the replay buffer/storage is limited. Hence the analysis in this
section naturally includes limited storage as a special case. Under these assumptions, we can prove
the following convergence result of SGD in the non-stationary case:
Theorem 1. Assume A1 to A4, and let αk < L2 ,

                                                                         2
                                 min        EE1 ,...,Ej [∥▽lj+1 (θj )∥ ] ≤ T1 + T2 + T3                              (19)
                            j∈{0,1,...,k}


                                                                                   Lρ2 k        2
                                                                                        P
                       2(l1 (θ0 )−EE1 ,...,Ek+1 [lk+2 (θk+1 )])                            j=0 αj+1
where T1           =          Pk                   2            ,   T2       =   Pk               2     ,   and T3    =
                                 j=0 (2αj+1 −Lαj+1 )                              j=0 (2α j+1 −Lα j+1 )
          Pk    2
      2    j=0 χj+1
Pk              2       .
  j=0 (2αj+1 −Lαj+1 )


                                                              13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Proof. With A1 and Lemma 1.2.3 of (Nesterov, 1998), we have
    EE1 ,...,Ek+1 [lk+1 (θk+1 )]                                                                                (20)
                                                                                   2
                                                                L ∥θk+1 − θk ∥
  ≤EE1 ,...,Ek+1 [lk+1 (θk ) + ▽lk+1 (θk )T (θk+1 − θk ) +                        ]                             (21)
                                                                      2
                                                                   LEE1 ,...,Ek+1 [∥αk+1 gk+1 (θk |Ek+1 )∥2 ]
  =EE1 ,...,Ek [lk+1 (θk )] − αk+1 EE1 ,...,Ek [∥▽lk+1 (θk )∥2 ] +                                              (22)
                                                                                       2
  =EE1 ,...,Ek [lk+1 (θk )] − αk+1 EE1 ,...,Ek [∥▽lk+1 (θk )∥2 ]+
      2
   Lαk+1    EE1 ,...,Ek+1 [∥(gk+1 (θk |Ek+1 ) − ▽lk+1 (θk )) + ▽lk+1 (θk )∥2 ]
                                                                                                                (23)
                                          2
  =EE1 ,...,Ek [lk+1 (θk )] − αk+1 EE1 ,...,Ek [∥▽lk+1 (θk )∥2 ]+
      2
    Lαk+1 EE1 ,...,Ek+1 [∥gk+1 (θk |Ek+1 ) − ▽lk+1 (θk )∥2 + ∥▽lk+1 (θk )∥2 −
    ▽lk+1 (θk )T (gk+1 (θk |Ek+1 ) − ▽lk+1 (θk ))]/2                                                            (24)
                                                                       2
                                                                     Lαk+1 EE1 ,...,Ek [ρ2 + ∥▽lk+1 (θk )∥2 ]
  ≤EE1 ,...,Ek [lk+1 (θk )] − αk+1 EE1 ,...,Ek [∥▽lk+1 (θk )∥2 ] +                                              (25)
                                                                                           2
                                          2                                      2
                                        Lαk+1                                  Lαk+1 ρ2
  =EE1 ,...,Ek [lk+1 (θk )] − (αk+1 −         )EE1 ,...,Ek [∥▽lk+1 (θk )∥2 ] +          .                       (26)
                                          2                                       2
                                                                                       2
where (25) is due to A3 (∥gk+1 (θk |Ek+1 ) − ▽lk+1 (θk )∥                                   ≤      ρ2 ) and A2
(EE1 ,...,Ek+1 [−2▽lk+1 (θk )T (gk+1 (θk |Ek+1 ) − ▽lk+1 (θk ))] = 0).                     Rearranging the terms
in (26) and using A4, we have
                             2
                           Lαk+1                            2
               (αk+1 −           )EE1 ,...,Ek [∥▽lk+1 (θk )∥ ]                                                  (27)
                             2
                                                                                    2
                                                                                  Lαk+1 ρ2
                ≤ EE1 ,...,Ek [lk+1 (θk )] − EE1 ,...,Ek+1 [lk+1 (θk+1 )] +                     ,               (28)
                                                                                       2
                                                                                                 2
                                                                                               Lαk+1 ρ2
                ≤ EE1 ,...,Ek [lk+1 (θk )] − EE1 ,...,Ek+1 [lk+2 (θk+1 )] + χk+1 +                      .       (29)
                                                                                                  2
Summing both sides of (29) from j = 0 to k, we have
                    k
                    X
                                     2                                      2
                          (2αj+1 − Lαj+1 )EE1 ,...,Ej [∥▽lj+1 (θj )∥ ]
                    j=0
                                                                            k
                                                                            X              k
                                                                                           X
                                                                        2          2
                 ≤2(l1 (θ0 ) − EE1 ,...,Ek+1 [lk+2 (θk+1 )]) + Lρ                 αj+1 +            χj+1 .      (30)
                                                                            j=0            j=0

With a similar derivation as in the proof of Theorem 2, we immediately have (19).

Intuitively, to make T3 converge to 0, we need to set the learning rate such that
                                               Pk
                                                 j=0 χj+1
                                   lim Pk                         = 0,                             (31)
                                                              2
                                           j=0 (2αj+1 − Lαj+1 )
                                 k→∞

               Pk                  2
                                                                Pk
i.e., we need j=0 (2αj+1 − Lαj+1      ) to increase faster than j=0 χj+1 . In practice, the value of χk
depends on the application. Given a constant learning rate αk = α, T3 can increase for an increasing
sequence of χk . This explains why P3 can happen in practice. If χk ≥ χ for a constant χ, we cannot
have a learning rate schedule that makes T1 , T2 and T3 converge to 0 at the same time. Moreover,
when αk < 1, decreasing αk will increase of T3 . In the extreme case, if αk is reduced to 0, T3 will
increase in linear speed, causing long term failure of SGD+RWP. This explains P2, i.e., why reducing
the learning rate to 0 using RWP hurts the performance of OCL. And demonstrates why we need
to keep the learning rate sufficiently large, i.e., P1. Note that currently, there is no lower bound
to demonstrate the tightness of (19). Hence, the analysis in this section can only be viewed as an
intuition.
Interpreting Theorem 1 under limited storage In practice, both supervised learning and continual
learning use a limited amount of (though may be in a large scale) training/replay data. In such cases,


                                                        14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


the loss (lk (θ) in (17) and l(θ) (10)) is only computed over the stored data. And our assumptions in
the theories are only w.r.t. the loss over the training/replay data. For supervised learning, each training
data point can be viewed as a random sample from the original data distribution. For continual
learning where not all past data can be stored, one can construct a reservoir replay buffer (Chaudhry
et al., 2019) online, so that at each time step t, each data point in the replay buffer is also a random
sample from the original data distribution. Hence, the bound in Theorem 1 is directly comparable
to the bound in Theorem 2 when the replay buffer size in OCL is the same as the dataset size of
supervised learning. The performance of a (continual) learner over the original data distribution is
the problem of generalization, which is out of the scope of convergence analysis.

B     F URTHER D ETAILS OF AMA AND O NLINE VALIDATION

Algorithm 2 Adaptive Moving Average (AMA)
Require: Initial model θ0 , the initial moving average weight γ0 , MA weight adjustment coefficient
    δ(> 0), model update interval KM , validation interval KV , MA weight update interval KW ,
    number of training iterations per time step p.
 1: θ M A1 ← θ0 , θ M A2 ← θ0 , γ M A1 ← γ0 , γ M A2 ← γδ0
 2: Acc1 ← 0, Acc2 ← 0, n ← 0, ibest ← 1
 3: for k ∈ {1, 2, 3, ..., ∞} do
 4:     θk ← θk−1 − αk g(θk−1 )
 5:     if k mod KM = 0 then
 6:         θ M A1 ← γ M A1 θ M A1 + (1 − γ M A1 )θk
 7:         θ M A2 ← γ M A2 θ M A2 + (1 − γ M A2 )θk
 8:     end if
 9:     if k mod KV = 0 then
                      n·Acc1 +acc(BV k ,θ M A1 )           n·Acc2 +acc(BV k ,θ M A2 )
                                    ⌊   ⌋                                ⌊   ⌋
                                     p                                 p
10:        Acc1 ←              n+1             , Acc2 ←            n+1          ,n←n+1
11:        If Acc1 > Acc2 then ibest = 1 else ibest = 2
12:    end if
13:    if k mod KW = 0 then
14:        Acc1 ← 0, Acc2 ← 0, n ← 0
15:        if ibest = 1 then                      ▷ Increase both MA weights but limit them to be ≤ 1
                                                         M A1
16:             γ M A1
                       ← min(1, δγ   M A1
                                          ), γ M A2
                                                     ←γ δ
17:             θ M A2 ← θ M A1 , ibest = 2
18:        else                                                         ▷ Decrease both MA weights
                           M A1                M A2
19:             γ M A1 ← γ δ , γ M A 2 ← γ δ
20:             θ M A1 ← θ M A2 , ibest = 1
21:        end if
22:    end if
23: end for


Alg. 2 describes the complete version of Alg. 1, with overhead reduction strategies added. Each
online validation step (Line 9 to Line 12) computes the accuracy on a batch of data BV⌊ k ⌋ sampled
                                                                                              p

from the information retention validation set SV⌊ k ⌋ of the current training iteration k, where p is the
                                                   p
number of SGD updates allowed per time step. We average the computed accuracy on the fly between
each KW iterations, and use the averaged accuracy as the online information retention validation
accuracy. The benefit of this online validation process is that the validation steps can be parallelized
completely with model updates, and we can also select the best MA model for inference anytime
during OCL.

C     F URTHER E XPERIMENTS
C.1   BN VS GN+WS


                                                    15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                                                        44
                                                                                                                   GN+WS


                                                                            Information Retention (%)
                                                                                                        42         BN
                                                                                                        40
                                                                                                        38
                                                                                                        36
                                                                                                        34
                                                                                                        32
                                                                                                        30
                                                                                                        28
                                                                                                             0   100000 200000 300000 400000 500000 600000 700000
                                                                                                                 Number of Training Iterations
Figure 6: Information retention over time for models with different normalization layers. (↑)
GN+WS performed slightly better than BN in terms of information retention, but more efficient in
AMA due to the removal of BN statistics.

                                                                     AMA+MALR                                                                                                                                      AMA+MALR
             Per-week Accuracy (%)


                                                                                                                                                           Per-week Accuracy (%)
                                     40                              AMA+CLR                                                                                                       40                              AMA+CLR
                                                                     AMA+RWP                                                                                                                                       AMA+RWP
                                     30                              SGD+RWP                                                                                                                                       SGD+RWP
                                                                                                                                                                                   30

                                     20                                                                                                                                            20

                                     10                                                                                                                                            10

                                      0                                                                                                                                             0
                                           1.0    1.5   2.0    2.5    3.0                 3.5                                                                                            1.0    1.5   2.0    2.5    3.0   3.5
                                          Time Stamp of Evaluation Data (s)1e8                                                                                                          Time Stamp of Evaluation Data (s)1e8
 (a) k = 5.76e5. αk is 1.25e−2 for AMA+MALR, (b) k = 4.8e8. αk is 1.56e−3 for AMA+MALR,
 6.25e−3 for AMA+RWP, and 9.77e−5 for 9.54e−8 for AMA+RWP, and 2.98e−9 for
 SGD+RWP. (↑)                                SGD+RWP. (↑)
Figure 7: Accuracy on evaluation data from different time ranges, for models at two different
training iterations k. Comparing to AMA+MALR, AMA+CLR used a larger learning rate αk ,
causing performance deterioration on all data ranges. SGD+RWP and AMA+RWP dropped the
learning rate too quickly, making the model unable to adapt to new data.


As mentioned in Sec. 4.2, we replace BN with GN+WS to remove the overhead of re-computing BN
statistics in AMA. To show the effect of changing the normalization layer, we compare the model
trained with BN against the one trained with GN+WS. Due to resource limitations, we only train the
BN model for 700 thousand iterations. As shown in Fig. 6, GN+WS performed slightly better than
BN. Combined with the efficiency, GN+WS is suitable for information retention in OCL.

C.2   S MALL L EARNING R ATES S TYMIE A DAPTATION TO N EW DATA
To understand the effect of using suboptimal learning rates on data from different ranges, we take
the models of different methods at two distinct training iterations (k = 5.76e5 and k = 4.8e8), and
plot their accuracy on evaluation data from different time ranges. As shown in Fig. 7, AMA+CLR
performed worse than AMA+MALR on all data ranges due to the use of a large learning rate. The
performance gap was larger on historical data than on future data. SGD+RWP and AMA+RWP
performed well only on early data and failed to improve the performance for new data when the
learning rate was too low.

C.3   H EAVY PARALLELISM H URT OCL

Cai et al. (2021) have shown that increasing batch sizes for optimizing learning efficacy hurts all
OCL performance metrics. We perform a similar analysis to study whether this phenomenon still
happens when optimizing information retention. Specifically, we optimize information retention
with batch sizes varying from 64 to 1024. When we increase the batch size, we reduce the number
of training iterations per time step and increase the learning rate by the same factor. We allow 1
training iteration per time step for a batch size of 256. As shown in Fig. 8, increasing batch sizes for
optimizing information retention also hurt all OCL performance metrics.

C.4   A R EASONABLY L ARGE R EPLAY B UFFER I S S UFFICIENT

We now analyze the effect of replay buffer sizes, by training models with replay buffer sizes of 400
thousand, 4 million, and 40 million images. To optimize information retention, we use a reservoir


                                                                                                                                16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                           BS64                                                                             BS64                                                                            BS64


                                                                                     Information Retention (%)
                            8                                                                                    14                                                                            10
                                           BS256                                                                            BS256                                                                           BS256


                                                                                                                                                                        Forward Transfer (%)
    Learning Efficacy (%)
                            7                                                                                    12
                                           BS1024                                                                           BS1024                                                              8           BS1024
                            6                                                                                    10
                            5                                                                                     8                                                                             6
                            4
                                                                                                                  6                                                                             4
                            3
                                                                                                                  4
                            2                                                                                                                                                                   2
                            1                                                                                     2
                                                                                                                  0                                                                             0
                                    0.0     0.5     1.0   1.5     2.0    2.5                                          0.0    0.5     1.0       1.5    2.0   2.5                                     0.00   0.25   0.50    0.75    1.00     1.25     1.50     1.75
                                                     Time (s)                  1e8                                                    Time (s)                    1e8                                                    Time (s)                            1e8


 (a) Learning efficacy over time. (↑) (b) Information retention over time. (c) Forward transfer over time. (↑)
                                      (↑)
   Figure 8: Effect of batch sizes. Increasing the batch size hurt all OCL performance metrics.

                            14
                                                                                                                                                                                                            400 Thousand


                                                                                     Information Retention (%)
                                                                                                                                                                                               14
                                                                                                                 20                                                                                         4 Million
    Learning Efficacy (%)


                            12


                                                                                                                                                                        Forward Transfer (%)
                                                                                                                                                                                               12           40 Million
                            10
                                                                                                                 15                                                                            10
                                8
                                                                                                                                                                                                8
                                6                                                                                10                                                                             6
                                4                                400 Thousand                                                              400 Thousand                                         4
                                                                                                                  5
                                2                                4 Million                                                                 4 Million                                            2
                                                                 40 Million                                                                40 Million
                                0                                                                                 0                                                                             0
                                     0.0     0.5    1.0   1.5     2.0   2.5                                           0.0    0.5     1.0       1.5    2.0   2.5                                     0.00   0.25   0.50   0.75    1.00    1.25     1.50     1.75
                                                      Time (s)                 1e8                                                     Time (s)                   1e8                                                    Time (s)                              1e8


 (a) Learning efficacy over time. (↑) (b) Information retention over time. (c) Forward transfer over time. (↑)
                                      (↑)
Figure 9: Effect of replay buffer sizes. Though all performance metrics dropped when the replay
buffer size was reduced to 400 thousand images, the performance remained similar when the replay
buffer size was larger than 4 million images.


buffer (Chaudhry et al., 2019) in this experiment. We allow 5 training iterations per time step for
each replay buffer size.
As shown in Fig. 9, reducing the replay buffer size from 40 million to 400 thousand images signifi-
cantly hurt all performance metrics. However, the performance remained similar when the replay
buffer size was 4 million or larger. Therefore, given a fixed model and computational budget, OCL
only requires a reasonably large replay buffer.

C.5                             A PPLY AMA TO OTHER BASE O PTIMIZERS

Besides SGD, AMA+MALR can also be combined with other base optimizers. As an example, we
apply it to ADAM and test the performance on CLOC. Specifically, we compare (ADAM-based)
AMA+MALR with ADAM+MALR and ADAM+RWP, with an initial learning rate tuned to 0.001.
Due to resource limitations, we only run all algorithms on partial data. As shown in Fig. 10, (ADAM)
AMA+MALR outperformed ADAM+RWP. However, ADAM methods performed worse than SGD.
We conjecture that the adaptive scaling in ADAM reduced the effective learning rate (similar to the
SGD+RWP case), and leave further investigations as future works. Due to the poor performance of
ADAM-based methods, we use SGD-based methods in the main experiments.

C.6                             I MPACT OF O PTIMIZATION O BJECTIVES TO OCL

An ideal OCL algorithm should perform well for all three metrics, i.e., learning efficacy (eq. (1)),
information retention (eq. (2)), and forward transfer (eq. (3)). However, optimizing one objective
can hurt others. To demonstrate this point, we compare the model trained to optimize information
retention (with AMA+MALR), and the model trained to optimize learning efficacy (with the method
of Cai et al. (2021)). Following Cai et al. (2021), we allow different computation budgets (1 and 5
training iterations) per time step. To fairly compare pure replay and mixed replay, we double the
batch size for AMA+MALR, so that the average number of gradient descent steps per image is the
same for the two models. We set k1 and k2 in the forward transfer metric to 10% and 25% of the
dataset size respectively.
As shown in Fig. 11a, given the same budget, optimizing learning efficacy (LE Model) performed
the best for learning efficacy. Optimizing information retention (IR Model) performed the best for
information retention (Fig. 11b) and forward transfer (Fig. 11c). More importantly, unlike optimizing


                                                                                                                                       17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                                                                                                      (ADAM) AMA+MALR


                                                                               Information Retention (%)
                                                                                                           45
                                                                                                                                                      AMA+MALR
                                                                                                           40                                         ADAM+MALR
                                                                                                                                                      ADAM+RWP
                                                                                                           35                                         SGD+RWP
                                                                                                           30

                                                                                                           25

                                                                                                           20

                                                                                                                        0.0     0.2     0.4         0.6         0.8          1.0
                                                                                                                              Number of Training Iterations 1e6

Figure 10: ADAM results. (↑) AMA+MALR applied to ADAM also improved information retention
in OCL. However, ADAM-based methods performed worse than SGD counterparts.

                                      IR Model (5 GDSteps)                                                                    IR Model (5 GDSteps)                                                        16           IR Model (5 GDSteps)


                                                                                       Information Retention (%)
                           40                                                                                      25
                                      IR Model (1 GDStep)                                                                     IR Model (1 GDStep)                                                                      IR Model (1 GDStep)
   Learning Efficacy (%)


                                                                                                                                                                                   Forward Transfer (%)
                                                                                                                                                                                                          14
                                      LE Model (5 GDSteps)                                                         20         LE Model (5 GDSteps)                                                        12           LE Model (5 GDSteps)
                           30         LE Model (1 GDStep)                                                                     LE Model (1 GDStep)                                                                      LE Model (1 GDStep)
                                                                                                                                                                                                          10
                                                                                                                   15
                           20                                                                                                                                                                              8
                                                                                                                   10                                                                                      6
                           10                                                                                                                                                                              4
                                                                                                                    5
                                                                                                                                                                                                           2
                            0                                                                                       0                                                                                      0
                                0.0    0.5    1.0     1.5    2.0   2.5                                                  0.0     0.5   1.0     1.5         2.0         2.5                                      0.00   0.25   0.50   0.75   1.00   1.25   1.50   1.75
                                                Time (s)                 1e8                                                            Time (s)                            1e8                                                     Time (s)                           1e8


(a) Learning efficacy over time. (↑) (b) Information retention over time. (c) Forward transfer over time. (↑)
                                     (↑)
Figure 11: Optimizing learning efficacy (LE Model) vs optimizing information retention (IR
Model). Optimizing information retention hurt learning efficacy (a), but improved information
retention (b) and forward transfer (c). More importantly, increasing the budget for optimizing
learning efficacy hurt both information retention and forward transfer. In contrast, increasing the
budget for optimizing information retention improved all OCL metrics.


information retention, where increasing the computation budget improved all OCL metrics, increasing
the computation budget for optimizing learning efficacy hurt information retention and forward
transfer. This phenomenon is consistent with the finding in the language modeling setting (Hu et al.,
2020). Hence in terms of improving long term transfer in OCL, information retention is a better
objective than learning efficacy.

C.7                             D ETAILS ON G OOGLE L ANDMARKS V 2

Similar to CLOC, we construct the OCL version of Google Landmarks v2 using the subset of images
from Flickrs, which have time stamps that can be retrieved from flickr API. Similar to the original
paper (Weyand et al., 2020), we address the noisy label and class imbalance issues by using only
the data from the cleaned set, and filter out the classes with fewer than 25 images. This results in
645666 images in total. We further divide the dataset into 90% of training data (roughly 580 thousand
images) and 10% of evaluation data (roughly 65 thousand images).
In terms of hyper-parameters, we use the same model as the CLOC dataset. We tune other hyper-
parameters on the first 20% of the training data (we still use this part of data during training because
otherwise the dataset will be even smaller), resulting in the learning rate of 0.135, the momentum of
0.9 for SGD, the weight decay of 1e-4, and the cross-entropy loss.

C.8                             D ETAILS ON I MAGE N ET C ONTINUAL L EARNING E XPERIMENTS

We mostly follow the hyper-parameter settings of supervised learning, i.e., we use ResNet50, with
batch size of 256, initial learning rate of 0.1, the momentum of 0.9 for SGD, the weight decay of
1e-4. For ER, GDumb and MIR, we use the same basic hyper-parameter as SGD+Cyclic, including
the optimizer, learning rates, the batch size etc. For ER, we mix 128 samples from the current task
and 128 samples from replay for each model udpate step. For MIR, we select 128 examples from 256
candidates (using the sM I−1 criterion) during the replay data sampling procedure, and mix them with
another 128 examples from the current task to update the model. For a fair comparison, we limit the
computation of each method to be the same as SGD+Cyclic. Specifically, MIR requires at least two
SGD iterations in each model update step, hence, the total number of model update steps is limited to


                                                                                                                                            18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


         Information Retention (%)
                                     80


                                     60


                                     40

                                                                                                            AMA+MALR (BN)
                                     20                                                                     AMA+MALR (WS+GN)
                                                                                                            Supervised Learning Val Acc
                                          0             20              40             60              80                       100
                                                                             Task ID
Figure 12: BN vs GN+WS in ImageNet continual learning. (↑) Similar as in CLOC, GN+WS also
performed slightly better than the BN model on ImageNet continual learning. And its best validation
accuracy in the final task (76.8%) is similar as the standard BN model trained with supervised
learning.

                                          AMA+MALR   SGD+RWP   SGD+Cyclic      GDumb        ER   MIR        Supervised Learning Val Acc
         Information Retention (%)


                                     80

                                     60

                                     40

                                     20

                                      0
                                          0             20              40             60              80                       100
                                                                             Task ID
Figure 13: Information retention on ImageNet continual learning with small replay buffer (120K
images). (↑) Similar to the results in the main experiment, AMA+MALR out-performed SGD+Cyclic
and other OCL methods designed for handling storage limitations. Interestingly, the gap between
SGD+Cyclic and ER/MIR became smaller in this case.


half of the SGD steps in SGD+Cyclic. GDumb trains a model from scratch for each task, hence the
number of SGD updates of GDumb and SGD+Cyclic is limit to be the same in each task. To make
the final validation accuracy directly comparable to the standard ResNet50 supervised learning result,
we use BN as the normalization layer in this experiment (The GN+WS model performed slightly
better than the BN model). To update BN statistics on the fly, we do one extra forward pass per 10
training iterations to accumulate the BN statistics for MA models. For both RWP and AMA, we
decay the learning rate by half when the corresponding conditions are satisfied. We set KR in RWP
and AMA to 15000, which is smaller than in CLOC, so that the effect of learning rate reduction can
be clearly seen.
We also show in Fig. 12 the performance comparison between the BN model and the GN+WS model.
Similar as in CLOC, GN+WS also performed slightly better than BN. And its best validation accuracy
in the final task (76.8%) is similar as the standard BN model trained with supervised learning. This
result confirmed the generalization of our method across problems and datasets.
In the main paper, we analysed the complexity of AMA. To support our analysis, we further provide
here the runtime of each algorithm to show the practical efficiency of AMA. Specifically, we provide
the average runtime for each algorithm to finish one training iteration. AMA+MALR used 0.264s,
SGD+Cyclic used 0.245s, SGD+RWP used 0.272s, GDumb used 0.261s, MIR used 0.395s, ER used
0.327s. Note that there are some noise in the runtime due to the change of environments in different
experiment executions, but it is clear that AMA+MALR has similar efficiency as SGD+RWP in
practice.

C.9   S MALL REPLAY BUFFER ON I MAGE N ET

In this section, we show the ImageNet continual learning result with limited storage. Specifically,
we only allow 120K images to be stored in the replay buffer, and compare AMA+MALR against
SGD+Cyclic, ER, MIR and GDumb. For AMA+MALR, SGD+Cyclic and GDumb, the replay buffer
is formed using reservoir sampling. For ER and MIR, we assign half of the replay buffer for storing
data from previous tasks (using reservoir sampling), and half of the replay buffer for storing data from
the current task. As shown in Fig. 13, AMA+MALR still outperformed all competitors in this case.
Interestingly, the performance gap between SGD+Cyclic and ER/MIR became smaller compared to
the case of large replay buffers.


                                                                             19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


C.10     P ERFORMANCE ON S UPERVISED L EARNING

                                                  80
                                                                                                                     0.10                                Cosine
                                                  70                                                                                                     MALR


                                                                                              Testing Accuracy (%)
                           Testing Accuracy (%)
                                                                                                                     0.08
                                                  60
                                                  50                                                                 0.06
                                                  40
                                                                                                                     0.04
                                                  30                 SGD+Cosine
                                                                     AMA+Cosine                                      0.02
                                                  20                 AMA+MALR (SGD Model)
                                                  10
                                                                     AMA+MALR                                        0.00
                                                       0   20   40    60     80   100   120                                 0   20   40    60     80   100   120
                                                                     Epoch                                                                Epoch
                              (a) Validation accuracy (b) Learning rate over
                              over time. (↑)          time.
Figure 14: Performance of AMA and MALR on ImageNet for supervised learning. (↑) Similar as
in the OCL case, AMA performed much better than SGD when the learning rate was large. MALR
adaptively reduced the learning rate, providing similar final performance as the cosine schedule.


To understand the performance of AMA + MALR on supervised learning, we apply it to ImageNet,
and compare against SGD + cosine schedule (denoted as SGD+Cosine), which is the standard
for ImageNet. To understand the effect of each component, we also show the performance of
AMA+Cosine and the SGD model in AMA+MALR. To replicate the standard ResNet50 result on
ImageNet, we use BN as the normalization layer, and train all models for 120 epochs. Since limiting
the minimum learning rate hurts supervised learning, we only use C1 and C2 in MALR for this
experiment. We reduce the learning rate by 10 times once C1 and C2 are true.
As shown in Fig. 14, though not better in terms of the final performance, AMA performed much
better than SGD at early training stages, where the learning rate was large. MALR adaptively reduced
the learning rate over time, providing a similar final performance as the cosine schedule.

C.11     AMA HYPER - PARAMETER TUNING AND SENSITIVITY

As described in Sec. 4.2, we set the MA weight adjustment coefficient δ to 5 and the interval KW
to adjust MA weights to 10000 iterations. We empirically observed that setting KW in between
1-10000, and δ between 2-10 does not have strong effect to the performance (i.e., the classification
accuracy). Setting KW to 10000 and δ to 5 worked across problems (ImageNet, CLOC, Google
Landmarks) and provides AMA a similar speed as SGD in practice.
For classification tasks, we set ϵ in C3 to 3% accuracy. This value worked for CLOC, ImageNet and
CGLM (only tuned on the CLOC preprocessing data). It can be used as a reasonable default for other
datasets as well. For tasks other than classification, one can tune ϵ by:

       1. Finding the best initial learning rate on preprocessing data.
       2. Using a constant learning rate schedule, with learning rate set to the best initial learning
          rate. Compute the performance gap between AMA and SGD models on pre-processing data,
          denoted as g.
       3. Setting ϵ to roughly 0.3g (this is how we set our ϵ), we observe that the performance
          difference is small by setting ϵ in between 0.5-0.2g.

C.12     W HY NOT SMALLER DATASETS LIKE CIFAR OR 1 TRAINING ITERATION PER TIME STEP ?

Existing literature focus more on datasets with smaller scale, e.g., CIFAR, MNIST and/or with 1
training iteration per time step. Here we show why such experiments are not considered in this work.
As shown in Fig. 15 if we allow only 1 iteration per time step for CIFAR (5 tasks, 2 classes for each
task) and ImageNet, the learning rate for both SGD+RWP and AMA+MALR would remain constant
throughout training, hence, no learning rate scheduling is needed. Also as shown in Fig. 16, even
if we allow 120 iterations per time step in CIFAR, as in the ImageNet experiment, SGD+RWP and
AMA+MALR still used constant learning rate throughout training, as in the experiment of CGLM
(Sec. 5.2.1). More importantly, the performance difference between different continual learning
algorithms was much smaller in CIFAR compared to ImageNet, due to the small data stream. Hence,
we argue that the data stream in such cases is too short for the main purpose of this work, which is to


                                                                                              20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                 AMA+MALR         SGD+RWP                                                                                                               AMA+MALR     SGD+RWP
                                                                                                                                                                   50
                            12


Information Retention (%)


                                                                                                                                       Information Retention (%)
                                                                                                                                                                   45
                            10
                                                                                                                                                                   40
                             8
                                                                                                                                                                   35
                             6                                                                                                                                     30

                             4                                                                                                                                     25

                             2                                                                                                                                     20
                                                                                                                                                                   15
                             0
                                 0                                        20              40             60           80        100                                     0.0        0.5         1.0   1.5         2.0     2.5   3.0       3.5   4.0
                                                                                               Task ID                                                                                                         Task ID

Figure 15: Information retention on ImageNet (Left) and CIFAR (right) continual learning
with 1 training iteration per time step. (↑) We store 120K images in the replay for ImageNet and
5K for CIFAR. Due to the small number of training iterations in total, allowing 1 training iteration
per time step did not reveal the problem of SGD+RWP in the long term. Specifically, the learning
rate of SGD+RWP and AMA+MALR remained constant throughout training for both CIFAR and
ImageNet. And the advantage of AMA+MALR was also invisible since MA needs a reasonable
number of iterations to track the SGD trajectory. Hence, this experiment is not proper to validate
Theorem 7 and demonstrate the complete behavior of different algorithms in large scale OCL.

                                                                               AMA+MALR                           SGD+RWP                                                 ER                         MIR                       GDumb
                                                                        100
                                            Information Retention (%)


                                                                         80


                                                                         60


                                                                         40


                                                                         20

                                                                               0                              1             2                                                       3                      4                         5
                                                                                                                                      Task ID
Figure 16: Information retention on CIFAR continual learning with 120 training iteration per
time step, with replay buffer size of 5000 images. (↑) Similar as in the experiment of CGLM
(Sec. 5.2.1), due to the small number of images in total, training on CIFAR does not reveal the problem
of SGD+RWP in the long term even with multiple training iterations per time step. The learning rate
of SGD+RWP and AMA+MALR remained constant throughout training, and the performance of
different algorithms was much smaller than in the ImageNet experiment. Hence, this experiment is
also not proper to validate Theorem 7 and demonstrate the complete behavior of different algorithms
in the long term.


reveal the problem of SGD+RWP (validating Theorem 7) and the benefit of AMA+MALR in the
long term.


                                                                                                                                      21
