Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


D ISCOVERING E VOLUTION S TRATEGIES
VIA M ETA -B LACK -B OX O PTIMIZATION

 Robert Tjarko Lange∗                                    Tom Schaul & Yutian Chen & Tom Zahavy
 Technical University Berlin                             DeepMind

 Valentin Dallibard           Chris Lu∗                   Satinder Singh & Sebastian Flennerhag
 DeepMind                     University of Oxford        DeepMind

                                              A BSTRACT
            Optimizing functions without access to gradients is the remit of black-box meth-
            ods such as evolution strategies. While highly general, their learning dynamics are
            often times heuristic and inflexible — exactly the limitations that meta-learning
            can address. Hence, we propose to discover effective update rules for evolution
            strategies via meta-learning. Concretely, our approach employs a search strategy
            parametrized by a self-attention-based architecture, which guarantees the update
            rule is invariant to the ordering of the candidate solutions. We show that meta-
            evolving this system on a small set of representative low-dimensional analytic
            optimization problems is sufficient to discover new evolution strategies capable of
            generalizing to unseen optimization problems, population sizes and optimization
            horizons. Furthermore, the same learned evolution strategy can outperform estab-
            lished neuroevolution baselines on supervised and continuous control tasks. As
            additional contributions, we ablate the individual neural network components of
            our method; reverse engineer the learned strategy into an explicit heuristic form,
            which remains highly competitive; and show that it is possible to self-referentially
            train an evolution strategy from scratch, with the learned update rule used to drive
            the outer meta-learning loop.


1       I NTRODUCTION
Black-box optimization (BBO) methods are those general enough for the optimization of functions
without access to gradient evaluations. Recently, BBO methods have shown competitive perfor-
mance to gradient-based optimization, namely of control policies (Salimans et al., 2017; Such et al.,
2017; Lee et al., 2022). Evolution Strategies (ES) are a class of BBO that iteratively refines the
sufficient statistics of a (typically Gaussian) sampling distribution, based on the function evalua-
tions (or fitness) of sampled candidates (population members). Their update rule is traditionally
formalized by equations based on first principles (Wierstra et al., 2014; Ollivier et al., 2017), but
the resulting specification is inflexible. On the other hand, the evolutionary algorithms community
has proposed numerous variants of BBO, derived from very different metaphors, some of which
have been shown to be equivalent (Weyland, 2010). One way to attain flexibility without having to
hand-craft heuristics is to learn the update rules of BBO algorithms from data, in a way that makes
them more adaptive and scalable. This is the approach we take: We meta-learn a neural network
parametrization of a BBO update rule, on a set of representative task families, while leveraging
evaluation parallelism of different BBO instances on modern accelerators, building on recent devel-
opments in learned optimization (e.g. Metz et al., 2022). This procedure discovers novel black-box
optimization methods via meta-black-box optimization, and is abbreviated by MetaBBO. Here, we
investigate one particular instance of MetaBBO and leverage it to discover a learned evolution strat-
egy (LES).1 The concrete LES architecture can be viewed as a minimal Set Transformer (Lee et al.,
2019), which naturally enforces an update rule that is invariant to the ordering of candidate solutions
within a batch of black-box evaluations. After meta-training, LES has learned to flexibly interpo-
late between copying the best-performing candidate solution (hill-climbing) and successive moving
average updating (finite difference gradients). Our contributions are summarized as follows:
    ∗
        Work done during an internship at DeepMind. Contact: robert.t.lange@tu-berlin.de.
    1
        Pronounced ‘meta-boh’ and ‘less’.


                                                     1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 1: Overview diagram of MetaBBO, LES & performance on continuous control tasks. Left:
MetaBBO. The outer loop samples a set of inner loop tasks (uniformly), and a set of candidate
LES parameters {θi }M   i=1 from a meta-ES (here: CMA-ES). After obtaining a normalized meta-
fitness score of each LES instance, the meta-ES is updated and we iterate the meta-optimization
process. Middle: LES. In the inner loop and for each task, we iteratively sample candidate solu-
tions from a Gaussian search distribution and evaluate their fitness. Afterwards, a (meta-learned)
Set Transformer-inspired search strategy processes tokens of fitness transformations corresponding
to the population member performance. It outputs a set of recombination weights, which are used to
update the mean and standard deviation of the diagonal Gaussian search distribution. An additional
MLP module (not shown) computes per-dimension learning rates by processing momentum-like
statistics and a timestamp. Right: Neuroevolution of control policies. Average normalized perfor-
mance across 8 continuous control Brax environments (Freeman et al., 2021). The LES discovered
by MetaBBO on a small set of analytic meta-training problems generalizes far beyond its meta-
training distribution, in terms of problem type, population size, search dimension and optimization
horizon. In fact, LES outperforms diagonal ES baselines (normalized against OpenES) and scales
well with an increased population size (normalized by min/max performance across all strategies).
Results are averaged over 10 independent runs (±1.96 standard errors). Each task-specific learning
curve is normalized by the largest and smallest fitness across all considered ES. Afterwards, the
normalized learning curves are averaged across tasks. More training details and results can be found
in Section 5 and in the supplementary information (SI, C and E, Figure 16).


     1. We propose a novel self-attention-based ES parametrization, and demonstrate that it is
        possible to meta-learn black-box optimization algorithms that outperform existing hand-
        crafted ES algorithms on neuroevolution tasks (Figure 1, right). The learned strategy gen-
        eralizes across optimization problems, compute resources and search space dimensions.
     2. We investigate the importance of the meta-task distribution and meta-training protocol. We
        find that in order to meta-evolve a well-performing ES, only a handful of core optimization
        classes are needed at meta-training time. These include separable, multi-modal and high
        conditioning functions (Section 5).
     3. We reverse-engineer the learned search strategy. More specifically, we ablate the black-box
        components recovering an interpretable strategy and show that all neural network compo-
        nents have a positive effect on the early performance of the search strategy (Section 6). The
        discovered evolution strategy provides a simple to implement yet very competitive new ES.
     4. We demonstrate how to generate a new LES starting from a blank-slate LES: A randomly
        initialized LES can bootstrap its own learning progress and self-referentially meta-learn its
        own weights (Section 7).


                                                 2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


2   R ELATED W ORK
Evolution Strategies & Neuroevolution. Unlike gradient-based optimization, ES (Rechenberg,
1973; Schwefel, 1977; Beyer & Schwefel, 2002) rely only on black-box function evaluations with-
out the necessity of access to gradient evaluations. Instead, they iterate between the sampling of can-
didate solutions, their evaluation and the updating of the sampling distribution. ES can be grouped
into estimation of distribution algorithms, which refine the sufficient statistics of a sampling distri-
bution in order to increase the likelihood of high fitness solutions (Hansen & Ostermeier, 2001) and
finite-difference gradient-based methods (Wierstra et al., 2014; Nesterov & Spokoiny, 2017). They
can address non-differentiable problem settings and yield competitive wall-clock times on neural
network tasks due to parallel fitness evaluation (Salimans et al., 2017; Such et al., 2017).
Discovering Algorithm Components from Data. The history of machine learning has been char-
acterized by the successive replacement of manually designed components by modules that are in-
formed by data. This includes the use of convolutional neural networks that learn filters (Fukushima,
1975; LeCun et al., 1998), neural architecture search (Elsken et al., 2019) or initilization schemes
(Dauphin & Schoenholz, 2019). Recently, these efforts have been extended to the end-to-end dis-
covery of objective functions in Reinforcement Learning (Kirsch et al., 2019; Oh et al., 2020; Xu
et al., 2020; Lu et al., 2022), the online refinement of hyperparameter schedules (Xu et al., 2018;
Zahavy et al., 2020; Flennerhag et al., 2021; Parker-Holder et al., 2022) and the meta-learning of
entire learning algorithms (Wang et al., 2016; Kirsch & Schmidhuber, 2021; Kirsch et al., 2022).
Meta-Learned Gradient-Based Optimization. An exciting direction aims to meta-learn gradient
descent-based learning rules (Bengio et al., 1992; Andrychowicz et al., 2016; Metz et al., 2019)
to update the weights of a neural network. Unlike our proposed method, these approaches require
access to gradient calculations using the backpropagation algorithm implemented by automatic dif-
ferentiation software. The gradient and several summary statistics are processed by a small neural
network, whose weights have been meta-learned on a distribution of tasks (Metz et al., 2020). The
resulting outputs are calculated on a per-parameter basis and used to characterize the magnitude and
direction of the weight change. It has been shown that this approach can extract useful inductive
biases for domain-specific gradient-based optimization (Merchant et al., 2021; Metz et al., 2022) but
can struggle to broadly generalize to task domains beyond the meta-training distribution.
Meta-Learned Black-Box Optimization. Shala et al. (2020) meta-learn a policy that controls
the scalar search scale of CMA-ES (Hansen & Ostermeier, 2001). Chen et al. (2017); TV et al.
(2019); Gomes et al. (2021) explored meta-learning entire algorithms for low-dimensional BBO.
They parametrize the algorithm by a recurrent network processing the raw solution vectors and/or
their associated fitness. Their applicability is constrained to narrow optimization domains, fixed
population sizes or search dimensions. The proposed LES, on the other hand, learns to recombine
solution candidates by leveraging the invariance properties of dot-product self-attention (Lee et al.,
2019; Tang & Ha, 2021). After meta-training the learned ES generalizes to unseen populations and a
large number of dimensions (> 5000). To the best of our knowledge we are the first to demonstrate
that a meta-learned ES generalizes to neuroevolution tasks. Our meta-evolution approach does not
rely on access to a teacher ES (Shala et al., 2020) or knowledge of task optima (TV et al., 2019).
Self-Referential Meta-Learning. Our current learning systems are not capable of flexibly refining
their own learning behavior. Schmidhuber (1987) first articulated the vision of self-referentially
updating a genetic algorithm to improve its own performance. Kirsch & Schmidhuber (2022) further
formulated a simple heuristic to allocate compute resources for population-based self-referential
learning. Metz et al. (2021a) showed that the recursive meta-training of gradient-based optimizers
is feasible using an improvement mechanism based on population-based training (Jaderberg et al.,
2017). Here, we introduce a simple self-referential MetaBBO loop, which successfully meta-evolves
a LES capable of generalization to continuous control tasks.


3   P RELIMINARIES : G AUSSIAN E VOLUTION S TRATEGIES
Many common ES use Gaussian search distributions, with the most scalable ones using isotropic
or diagonal (axis-aligned) Gaussian approximations. They have shown to effectively scale to large
search space dimensions, specifically in the context of neuroevolution (Salimans et al., 2017), and
can outperform full covariance search methods (Ros & Hansen, 2008). We therefore chose them as
the starting point for our attention-based LES architecture, and use four common ones as baselines:


                                                   3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


OpenES (Salimans et al., 2017), sep-CMA-ES (Ros & Hansen, 2008), PGPE (Sehnke et al., 2010)
and SNES (Schaul et al., 2011). We also compare with ASEBO (Choromanski et al., 2019), which
dynamically adapts to the fitness geometry based on the iterative estimation of gradient subspaces.
Diagonal ES maintain mean m ∈ RD and standard deviation vectors σ ∈ RD , where D denotes
the number of search space dimensions. At each generation one samples a population of candidate
solutions xj ∈ RD ∼ N (m, σ1D ) for all j = 1, ..., N population members. Each solution vector
is evaluated, producing fitness estimates fj ∈ R, which are used to construct recombination weights
wj . These weights define how to update the search distribution (mean and standard deviations).
Most often, the weights are assigned based on the rank of the fitness rank(j) ∈ [1, N ] among the
current population, for example:
                                                     1
                                  N                     , if rank(j) ≤ E,
                      wt,j ({fk }k=1 ) = wrank(j) = E                                           (1)
                                                      0, otherwise,
where wrank(j) denotes the weight assigned to the rank of member j, and E denotes the number of
high-fitness candidates that contribute to the update. The search distribution is then updated using
an exponentially moving fitness-weighted average:
                                                           N
                                                           X
                   mt+1 = (1 − αm,t )mt + αm,t                   wt,j xj ,                          (2)
                                                           j=1
                                                v
                                                uN
                                                uX
                    σt+1 = (1 − ασ,t )σt + ασ,t t  wt,j (xj − mt )2 ,                               (3)
                                                           j=1

which can be interpreted as a finite-difference gradient update on the expected fitness. Both the
learning rates αm , ασ and the weighting scheme wt , highlighted in red, are commonly fixed across
the update generations t = 1, ..., T , which is an obvious restriction to the flexibility of the ES. The
main aim of our proposed meta-learned neural network parametrization is to overcome the implied
limitations by meta-learning these.

4     M ETA -E VOLVING E VOLUTION S TRATEGIES
In this section, we first introduce the learned evolution strategy architecture (Figure 1, middle), a
self-attention-based generalization of the diagonal Gaussian ES in equations 2 and 3. Section 4.2
then outlines the MetaBBO procedure (Figure 1, left) used to meta-evolve the weights of LES.

4.1   Learned Evolution Strategies (LES): P OPULATION O RDER -I NVARIANCE VIA ATTENTION

A fundamental property that any (learned) ES has to fulfill is invariance in the ordering of popu-
lation members within a generation. Intuitively, the order of the population members is arbitrary
and should therefore not affect the search distribution update. A natural inductive bias for an appro-
priate neural network-based parametrization is given by the dot-product self-attention mechanism.
Our proposed learned evolution strategy processes a matrix Ft of population member-specific to-
kens (Figure 1, middle). Ft ∈ RN ×3 consists of (1) the z-scored population fitness scores, (2)
a centered rank transformation (lying within [−0.5, 0.5]), and (3) a Boolean indicating whether
the fitness score exceeds the previously best score. This fitness matrix is embedded into queries
(Q ∈ RN ×DK ), keys (K ∈ RN ×DK ) and values (V ∈ RN ×1 ) using learned linear transforms with
weights WK , WQ , WV . Recombination weights are computed as attention scores over the members:
                             QK T                                            T T

                                                                   Ft WQ WK   Ft
  wt = softmax softmax √              V = softmax softmax              √            Ft W V ∈ R N .
                               DK                                        DK
The resulting recombination weights are shared across the search space dimensions, but vary
across the generations t. Instead of using a set of fixed learning rates, we additionally modulate
αm,t , ασ,t ∈ RD by a MLP parametrized by ϕ and shared across D. It processes a timestamp em-
bedding and parameter-specific information provided by momentum-like statistics (see SI A). The
chosen parametrization can in principle smoothly interpolate between integrating information from
many population members and copying over a single best performing solution by setting a single


                                                   4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


recombination weight and αm,t to one for all dimensions. The set of LES parameters are given by
θ = {WK , WQ , WV , ϕ}, whose total number is usually small (<500) given a sufficient key embed-
ding size (DK = 8). The complexity of the proposed LES scales quadratically in the population
size, which for common application budgets (N < 10, 000) introduces a negligible runtime cost.

4.2   MetaBBO: M ETA -B LACK -B OX O PTIMIZATION OF B LACK -B OX O PTIMIZERS

How do we learn the LES parameters θ, so that they provide useful inductive biases for black-
box optimization? Meta-learning via evolutionary optimization has previously proven successful in
the context of learned gradient-based optimization (Vicol et al., 2021) and RL objective discovery
(Lu et al., 2022). It avoids exploding meta-gradients (Metz et al., 2021b), myopic meta-solutions
(Flennerhag et al., 2021; Lange & Sprekeler, 2022), and allows to optimize θ through long inner loop
ES executions involving stochastic sampling. We adopt this meta-evolution approach in MetaBBO
and iterate the following steps (Figure 1, left; SI Algorithm 2):

      1. Meta-sampling. At each meta-generation we sample a population of LES network
         parametrizations θi for i = 1, . . . , M meta-population members using a standard off-the-
         shelf ES algorithm with meta-mean µ and covariance Σ.
      2. Inner loop search. Next, we estimate the performance of different LES parametrizations
         on a set of tasks. We sample a set of inner loop optimization problems. For each task
         we initialize a mean m0 ∈ RD , standard deviation σ0 ∈ RD . Each LES instance is then
         executed on a batch of inner loop tasks (in parallel) with N population members and for a
         fixed set of inner-loop generations t = 1, . . . , T .
      3. Meta-normalize. In order to ensure stable meta-optimization with optimization problems
         that can exhibit very different fitness scales, we normalize (z-score) the fitness scores within
         tasks and across meta-population members. We average the scores over inner-loop tasks,
         and maximize over inner-loop population members and over generations.
      4. Meta-updating. Given the meta-performance estimate for the different LES parametriza-
         tions, we update the meta-ES search distribution µ′ , Σ′ and iterate.

The choice of the meta-task distribution is crucial to ensure generalization of the meta-learned evo-
lution strategy. We select a small set of classic black-box optimization functions, to characterize a
space of representative optimization problems. The problem space includes smooth functions with
and without high curvature and multi-modal surfaces with global and local structure. Furthermore,
we apply Gaussian additive noise to the fitness evaluations to mimic unreliable estimation and sam-
ple optima offsets. MetaBBO differs from standard meta-learning in a couple aspects: First, we use
BBO in both the inner and outer loop. This allows for flexible LES design, stochastic sampling and
long inner loop ES execution. We also share the same task parameters, m0 and fixed randomness
for all meta-population members θi . The fixed stochasticity and task-based normalization enhances
stable meta-optimization (‘Pegasus-trick’, Ng & Jordan, 2000).

5     E XPERIMENTS
In this section we discuss the results of meta-learning LES parameters via MetaBBO. We answer
the following questions: Does MetaBBO discover an ES capable of generalization beyond the meta-
training distribution and can the LES meta-trained only on a limited set of functions even generalize
to unseen neural network tasks with different fitness functions & network architectures?

5.1   M ETA -T RAINING ON THE B LACK -B OX O PTIMIZATION B ENCHMARK

Throughout, we meta-train on functions from the BBOB (Hansen et al., 2010) benchmark, which
comprise a set of challenging functions for optimization (Table 1). From BBOB, we construct
a small, medium, and large meta-training set (detailed in Section 5.2). To create a task in-
stance, we randomly sample: (1) a function f from the meta-training set, (2) a dimensionality
D ∼ U {2, 3, . . . , 10} for f : RD → R, (3) a noise-level Ξ ∼ U [0, 0.1], and (4) an optimum offset
z ∼ U [−5, 5]D , which together creates a stochastic objective fˆ(x) ∼ f (x+z)+Ξ N (0, 1). Finally,
(5) we sample an initialization m0 ∼ [−5, 5]D and starting generation counter t0 ∈ [0, 2000].


                                                   5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 2: BBOB evaluation of LES. Left. MetaBBO fitness objective over meta-generations. The
optimization process is robust to the choice of meta-ES. Middle. Minimization performance on
Sphere task across dimensions and population size (T = 25). Boxed cells indicate meta-training
tasks. Right. Relative performance on different BBOB test functions (D = 10, N = 16, T = 100),
lower is better. Despite LES only being meta-trained on a population size of N = 16 and low-
dimensional (D ≤ 10) search spaces, it is capable of generalizing to different functions, problem
settings and resources. Detailed meta-training curves can be found in SI E (Figures 8, 9).


In the MetaBBO outer loop we optimize θ using CMA-ES (Hansen & Ostermeier, 2001) for 1500
meta-generations with a meta-population size of M = 256. We sample 128 tasks and train each
sampled LES on each task independently. Each LES is unrolled for T = 50 generations, with
N = 16 population members in each iteration.2 Each LES-task pair is assigned a raw fitness score
according to the highest fitness (lowest loss) obtained in the rollout. These raw scores are meta-
normalized per task before we aggregate them into a meta-fitness score for each sampled LES.
During MetaBBO training, we find average meta-training improves rapidly (Figure 2, top left) and
is invariant to the choice of the meta-ES optimizer. We assess the performance of LES obtained
through the MetaBBO outer loop, on the BBOB functions (Figure 2, right). LES generalizes well
to larger dimensions and larger evaluation budgets on both meta-training and meta-testing function
classes. While the task complexity increases with D and performance drops for a fixed population
size, LES is capable of making use of the additional evaluations provided by an increased population.

5.2    M ETA -G ENERALIZATION OF LES TO U NSEEN N EUROEVOLUTION TASKS

Our results on BBOB suggests that LES have strong generalizing properties, thus prompting the
question, what are the limits of LES’ generalization capabilities? In this section, we evaluate an LES
trained on BBOB on a set of CNN-based classification tasks and continuous control tasks (Figure
3) using MLP policies. This requires LES to generalize beyond the 10-dimensional problems it was
trained on to thousands of dimensions. Not only that, but also to completely different loss surfaces,
and even learning paradigms (in the case of continuous control).
Figure 3 shows that LES is indeed capable of successfully evolving CNN classifiers on different
MNIST variants. We also find that it is capable of evolving 4-layer MLP policies for robotics tasks
(Freeman et al., 2021). We consider three budgets for test-time optimisation (that vary in inner loop
length T and population size N , see Figure 3). LES generally outperforms ES baselines3 across test-
time budgets. It enjoys a substantial advantage in small budgets, where it outperforms baselines on
5 out of 7 tasks. LES still performs best on the majority of tasks for the medium and large adaptation
budgets, which requires it to generalize to larger populations and longer unroll lengths. Next, we
evaluate the impact of the meta-training distribution on the generalization of LES. The small meta-
training set consists of 1 BBOB function and restricts dimenionality to D = 2 with inner loop length
T = 25. medium is restricted to 5 functions., with D ∈ {1, 2, . . . , 5} and T = 25; large is given by
10 functions, D ∈ {1, 2, . . . , 10} and T = 50. Figure 4 shows that training on broader meta-training
distributions has a positive effect on the generalization capability of the trained LES, as measured
on continuous control tasks. In particular, we find that meta-training with larger populations in the
inner loop especially benefits from scaling up the meta-training set.
   2
    In SI Figures 10, 11, we demonstrate that the MetaBBO is largely robust to the choice of D, T , N , DK .
   3
    For all considered ES we grid-searched over different σ0 and tuned learning rates were additionally tuned
on the Brax ant environment. More details can be found in the SI D. We provide more results on 4 MinAtar
(Young & Tian, 2019) tasks with CNN policies in the SI (Figure 21).


                                                     6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 3: Evaluation of LES on classification and continuous control tasks. Top. BBOB meta-
evolved LES generalizes to classification tasks including MNIST/Fashion-MNIST/K-MNIST clas-
sification using a simple Convolutional Neural Network. Bottom. The learned strategy can also
evolve control policies based on a 4 hidden layer Tanh MLP architecture with 32 hidden units in 8
different control environments. Results are averaged over 5 (vision) and 10 (control) independent
runs and max/min normalized for Brax for better comparison. Details: SI E (Figures 16, 20).


6   R EVERSE E NGINEERING L EARNED E VOLUTION S TRATEGIES
In order to investigate which algorithmic com-
ponents are discovered by the MetaBBO pro-
cedure, we start by ablating the different meta-
learned neural network modules. Fixing both
recombination weights and the learning rate
modulation, as per the simple Gaussian ES in
Section 3 degrades performance significantly
(Figure 5, top left). Fixing the recombination
weights (as in equation 1, E = 0.5N ) also
decreases performance, but fixing the learning
rates to αm = 1, ασ = 0.1 does not hurt per-
formance significantly. We observed that the
learning rates are flexibly adapted early in train-
ing, but settle quickly to constant values (Figure
5, right). Next, we visualized the recombina- Figure 4: The performance of LES increases as
tion weights for a LES run on the Walker2D it is meta-trained on richer task distributions. We
Brax task (Figure 5, top middle). LES per- plot the relative performance of LES on Brax tasks
forms a variable amount of selection and either against OpenES (Salimans et al., 2017).
applies hill-climbing or integrates information
from multiple well-performing solutions. We plot the weights as a function of the centered rank
(for N = 256) for sampled Gaussian fitness scores (Figure 5, bottom middle). The recombination
weights can be well approximated by a softmax parametrization of the centered ranks:
         wt,j = softmax (20 × [1 − sigmoid (β × (rank(j)/N − 0.5))]) , ∀j = 1, ..., N,          (4)
with a temperature parameter β ≈ 12.5. Intuitively, the temperature regulates the amount of se-
lection pressure applied by the recombination weights. Based on these insights, we implement an
interpretable ES that uses the discovered recombination weight approximation. We call the resulting


                                                7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 5: Reverse engineering of LES. Left. Ablation study of LES and performance of reverse-
engineered DES on continuous control tasks. The self-attention-based recombination weights con-
tribute most to the performance of LES. Furthermore, DES provides a competitive ES when suffi-
ciently tuning β. Results are averaged over 5 independent runs (±1.96 standard errors). Middle.
Recombination weights in the first 20 LES generations on the Walker2D task. LES can perform
both hill climbing by assigning high recombination weight to the best performing population mem-
ber and distribute the recombination weight across multiple well-performing candidates. The LES
recombination weights can be approximated well by equation (4). Right. Learning rate modulation
of LES on a subset of dimensions. LES learning rates quickly converge to fixed values after initial
adaption. Detailed learning curves can be found in SI E (Figures 13, 17).


algorithm Discovered Evolution Strategy (DES, SI Algorithm 1). DES(β = 12.5) performs simi-
larly to LES on the Brax benchmark tasks and can be further improved by tuning the temperature
parameter (Figure 5, bottom left). This result highlights that MetaBBO can be used not only to
discover black-box ES strategies, but also to discover new interpretable inductive biases.

7   S ELF -R EFERENTIAL M ETA -E VOLUTION OF LES
Given a choice of meta-ES, MetaBBO can discover LES that performs competitively with baseline
ES. It is therefore natural to ask, can we use an LES to discover a new LES? And can this be a purely
self-referential loop, starting from a random initialization? To address this question we consider a
two-step self-referential metaBBO paradigm, which starts from a random θmeta (Figure 6, left):

     1. We evaluate a set of candidate LES parametrizations θi ∼ N (µ, Σ) with Σ = σ1. After
        obtaining the meta-fitness scores f (θi ), we update the strategy statistics using the meta-
        LES update rule µ′ , Σ′ ← LES({θi , fi }Mi=1 |µ, Σ, θmeta ).
     2. If the meta-fitness has improved, we replace θmeta ← arg maxθi f (θi ) using a hill-
        climbing step that copies the best performing inner-loop mean µ′ ← θmeta . Addition-
        ally, we reset the meta-search variance to induce additional exploration around the newly
        improved meta-search mean: Σ ← σ0 1Dmeta .

Note that this procedure starts out as simple random search with hill-climbing selection. As the
meta-parameters are updated, the meta-search is improved by the newly learned inductive biases.
Thereby, LES is capable of improving its own optimization behavior. Figure 6 compares different
meta-training procedures for LES, including the usage of CMA-ES, a previously meta-trained and
fixed LES instance, and our proposed self-referential training paradigm. We find it is indeed fea-
sible to effectively self-evolve LES starting from a random initialization. While the meta-fitness is
improved fastest by the pre-trained LES instance, we observe that the resulting meta-trained LES


                                                 8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 6: Self-Referential MetaBBO of LES. Left. We use LES to meta-evolve its own parame-
ters θ starting from a random initialization and using hill climbing replacement. Middle. Meta-
performance over training. It is possible to meta-train LES using both a previously trained and
frozen instance and a self-referentially improved random initialization. Right, Top. Performance
on 2D Circles MLP classifier and Acrobot control tasks throughout meta-training. Right, Bottom.
While the LES discovered by a frozen pre-trained version does not generalize to Brax meta-testing,
the self-referentially meta-trained one does. Results are averaged over 5 independent runs (+/- 1.96
standard errors). Detailed learning curves can be found in SI E (Figures 18, 9).


does not generalize well to the downstream Brax evaluation (Figure 6, bottom right). Both the
CMA-ES optimizer and self-referential meta-training procedure, on the other hand, are capable of
meta-evolving stable and performant LES, that do not overfit to the meta-training task distribution.
We speculate that self-referential meta-training performs implicit regularization: LES is forced to
simultaneously perform well on the inner loop tasks and to progress its own continual improvement.

8   C ONCLUSION & D ISCUSSION
Summary. We introduced a self-attention-based ES architecture and a procedure to effectively
meta-learn its parametrization. The resulting learned evolution strategy is flexible and outperforms
established baseline strategies on both vision and continuous control tasks. We reverse engineered
the discovered search update rule into a simple and competitive DES. Finally, we showed that it is
possible to successfully self-referentially evolve a LES starting from a random initialization of itself.
Limitations. The LES considered in this paper only applies to diagonal covariance strategies. This
limits its effectiveness on non-separable problems. We observed that the learning rate module can
struggle to generalize to long time horizons indicating a degree of temporal meta-overfitting. Finally,
the self-attention mechanism scales quadratically in the number of population members. This may
be addressed by improvements in Transformer efficiency (Wang et al., 2020; Jaegle et al., 2021).
Future work. Our LES architecture meta-learns to modulate the search distribution update solely
based on fitness transformations. One potential extension is to provide additional information (agent
trajectory or multiple evaluations) to the attention module. Thereby, the MetaBBO could discover
behavioural descriptors in the context of quality-diversity optimization (Pugh et al., 2016; Cully &
Demiris, 2017) or application-specific denoising procedures. Furthermore, one may want to attend
over an archive of well-performing solutions (e.g. as in genetic algorithms) using cross-attention
that implements a cross-over operation. Finally, our experiments indicate the potential of further
scaling of the MetaBBO procedure to broader meta-training task distributions.



                                                   9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Work funded by DeepMind. We thank Nemanja Rakićević for valuable feedback on a first draft of
this manuscript. Furthermore, the authors are grateful to Antonio Orvieto, Denizalp Goktas, Evgenii
Nikishin, Junhyok Oh, Greg Farquhar, Alexander Neitz, Himanshu Sahni, Ted Moskovitz and other
colleagues on the Discovery team and at DeepMind for stimulating discussions over the course of
the project.

R EFERENCES
Marcin Andrychowicz, Misha Denil, Sergio Gomez, Matthew W Hoffman, David Pfau, Tom Schaul,
 Brendan Shillingford, and Nando De Freitas. Learning to learn by gradient descent by gradient
 descent. Advances in neural information processing systems, 29, 2016.
Samy Bengio, Yoshua Bengio, Jocelyn Cloutier, and Jan Gescei. On the optimization of a synaptic
  learning rule. In Optimality in Biological and Artificial Networks?, pp. 281–303. Routledge, 1992.
Hans-Georg Beyer and Hans-Paul Schwefel. Evolution strategies–a comprehensive introduction.
  Natural computing, 1(1):3–52, 2002.
James Bradbury, Roy Frostig, Peter Hawkins, Matthew James Johnson, Chris Leary, Dougal
  Maclaurin, George Necula, Adam Paszke, Jake VanderPlas, Skye Wanderman-Milne, and Qiao
  Zhang. JAX: composable transformations of Python+NumPy programs, 2018. URL http:
  //github.com/google/jax.
Yutian Chen, Matthew W. Hoffman, Sergio Gómez Colmenarejo, Misha Denil, Timothy P. Lilli-
  crap, Matt Botvinick, and Nando de Freitas. Learning to learn without gradient descent by gra-
  dient descent. In Doina Precup and Yee Whye Teh (eds.), Proceedings of the 34th International
  Conference on Machine Learning, volume 70 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research,
  pp. 748–756. PMLR, 06–11 Aug 2017. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v70/
  chen17e.html.
Krzysztof M Choromanski, Aldo Pacchiano, Jack Parker-Holder, Yunhao Tang, and Vikas Sind-
  hwani. From complexity to simplicity: Adaptive es-active subspaces for blackbox optimization.
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 32, 2019.
Antoine Cully and Yiannis Demiris. Quality and diversity optimization: A unifying modular frame-
  work. IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computation, 22(2):245–259, 2017.
Yann N Dauphin and Samuel Schoenholz. Metainit: Initializing learning by learning to initialize.
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 32, 2019.
Thomas Elsken, Jan Hendrik Metzen, and Frank Hutter. Neural architecture search: A survey. The
  Journal of Machine Learning Research, 20(1):1997–2017, 2019.
Sebastian Flennerhag, Yannick Schroecker, Tom Zahavy, Hado van Hasselt, David Silver, and Satin-
  der Singh. Bootstrapped meta-learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2109.04504, 2021.
C Daniel Freeman, Erik Frey, Anton Raichuk, Sertan Girgin, Igor Mordatch, and Olivier Bachem.
  Brax–a differentiable physics engine for large scale rigid body simulation. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2106.13281, 2021.
Kunihiko Fukushima. Cognitron: A self-organizing multilayered neural network. Biological cyber-
  netics, 20(3):121–136, 1975.
Hugo Siqueira Gomes, Benjamin Léger, and Christian Gagné. Meta learning black-box population-
  based optimizers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2103.03526, 2021.
Nikolaus Hansen and Andreas Ostermeier. Completely derandomized self-adaptation in evolution
  strategies. Evolutionary computation, 9(2):159–195, 2001.
Nikolaus Hansen, Anne Auger, Steffen Finck, and Raymond Ros. Real-parameter black-box opti-
  mization benchmarking 2010: Experimental setup. PhD thesis, INRIA, 2010.


                                                10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Charles R Harris, K Jarrod Millman, Stéfan J Van Der Walt, Ralf Gommers, Pauli Virtanen, David
  Cournapeau, Eric Wieser, Julian Taylor, Sebastian Berg, Nathaniel J Smith, et al. Array program-
  ming with numpy. Nature, 585(7825):357–362, 2020.
John D Hunter. Matplotlib: A 2d graphics environment. Computing in science & engineering, 9
  (03):90–95, 2007.
Max Jaderberg, Valentin Dalibard, Simon Osindero, Wojciech M Czarnecki, Jeff Donahue, Ali
 Razavi, Oriol Vinyals, Tim Green, Iain Dunning, Karen Simonyan, et al. Population based train-
 ing of neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1711.09846, 2017.
Andrew Jaegle, Felix Gimeno, Andy Brock, Oriol Vinyals, Andrew Zisserman, and Joao Carreira.
  Perceiver: General perception with iterative attention. In International conference on machine
  learning, pp. 4651–4664. PMLR, 2021.
Louis Kirsch and Jürgen Schmidhuber. Meta learning backpropagation and improving it. Advances
  in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:14122–14134, 2021.
Louis Kirsch and Jürgen Schmidhuber. Self-referential meta learning. In Decision Awareness in
  Reinforcement Learning Workshop at ICML 2022, 2022.
Louis Kirsch, Sjoerd van Steenkiste, and Jürgen Schmidhuber. Improving generalization in meta
  reinforcement learning using learned objectives. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.04098, 2019.
Louis Kirsch, Sebastian Flennerhag, Hado van Hasselt, Abram Friesen, Junhyuk Oh, and Yutian
  Chen. Introducing symmetries to black box meta reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the
  AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 36, pp. 7202–7210, 2022.
Robert Tjarko Lange. evosax: JAX-based evolution strategies, 2022a. URL http://github.
  com/RobertTLange/evosax.
Robert Tjarko Lange. gymnax: A JAX-based reinforcement learning environment library, 2022b.
  URL http://github.com/RobertTLange/gymnax.
Robert Tjarko Lange and Henning Sprekeler. Learning not to learn: Nature versus nurture in silico.
  In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 36, pp. 7290–7299,
  2022.
Yann LeCun, Léon Bottou, Yoshua Bengio, and Patrick Haffner. Gradient-based learning applied to
  document recognition. Proceedings of the IEEE, 86(11):2278–2324, 1998.
Juho Lee, Yoonho Lee, Jungtaek Kim, Adam Kosiorek, Seungjin Choi, and Yee Whye Teh. Set
  transformer: A framework for attention-based permutation-invariant neural networks. In Interna-
  tional conference on machine learning, pp. 3744–3753. PMLR, 2019.
Kuang-Huei Lee, Ofir Nachum, Tingnan Zhang, Sergio Guadarrama, Jie Tan, and Wenhao Yu. Pi-
  ars: Accelerating evolution-learned visual-locomotion with predictive information representa-
  tions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.13224, 2022.
Chris Lu, Jakub Grudzien Kuba, Alistair Letcher, Luke Metz, Christian Schroeder de Witt, and
  Jakob Nicolaus Foerster. Discovered policy optimisation. In Decision Awareness in Reinforce-
  ment Learning Workshop at ICML 2022, 2022.
Amil Merchant, Luke Metz, Samuel S Schoenholz, and Ekin D Cubuk. Learn2hop: Learned opti-
 mization on rough landscapes. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 7643–7653.
 PMLR, 2021.
Luke Metz, Niru Maheswaranathan, Jeremy Nixon, Daniel Freeman, and Jascha Sohl-Dickstein.
  Understanding and correcting pathologies in the training of learned optimizers. In International
  Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 4556–4565. PMLR, 2019.
Luke Metz, Niru Maheswaranathan, C Daniel Freeman, Ben Poole, and Jascha Sohl-Dickstein.
  Tasks, stability, architecture, and compute: Training more effective learned optimizers, and using
  them to train themselves. arXiv preprint arXiv:2009.11243, 2020.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Luke Metz, C Daniel Freeman, Niru Maheswaranathan, and Jascha Sohl-Dickstein. Training learned
  optimizers with randomly initialized learned optimizers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2101.07367, 2021a.
Luke Metz, C Daniel Freeman, Samuel S Schoenholz, and Tal Kachman. Gradients are not all you
  need. arXiv preprint arXiv:2111.05803, 2021b.
Luke Metz, C Daniel Freeman, James Harrison, Niru Maheswaranathan, and Jascha Sohl-Dickstein.
  Practical tradeoffs between memory, compute, and performance in learned optimizers. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2203.11860, 2022.
Yurii Nesterov and Vladimir Spokoiny. Random gradient-free minimization of convex functions.
  Foundations of Computational Mathematics, 17(2):527–566, 2017.
Andrew Y Ng and Michael I Jordan. Pegasus: A policy search method for large mdps and pomdps.
  In Proceedings of the Sixteenth Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence (UAI), pp.
  406–415, 2000.
Junhyuk Oh, Matteo Hessel, Wojciech M Czarnecki, Zhongwen Xu, Hado P van Hasselt, Satinder
  Singh, and David Silver. Discovering reinforcement learning algorithms. Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 33:1060–1070, 2020.
Yann Ollivier, Ludovic Arnold, Anne Auger, and Nikolaus Hansen. Information-geometric opti-
  mization algorithms: A unifying picture via invariance principles. Journal of Machine Learning
  Research, 18(18):1–65, 2017.
Jack Parker-Holder, Raghu Rajan, Xingyou Song, André Biedenkapp, Yingjie Miao, Theresa Eimer,
  Baohe Zhang, Vu Nguyen, Roberto Calandra, Aleksandra Faust, et al. Automated reinforcement
  learning (autorl): A survey and open problems. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research, 74:
  517–568, 2022.
Justin K Pugh, Lisa B Soros, and Kenneth O Stanley. Quality diversity: A new frontier for evolu-
  tionary computation. Frontiers in Robotics and AI, pp. 40, 2016.
Ingo Rechenberg. Evolutionsstrategie. Optimierung technischer Systeme nach Prinzipien derbiolo-
  gischen Evolution, 1973.
Raymond Ros and Nikolaus Hansen. A simple modification in cma-es achieving linear time and
  space complexity. In International conference on parallel problem solving from nature, pp. 296–
  305. Springer, 2008.
Tim Salimans, Jonathan Ho, Xi Chen, Szymon Sidor, and Ilya Sutskever. Evolution strategies as a
  scalable alternative to reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1703.03864, 2017.
Tom Schaul, Tobias Glasmachers, and Jürgen Schmidhuber. High dimensions and heavy tails for
  natural evolution strategies. In Proceedings of the 13th annual conference on Genetic and evolu-
  tionary computation, pp. 845–852, 2011.
Jürgen Schmidhuber. Evolutionary principles in self-referential learning, or on learning how to
   learn: the meta-meta-... hook. PhD thesis, Technische Universität München, 1987.
Hans-Paul Schwefel. Evolutionsstrategien für die numerische optimierung. In Numerische Opti-
  mierung von Computer-Modellen mittels der Evolutionsstrategie, pp. 123–176. Springer, 1977.
Frank Sehnke, Christian Osendorfer, Thomas Rückstieß, Alex Graves, Jan Peters, and Jürgen
  Schmidhuber. Parameter-exploring policy gradients. Neural Networks, 23(4):551–559, 2010.
Gresa Shala, André Biedenkapp, Noor Awad, Steven Adriaensen, Marius Lindauer, and Frank Hut-
  ter. Learning step-size adaptation in cma-es. In International Conference on Parallel Problem
  Solving from Nature, pp. 691–706. Springer, 2020.
Felipe Petroski Such, Vashisht Madhavan, Edoardo Conti, Joel Lehman, Kenneth O Stanley, and
  Jeff Clune. Deep neuroevolution: Genetic algorithms are a competitive alternative for training
  deep neural networks for reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1712.06567, 2017.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Yujin Tang and David Ha. The sensory neuron as a transformer: Permutation-invariant neural
  networks for reinforcement learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:
  22574–22587, 2021.
Yujin Tang, Yingtao Tian, and David Ha. Evojax: Hardware-accelerated neuroevolution. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2202.05008, 2022.
Vishnu TV, Pankaj Malhotra, Jyoti Narwariya, Lovekesh Vig, and Gautam Shroff. Meta-learning
  for black-box optimization. In Joint European Conference on Machine Learning and Knowledge
  Discovery in Databases, pp. 366–381. Springer, 2019.
Paul Vicol, Luke Metz, and Jascha Sohl-Dickstein. Unbiased gradient estimation in unrolled com-
  putation graphs with persistent evolution strategies. In International Conference on Machine
  Learning, pp. 10553–10563. PMLR, 2021.
Jane X Wang, Zeb Kurth-Nelson, Dhruva Tirumala, Hubert Soyer, Joel Z Leibo, Remi Munos,
  Charles Blundell, Dharshan Kumaran, and Matt Botvinick. Learning to reinforcement learn.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:1611.05763, 2016.
Sinong Wang, Belinda Z Li, Madian Khabsa, Han Fang, and Hao Ma. Linformer: Self-attention
  with linear complexity. arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.04768, 2020.
Michael L Waskom. Seaborn: statistical data visualization. Journal of Open Source Software, 6
 (60):3021, 2021.
Dennis Weyland. A rigorous analysis of the harmony search algorithm: How the research commu-
  nity can be misled by a “novel” methodology. International Journal of Applied Metaheuristic
  Computing (IJAMC), 1(2):50–60, 2010.
Daan Wierstra, Tom Schaul, Tobias Glasmachers, Yi Sun, Jan Peters, and Jürgen Schmidhuber.
  Natural evolution strategies. The Journal of Machine Learning Research, 15(1):949–980, 2014.
Zhongwen Xu, Hado P van Hasselt, and David Silver. Meta-gradient reinforcement learning. Ad-
  vances in neural information processing systems, 31, 2018.
Zhongwen Xu, Hado P van Hasselt, Matteo Hessel, Junhyuk Oh, Satinder Singh, and David Silver.
  Meta-gradient reinforcement learning with an objective discovered online. Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 33:15254–15264, 2020.
Kenny Young and Tian Tian. Minatar: An atari-inspired testbed for thorough and reproducible
  reinforcement learning experiments. arXiv preprint arXiv:1903.03176, 2019.
Tom Zahavy, Zhongwen Xu, Vivek Veeriah, Matteo Hessel, Junhyuk Oh, Hado P van Hasselt, David
  Silver, and Satinder Singh. A self-tuning actor-critic algorithm. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 33:20913–20924, 2020.


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Appendix
Table of Contents
     A Meta-Training Details                                                                    14

     B Discovered Evolution Strategy                                                            15

     C MetaBBO Algorithm for Meta-Evolving Evolution Strategies                                 16

     D Hyperparameter Settings                                                                  16
       D.1 MetaBBO Hyperparameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      16
       D.2 Neuroevolution Evaluation Hyperparameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      16
       D.3 Baseline Settings & Tuning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   17
       D.4 Software & Compute Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      17

     E Additional Results                                                                       18
       E.1 Meta-Evolution Training Curves & Ablations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     18
       E.2 Detailed DES/LES Neuroevolution Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      19

     F Pseudo-Code Implementations for DES & LES                                                22
       F.1 JAX-Based Pseudo-Code for Discovered Evolution Strategy . . . . . . . . . . .        22
       F.2 JAX-Based Pseudo-Code for Learned Evolution Strategy . . . . . . . . . . . . .       24



A    M ETA -T RAINING D ETAILS

 Function Name            Reference                         Property                      Meta-
                                                                                          Distribution
 Sphere                   Hansen et al. (p. 5, 2010)        Separable (Independent)       Small
 Rosenbrock               Hansen et al. (p. 40, 2010)       Moderate Condition            Medium
 Discus                   Hansen et al. (p. 55, 2010)       High Condition                Medium
 Rastrigin                Hansen et al. (p. 75, 2010)       Multi-Modal (Local)           Medium
 Schwefel                 Hansen et al. (p. 100, 2010)      Multi-Modal (Global)          Medium
 BuecheRastrigin          Hansen et al. (p. 20, 2010)       Separable (Independent)       Large
 AttractiveSector         Hansen et al. (p. 30, 2010)       Moderate Condition            Large
 Weierstrass              Hansen et al. (p. 80, 2010)       Multi-Modal (Global)          Large
 SchaffersF7              Hansen et al. (p. 85, 2010)       Multi-Modal (Global)          Large
 GriewankRosenbrock       Hansen et al. (p. 95, 2010)       Multi-Modal (Global)          Large

     Table 1: Meta-training black-box optimization tasks with different structural properties.

During meta-training we uniformly sample task parameters ξk for k = 1, ..., K different tasks,
characterizing the inner fitness f : RD → R, namely the function identifier and the number of
dimensions D ∈ [2, 10]. In addition, we sample a constant offset to the optimum x⋆ and a noise
level Eϵ [f (x) + ϵ] = f (x) with ϵ ∼ N (0, Ξ). The initial mean is sampled m0 ∈ [−5, 5]D in order
to ensure solutions that are robust to their starting initialization. We unroll the LES for T = 50
generations with N = 16 population members/function evaluations each. The meta-objective is
computed based on the collected inner loop fitness scores:

                       h                               M
                                             T iK
                                         N
                                                         ∈ RN ×T ×K×M .

                          {f (xj,t |ξk )}j=1 t=1  |θi
                                                  k=1     i=1


                                                  14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


For each candidate LES θi we minimize over time and population members. Afterwards, we z-score
the task-specific results over all population members and compute the mean across all tasks:

                                                 h                               M
                              M K
                                                                   N
                                                                       T iK
                 [f (θi |ξk )]i=1 k=1 = min min     {f (xj,t |ξk )}j=1 t=1  |θi
                                       t    j                            k=1     i=1
                                                                     K
                     {f˜(θi )}M                                 M

                              i=1 = Median Z-Score [f (θi |ξk )]i=1 k=1 .

In practice we found that it can be helpful to meta-optimize the median across tasks of the z-scored
fitness. Inspired by Shala et al. (2020), the learning rate modulation of αm , ασ is performed using
a small MLP that outputs two sigmoid activations corresponding to the per-parameter learning rates
(mean/std) using a tanh timestamp embedding as in (Metz et al., 2022) and a set of evolution paths,
which mimic momentum terms at different timescales:


         αm,t,d , ασ,t,d = MLP(pc,t+1,d , pσ,t,d , ρ(t))
                                                   X
                 pc,t+1 = (1 − αpc )pc,t + αpc (        wj (xj − mt ) − pc,t ) ∈ RD×3
                                                      j
                                                    X
                 pσ,t+1 = (1 − αpσ )pσ,t + αpσ (         wj (xj − mt )/σt − pσ,t ) ∈ RD×3 ,
                                                     j

with three time-scales αpc = αpσ = [0.1, 0.5, 0.9] and ρ(t) = tanh(t/γ − 1) with γ =
[1, 3, 10, 30, 50, 100, 250, 500, 750, 1000, 1250, 1500, 2000]. The ‘medium’ set of BBOB meta-
training functions for D = 2 and the time embedding features are visualized in figure 7:


Figure 7: Visualization of 2D ‘medium’ BBOB functions and tanh timestamp embedding features.


B    D ISCOVERED E VOLUTION S TRATEGY

Algorithm 1 Discovered Evolution Strategy (DES)
 1: Inputs: Population members N , search dimensions D, generations T , Initial scale σ0 ∈ RD ,
    Mean and std learning rates αm = 1, ασ = 0.1, temperature parameter β ≈ 12.5.
 2: Initialize the search mean m0 = 0D ∈ RD
 3: for t = 0, ..., T − 1 do
 4:     Sample candidates: xj ∼ N (mt , σt 1D )
 5:     Evaluate all candidates: fj , ∀j = 1, ..., N
 6:     Compute weights using: wt,j = softmax (20 × sigmoid (β × (rank(j)/N − 0.5))) , ∀j =
    1, ..., N
 7:    Update mean using equation (2) → mt+1
 8:    Update std using equation (3) → σt+1
 9: end for


                                                15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


C     M ETA BBO A LGORITHM FOR M ETA -E VOLVING E VOLUTION S TRATEGIES


Algorithm 2 MetaBBO Training of Learned Evolution Strategies
 1: Inputs: Meta-population members M , meta-task size K, inner loop population size N , inner
      loop generations T , MetaES (e.g. CMA-ES)
 2: Initialize the meta-search mean and covariance µ, Σ.
 3: while not done do
 4:     Sample K tasks with parameters ξk , ∀k = 1, ..., K
 5:     Sample LES candidates: θi ∼ N (µ, Σ), ∀i = 1, ..., M
 6:     Evaluate all M LES candidates (in parallel) on K tasks:
 7:     for k = 1, ..., K do
 8:          for i = 1, ..., M do
 9:              Initialize inner loop search means/std m0,k,i ∈ RDk , σ0,k,i ∈ RDk
10:              for t = 0, ..., T − 1 do
11:                  Sample inner loop candidates: xj,t ∼ N (mt,k,i , σt,k,i 1Dk ), ∀j = 1, ..., N
12:                  Evaluate all inner loop candidates: f (xj,t |ξk ), ∀j = 1, ..., N
13:                  Update LES mean/std using equation (2) and (3) → mt+1,k,i , σt+1,k,i with θi
14:              end for
15:          end for
16:     end for                                                                 M
                                                 h                    T iK
17:      Collect all inner loop fitness scores     {f (xj,t |ξk )}N
                                                                  j=1 t=1  |θ i   ∈ RN ×T ×K×M
                                                                     k=1     i=1
18:    Compute the population normalized and task aggregated meta-fitness scores {f˜(θi )}M
                                                                                          i=1
19:    Update meta-mean, meta-std µ′ , Σ′ ← MetaES({θi , f˜}M
                                                            i=1 |µ, Σ)
20: end while



D      H YPERPARAMETER S ETTINGS

D.1     M ETA BBO H YPERPARAMETERS

                          MetaBBO Hyperparameters for LES Discovery
 Hyperparameter           Value               Hyperparameter               Value
 Meta-Generations         1500                Meta-Population              256
 Meta-Tasks               128                 Meta-ES                      CMA-ES
 CMA-ES σ0                0.1                 Inner-Population             16
 Inner-Generations        50                  m0 range                     [-5, 5]
 Timestamp Range          [0, 2000]           σ0 range                     [1, 1]
 Dk Attention keys        8                   MLP Hidden dim.              8
For the self-referential meta-training results (Section 7 we replace the meta-LES parameters every
5 meta-generations if we observe an improvement in the meta-objective by one of the inner LES
candidates. Furthermore, we reset the meta-variance Σ = σ0 I = 0.1I .


D.2     N EUROEVOLUTION E VALUATION H YPERPARAMETERS

                              Brax Task Evaluation Hyperparameters
 Hyperparameter            Value                  Hyperparameter           Value
 Generations               2000                   Population               256
 MC Evaluations            16                     MLP Layers               4
 Hidden Units              32                     Activation               Tanh
The Brax experiments all used observation normalization.


                                                   16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                            MNIST Task Evaluation Hyperparameters
 Hyperparameter           Value                 Hyperparameter             Value
 Generations              4000                  Population                 128
 MC Evaluations           1                     CNN Layers                 1
 Batchsize                1024                  Activation                 ReLU

                            MinAtar Task Evaluation Hyperparameters
 Hyperparameter           Value                  Hyperparameter            Value
 Generations              5000                   Population                256
 MC Evaluations           64                     CNN Layers                1
 Linear Layers            1                      Activation                ReLU
 Hidden Units             32                     Episode Steps             500
The MinAtar experiments do not use observation normalization.


D.3   BASELINE S ETTINGS & T UNING

Throughout the Brax control neuroevolution experiments, we consider the following baselines:

      1. OpenES (Salimans et al., 2017) using Adam and centered rank fitness transformation.

      2. PGPE (Sehnke et al., 2010) using Adam and centered rank fitness transformation.

      3. ASEBO (Choromanski et al., 2019) using Adam and z-scored fitness transformation.

      4. SNES (Wierstra et al., 2014) using the default rank-based fitness transformation.

      5. sep-CMA-ES (Ros & Hansen, 2008) using an elite ratio of 0.5.

We tuned the initial search scale σ0 for all baselines and LES by running a grid search over σ0 ∈
[0.05, 0.2]. We repeat this exercise for all individual environments. Furthermore, we tuned the
learning rate for OpenES (0.05), PGPE (0.02) and ASEBO (0.01) on the Brax ant environment and
using a population size of 256. For OpenES we exponentially decay σ to a minimal value of 0.01
using a decay constant of 0.999. For ASEBO the decay rate is set to γ = 0.99, l = 150 and for
better comparability we sample full populations instead of a dynamically adjusting the population
size. For PGPE the learning rate for σ is set to 0.1 and maximal relative change of σ is constrained
to 20 percent.
For the computer vision tasks we again tune the initial scale by running a grid search over σ0 ∈
[0.05, 0.2] for each task. The learning rates are fixed as follows: PGPE (0.01), OpenES (0.01),
ASEBO (0.01). Finally, for the MinAtar experiments (Figure 21) we only consider PGPE and
OpenES as baselines and tune both their learning rate (α ∈ [0.005, 0.0075, 0.01, 0.02, 0.03, 0.04])
and initial scale (σ0 ∈ [0.025, 0.05, 0.075, 0.1, 0.125, 0.15]) by running a grid search.
Note that LES only has a single hyperparameter σ0 and is fairly robust to its choice (see SI E.2.1).


D.4   S OFTWARE & C OMPUTE R EQUIREMENTS

This project has been made possible by the usage of freely available Open Source software. This
includes the following: NumPy: Harris et al. (2020), Matplotlib: Hunter (2007), Seaborn: Waskom
(2021), JAX: Bradbury et al. (2018), Evosax: Lange (2022a), Gymnax: Lange (2022b), Evojax:
Tang et al. (2022), Brax: Freeman et al. (2021). All experiments (both meta-training and evaluation
on Brax) were implemented using JAX for parallel rollout evaluations. The simulations were run
on individual NVIDIA V100 GPUs. Each MetaBBO meta-training run for 1500 meta-generations
takes ca. 1 hour. The Brax evaluations require between 30 minutes (hopper, reacher, walker, fetch,
ur5e) and 2 hours (ant, humanoid, halfcheetah). The computer vision evaluation experiments take
ca. 10 minutes and the MinAtar experiments last for ca. 35 minutes on a V100.


                                                 17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


E     A DDITIONAL R ESULTS

E.1   M ETA -E VOLUTION T RAINING C URVES & A BLATIONS


Figure 8: Comparing different meta-evolution training distributions (top) and input ablations to LES
(bottom). Results are averaged over 5 independent runs (+/- 1.96 standard errors).


Figure 9: Comparing meta-evolution optimizers (top) and training setups (bottom, MetaBBO &
self-referential MetaBBO). Results are averaged over 5 independent runs (+/- 1.96 standard errors).


Figure 10: Comparing different meta-evolution training problem dimensions D (top) and population
sizes N (bottom). Results are averaged over 5 independent runs (+/- 1.96 standard errors).


                                                18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 11: Comparing different meta-evolution training inner loop time horizons T (top) and LES
key embedding sizes DK (bottom). Results are averaged over 5 independent runs (+/- 1.96 std err.).


E.2     D ETAILED DES/LES N EUROEVOLUTION R ESULTS

E.2.1    D ETAILED A BLATION /ROBUSTNESS P ERFORMANCE ON B RAX TASKS


Figure 12: Impact of Meta-Task Distribution on Brax Performance. Results are averaged over 5
independent runs (+/- 1.96 standard errors).


Figure 13: Brax LES Neural Network Components Ablation Study. Results are averaged over 5
independent runs (+/- 1.96 standard errors).


                                               19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 14: Robustness to initial scale of standard deviations σ0 . Results are averaged over 5 inde-
pendent runs (+/- 1.96 standard errors).


Figure 15: Best initial scale of standard deviations across population sizes. Results are averaged
over 5 independent runs (+/- 1.96 standard errors).


E.2.2   D ETAILED N EUROEVOLUTION L EARNING C URVES


Figure 16: Detailed Brax Learning Curves with a population size of 256. PPO scores were taken
from Lu et al. (2022) using default settings provided by the Brax implementation (Freeman et al.,
2021). Results are averaged over 5 independent runs (+/- 1.96 standard errors).


                                                20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 17: Detailed Brax Learning Curves with DES(β) variants and a population size of 256.
Results are averaged over 5 independent runs (+/- 1.96 standard errors).


Figure 18: Detailed Brax Learning Curves with Self-Referentially Meta-Trained LES and a popula-
tion size of 256. Results are averaged over 5 independent runs (+/- 1.96 standard errors).


Figure 19: Detailed Brax Learning Curves with 5 separately Meta-Trained LES and a population
size of 256. Results are averaged over 5 independent runs (+/- 1.96 standard errors).


                                               21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 20: Detailed Learning Curves (Test Accuracy) on MNIST variants with a population size of
128. Results are averaged over 5 independent runs (+/- 1.96 standard errors).


Figure 21: Detailed MinAtar Learning Curves with a population size of 256. Results are averaged
over 3 independent runs (+/- 1.96 standard errors).


F     P SEUDO -C ODE I MPLEMENTATIONS FOR DES & LES
F.1   JAX-BASED P SEUDO -C ODE FOR D ISCOVERED E VOLUTION S TRATEGY

from typing import Tuple
import chex
import jax
import jax.numpy as jnp


def get_des_weights(popsize: int, temperature: float = 12.5):
    """Compute discovered recombination weights."""
    ranks = jnp.arange(popsize)
    ranks /= ranks.size - 1
    ranks = ranks - 0.5
    sigout = nn.sigmoid(temperature * ranks)
    weights = nn.softmax(-20 * sigout)
    return weights


class DES(object):
    def __init__(
        self,
        popsize: int,
        num_dims: int,
        temperature: float = 12.5,
    ):
        """Discovered Evolution Strategy"""
        self.strategy_name = "DES"
        self.popsize = popsize
        self.num_dims = num_dims
        self.temperature = temperature

      @property
      def params_strategy(self) -> EvoParams:
          """Return default parameters of evolution strategy."""
          return EvoParams(temperature=self.temperature)



                                               22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


     def initialize(
         self, rng: chex.PRNGKey, params: EvoParams
     ) -> EvoState:
         """‘initialize‘ the evolution strategy."""
         # Get DES discovered recombination weights.
         weights = get_des_weights(self.popsize, params.temperature)
         initialization = jax.random.uniform(
             rng,
             (self.num_dims,),
             minval=params.init_min,
             maxval=params.init_max,
         )
         state = EvoState(
             mean=initialization,
             sigma=params.sigma_init * jnp.ones(self.num_dims),
             weights=weights.reshape(-1, 1),
         )
         return state

     def ask(
         self, rng: chex.PRNGKey, state: EvoState, params: EvoParams
     ) -> Tuple[chex.Array, EvoState]:
         """‘ask‘ for new proposed candidates to evaluate next."""
         z = jax.random.normal(rng, (self.popsize, self.num_dims))
         x = state.mean + z * state.sigma.reshape(
              1, self.num_dims
         )
         return x, state

    def tell(
        self,
        x: chex.Array,
        fitness: chex.Array,
        state: EvoState,
        params: EvoParams,
    ) -> EvoState:
        """‘tell‘ update to ES state."""
        weights = state.weights
        x = x[fitness.argsort()]
        # Weighted updates
        weighted_mean = (weights * x).sum(axis=0)
        weighted_sigma = jnp.sqrt(
            (weights * (x - state.mean) ** 2).sum(axis=0) + 1e-06
        )
        mean = state.mean + params.lrate_mean * (weighted_mean - state.
    mean)
        sigma = state.sigma + params.lrate_sigma * (
            weighted_sigma - state.sigma
        )
        return state.replace(mean=mean, sigma=sigma)

                    Listing 1: Pseudo-Code Discovered Evolution Strategy.


                                               23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


F.2   JAX-BASED P SEUDO -C ODE FOR L EARNED E VOLUTION S TRATEGY

from typing import Tuple
import chex
import jax
import jax.numpy as jnp
from flax import linen as nn


class AttentionWeights(nn.Module):
    """Self-attention layer for recombination weights."""

      att_hidden_dims: int = 8

      @nn.compact
      def __call__(self, X: chex.Array) -> chex.Array:
          keys = nn.Dense(self.att_hidden_dims)(X)
          queries = nn.Dense(self.att_hidden_dims)(X)
          values = nn.Dense(1)(X)
          A = nn.softmax(jnp.matmul(queries, keys.T) / jnp.sqrt(X.shape[0])
      )
          weights = nn.softmax(jnp.matmul(A, values).squeeze())
          return weights[:, None]


class EvoPathMLP(nn.Module):
    """MLP layer for learning rate modulation based on evopaths."""

      mlp_hidden_dims: int = 8

      @nn.compact
      def __call__(
          self, path_c: chex.Array, path_sigma: chex.Array, time_embed:
      chex.Array
      ) -> Tuple[chex.Array, chex.Array]:
          timestamps = jnp.repeat(jnp.expand_dims(time_embed, axis=0),
      repeats=path_c.shape[0], axis=0)
          X = jnp.concatenate([path_c, path_sigma, timestamps], axis=1)
          hidden = jax.vmap(nn.Dense(self.mlp_hidden_dims), in_axes=(0))(X)
          hidden = nn.relu(hidden)
          lrates_mean = nn.sigmoid(nn.Dense(1)(hidden)).squeeze()
          lrates_sigma = nn.sigmoid(nn.Dense(1)(hidden)).squeeze()
          return lrates_mean, lrates_sigma


class LES(object):
    """Population Invariant Black-Box Evolution Strategy."""

      def __init__(self, popsize: int, num_dims: int, les_net_params: chex.
      ArrayTree):
          self.strategy_name = "LES"
          self.popsize = popsize
          self.num_dims = num_dims
          self.evopath = EvolutionPath(num_dims=self.num_dims, timescales=
      jnp.array([0.1, 0.5, 0.9]))
          self.weight_layer = AttentionWeights(8)
          self.lrate_layer = EvoPathMLP(8)
          self.fitness_features = FitnessFeatures()
          self.les_net_params = les_net_params

      @property
      def params_strategy(self) -> EvoParams:
          """Return default parameters of evolution strategy."""
          return EvoParams(net_params=self.les_net_params)



                                               24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


    def initialize(self, rng: chex.PRNGKey, params: EvoParams) ->
    EvoState:
        """‘initialize‘ the evolution strategy."""
        init_mean = jax.random.uniform(
            rng,
            (self.num_dims,),
            minval=params.init_min,
            maxval=params.init_max,
        )
        init_sigma = params.sigma_init * jnp.ones(self.num_dims)
        init_path_c = self.evopath.initialize()
        init_path_sigma = self.evopath.initialize()
        return EvoState(mean=init_mean, sigma=init_sigma, path_c=
    init_path_c, path_sigma=init_path_sigma)

     def ask(
         self, rng: chex.PRNGKey, state: EvoState, params: EvoParams
     ) -> Tuple[chex.Array, EvoState]:
         """‘ask‘ for new parameter candidates to evaluate next."""
         noise = jax.random.normal(rng, (self.popsize, self.num_dims))
         x = state.mean + noise * state.sigma.reshape(1, self.num_dims)
         x = jnp.clip(x, params.clip_min, params.clip_max)
         return x, state

    def tell(
        self, x: chex.Array, fitness: chex.Array, state: EvoState, params
    : EvoParams,
    ) -> EvoState:
        """‘tell‘ performance data for strategy state update."""
        fit_re = self.fitness_features.apply(x, fitness, state.
    best_fitness)
        time_embed = tanh_timestamp(state.gen_counter)
        weights = self.weight_layer.apply(
            params.net_params["recomb_weights"], fit_re
        )
        weight_diff = (weights * (x - state.mean)).sum(axis=0)
        weight_noise = (weights * (x - state.mean) / state.sigma).sum(
    axis=0)
        path_c = self.evopath.update(state.path_c, weight_diff)
        path_sigma = self.evopath.update(state.path_sigma, weight_noise)
        lrates_mean, lrates_sigma = self.lrate_layer.apply(
            params.net_params["lrate_modulation"], path_c, path_sigma,
            time_embed
        )
        weighted_mean = (weights * x).sum(axis=0)
        weighted_sigma = jnp.sqrt(
            (weights * (x - state.mean) ** 2).sum(axis=0) + 1e-10
        )
        mean_change = lrates_mean * (weighted_mean - state.mean)
        sigma_change = lrates_sigma * (weighted_sigma - state.sigma)
        mean = state.mean + mean_change
        sigma = state.sigma + sigma_change
        mean = jnp.clip(mean, params.clip_min, params.clip_max)
        sigma = jnp.clip(sigma, 0, params.clip_max)
        return state.replace(
            mean=mean, sigma=sigma,
            path_c=path_c, path_sigma=path_sigma,
            gen_counter=state.gen_counter + 1,
        )

                      Listing 2: Pseudo-Code Learned Evolution Strategy.


                                               25
