Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A V IEW F ROM S OMEWHERE :
H UMAN -C ENTRIC FACE R EPRESENTATIONS
 Jerone T. A. Andrews∗               Przemysław Joniak†                      Alice Xiang
 Sony AI, Tokyo                      University of Tokyo, Tokyo              Sony AI, New York



                                              A BSTRACT

          Few datasets contain self-identified sensitive attributes, inferring attributes risks
          introducing additional biases, and collecting attributes can carry legal risks. Besides,
          categorical labels can fail to reflect the continuous nature of human phenotypic
          diversity, making it difficult to compare the similarity between same-labeled faces.
          To address these issues, we present A View From Somewhere (AVFS)—a dataset of
          638,180 human judgments of face similarity.1 We demonstrate the utility of AVFS
          for learning a continuous, low-dimensional embedding space aligned with human
          perception. Our embedding space, induced under a novel conditional framework,
          not only enables the accurate prediction of face similarity, but also provides a
          human-interpretable decomposition of the dimensions used in the human-decision
          making process, and the importance distinct annotators place on each dimension.
          We additionally show the practicality of the dimensions for collecting continuous
          attributes, performing classification, and comparing dataset attribute disparities.


1       I NTRODUCTION
The canonical approach to evaluating human-centric image dataset diversity is based on demographic
attribute labels. Many equate diversity with parity across the subgroup distributions (Kay et al.,
2015; Schwemmer et al., 2020), presupposing access to demographically labeled samples. However,
most datasets are web scraped, lacking ground-truth information about image subjects (Andrews
et al., 2023). Moreover, data protection legislation considers demographic attributes to be personal
information and limits their collection and use (Andrus et al., 2021; 2020).
Even when demographic labels are known, evaluating diversity based on subgroup counts fails to
reflect the continuous nature of human phenotypic diversity (e.g., skin tone is often reduced to “light”
vs. “dark”). Further, even within the same subpopulation, image subjects exhibit certain traits to a
greater or lesser extent than others (Becerra-Riera et al., 2019; Carcagnì et al., 2015; Feliciano, 2016).
When labels are unknown, researchers typically choose certain attributes they consider to be relevant
for human diversity and use human annotators to infer them (Karkkainen & Joo, 2021; Wang et al.,
2019). Inferring labels, however, is difficult, especially for nebulous social constructs, e.g., race
and gender (Hanna et al., 2020; Keyes, 2018), and can introduce additional biases (Freeman et al.,
2011). Beyond the inclusion of derogatory categories (Koch et al., 2021; Birhane & Prabhu, 2021;
Crawford & Paglen, 2019), label taxonomies often do not permit multi-group membership, resulting
in the erasure of, e.g., multi-ethnic individuals (Robinson et al., 2020; Karkkainen & Joo, 2021).
Significantly, discrepancies between inferred and self-identified attributes can induce psychological
distress by invalidating an individual’s self-image (Campbell & Troyer, 2007; Roth, 2016).
In this work, we avoid problematic semantic labels altogether and propose to learn a face embedding
space aligned with human perception. To do so, we introduce A View From Somewhere (AVFS)—a
dataset of 638,180 face similarity judgments over 4,921 faces. Each judgment corresponds to the
odd-one-out (i.e., least similar) face in a triplet of faces and is accompanied by both the identifier and
demographic attributes of the annotator who made the judgment. Our embedding space, induced under
a novel conditional framework, not only enables the accurate prediction of face similarity, but also
    ∗
      Correspondence to jerone.andrews@sony.com.
    †
      Work done while the author was an intern at Sony AI, Tokyo.
    1
      Code and data may be found at https://github.com/SonyAI/a_view_from_somewhere.


                                                     1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


provides a human-interpretable decomposition of the dimensions used in the human decision-making
process, as well as the importance distinct annotators place on each dimension. We demonstrate that
the individual embedding dimensions (1) are related to concepts of gender, ethnicity, age, as well as
face and hair morphology; and (2) can be used to collect continuous attributes, perform classification,
and compare dataset attribute disparities. We further show that annotators are influenced by their
sociocultural backgrounds, underscoring the need for diverse annotator groups to mitigate bias.


2    R ELATED W ORK

Similarity. The human mind is conjectured to have, “a considerable investment in similarity” (Medin
et al., 1993). When two objects are compared they mutually constrain the set of features that are
activated in the human mind (Markman, 1996)—i.e., features are dynamically discovered and aligned
based on what is being compared. Alignment is contended to be central to similarity comparisons.
Shanon (1988) goes as far as arguing that similarity is not a function of features, but that the features
themselves are a function of the similarity comparison.
Contextual similarity. Human perception of similarity can vary with respect to context (Roth &
Shoben, 1983). Context makes salient context-related properties and the extent to which objects
being compared share these properties (Medin et al., 1993; Markman & Gentner, 2005; Goodman,
1972). For example, Barsalou (1987) found that “snakes” and “raccoons” were judged to be more
similar when placed in the context of pets than when no context was provided. The odd-one-out
similarity task (Zheng et al., 2019) used in this work also provides context. By varying the context
(i.e., the third object) in which two objects are experienced, it is possible to uncover different features
that contribute to their pairwise similarity. This is important as there are an uncountable number of
ways in which two objects may be similar (Love & Roads, 2021).
Psychological embeddings. Multidimensional scaling (MDS) is often used to learn psychological
embeddings from human similarity judgments (Zheng et al., 2019; Roads & Love, 2021; Dima et al.,
2022; Josephs et al., 2021). As MDS approaches cannot embed images outside of the training set,
researchers have used pretrained models as feature extractors (Sanders & Nosofsky, 2020; Peterson
et al., 2018; Attarian et al., 2020), which can introduce unwanted implicit biases (Krishnakumar et al.,
2021; Steed & Caliskan, 2021). Moreover, previous approaches ignore inter- and intra-annotator
variability. By contrast, our conditional model is trained end-to-end and can embed any arbitrary face
from the perspective of a specific annotator.
Face datasets. Most face datasets are semantically labeled images, created for the purposes of identity
and attribute recognition (Karkkainen & Joo, 2021; Liu et al., 2015; Huang et al., 2008; Cao et al.,
2018). An implicit assumption is that semantic similarity is equivalent to visual similarity (Deselaers
& Ferrari, 2011). However, many semantic categories are functional (Rosch, 1975; Rothbart & Taylor,
1992), i.e., unconstrained by visual features such as shape, color, and material. Moreover, semantic
labels often only indicate the presence or absence of an attribute, as opposed to its magnitude, making
it difficult to compare the similarity between same-labeled samples. While face similarity datasets
exist, the judgments narrowly pertain to identity (McCauley et al., 2021; Sadovnik et al., 2018; Somai
& Hancock, 2021) and expression similarity (Vemulapalli & Agarwala, 2019).
Annotator positionality. Semantic categorization by annotators not only depends on the image
subject, but also on extrinsic contextual cues (Freeman et al., 2011) and the annotators’ sociocultural
backgrounds (Segall et al., 1966). Despite this, annotator positionality is rarely discussed in computer
vision (Chen & Joo, 2021; Zhao et al., 2021; Denton et al., 2021); “only five publications [from 113]
provided any [annotator] demographic information” (Scheuerman et al., 2021). To our knowledge,
AVFS represents the first human-centric vision dataset, where each annotation is associated with the
annotator who created it and their demographics, permitting the study of annotator bias.


3    A V IEW F ROM S OMEWHERE DATASET

To learn a face embedding space aligned with human perception, we collect AVFS—a dataset of
odd-one-out similarity judgments collected from humans. An odd-one-out judgment corresponds to
the least similar face in a triplet of faces, representing a three-alternative forced choice (3AFC) task.
AVFS dataset documentation can be found in Appendix C.


                                                    2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Face image stimulus set. 4,921 near-frontal faces with limited eye occlusions and an apparent age
> 19 years old were sampled from the CC-BY licensed FFHQ (Karras et al., 2019) dataset. The
subset was obtained by (1) splitting FFHQ into 56 partitions based on inferred intersectional group
labels; and (2) randomly sampling from each partition with equal probability. Ethnicity was estimated
using a FairFace model (Karkkainen & Joo, 2021); and binary gender expression and age group
labels were obtained from FFHQ-Aging crowdsourced human annotations (Or-El et al., 2020).
3AFC similarity judgments. AVFS contains 638,180 quality-controlled triplets over 4,921 faces,
representing 0.003% of all possible triplets. To focus judgments on intrinsic face-varying features, for
each presented triplet, annotators were instructed to choose the person that looks least similar to the
two other people, while ignoring differences in pose, expression, lighting, accessories, background,
and objects. Each AVFS triplet is labeled with a judgment, as well as the identifier of the annotator
who made the judgment and the annotator’s self-reported age, nationality, ancestry, and gender
identity. As in previous non-facial odd-one-out datasets (Josephs et al., 2021; Hebart et al., 2022;
Dima et al., 2022), there is a single judgment per triplet. Quality was controlled by excluding
judgments from annotators who provided overly fast, deterministic, or incomplete responses. In total,
1,645 annotators contributed to AVFS via Amazon Mechanical Turk (AMT) and provided consent to
use their study data. Compensation was 15 USD per hour.
3AFC task rationale. Let x ∈ X and sim : (xi , xj ) → sim(i, j) ∈ R denote a face image and a
similarity function, respectively. Our motivation for collecting AVFS is fourfold. Most significantly,
the odd-one-out task does not require an annotator to explicitly categorize people. Second, for a
triplet (xi , xj , xk ), repeatedly varying xk permits the identification of the relevant dimensions that
contribute to sim(i, j). That is, w.l.o.g., xk provides context for which sim(i, j) is determined,
making the task easier than explicit pairwise similarity tasks (i.e., “Is xi similar to xj ?”). This is
because it is not always apparent to an annotator which dimensions are relevant when determining
sim(i, j), especially when xi and xj are perceptually different. Third, there is no need to prespecify
attribute lists hypothesized as relevant for comparison (e.g., “Is xi older than xj ?”). The odd-one-task
implicitly encodes salient attributes that are used to determine similarity. Finally, compared to 2AFC
judgments for triplets composed of an anchor (i.e., reference point), xa , a positive, xp , and a negative,
xn , 3AFC judgments naturally provide more information. 3AFC triplets require an annotator to
determine {sim(i, j), sim(i, k), sim(j, k)}, whereas 2AFC triplets with anchors only necessitate the
evaluation of {sim(a, p), sim(a, n)}.

4    M ODEL OF C ONDITIONAL D ECISION -M AKING
Zheng et al. (2019) developed an MDS approach for learning continuous, non-negative, sparse em-
beddings from odd-one-out judgments. The approach has been shown to offer an intepretable window
into the dimensions in the human mind of object categories (Hebart et al., 2020), human actions (Dima
et al., 2022), and reachspace environments (Josephs et al., 2021) such that dimensional values indicate
feature magnitude. The method is based on three assumptions: (1) embeddings can be learned solely
from odd-one-out judgments; (2) judgments are a function of {sim(i, j), sim(i, k), sim(j, k)}; and
(3) judgments are stochastic, where the probability of selecting xk is
                                        p(k) ∝ exp(sim(i, j)).                                         (1)

Conditional similarity. At a high-level, we want to apply Zheng et al. (2019)’s MDS approach
to learn face embeddings. However, the method (1) cannot embed data outside of the training set,
limiting its utility; and (2) pools all judgments, disregarding intra- and inter-annotator stochasticity.
Therefore, we instead propose to learn a conditional convolutional neural net (convnet).
                               n
Let {({xiℓ , xjℓ , xkℓ }, kℓ, a)}ℓ=1 denote a training set of n (triplet, judgment, annotator) tuples,
where a ∈ A. To simplify notation, we assume that judgments always correspond to index kℓ.
Suppose f : x 7→ f (x) = w ∈ Rd is a convnet, parametrized by Θ, where w ∈ Rd is an embedding
of x. In contrast to Zheng et al. (2019), we model the probability of annotator a selecting kℓ as
                                    p(kℓ | a) ∝ exp(sima (iℓ, jℓ)),                                    (2)
where sima (·, ·) denotes the internal similarity function of a. Given two images xi and xj , we define
their similarity according to a as:
                   sima (i, j) = (σ(ϕa ) ⊙ ReLU(wi ))⊤ · (σ(ϕa ) ⊙ ReLU(wj )),                         (3)


                                                    3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


where σ(·) is the sigmoid function and σ(ϕa ) ∈ [0, 1]d is a mask associated with a. Each mask
plays the role of an element-wise gating function, encoding the importance a places on each of the d
embedding dimensions when determining similarity. Conditioning prediction on a induces subspaces
that encode each annotator’s notion of similarity, permitting us to study whether per-dimensional
importance weights differ between a ∈ A. Veit et al. (2017) employed a similar procedure to learn
subspaces which encode different notions of similarity (e.g., font style, character type).
Conditional loss. We denote by Φ = [ϕ⊤              ⊤
                                       1 , . . . , ϕ|A| ] ∈ R
                                                              d×|A|
                                                                    a trainable weight matrix, where
                     ⊤
each column vector ϕa corresponds to annotator a’s mask prior to applying σ(·). In our conditional
framework, we jointly optimize Θ and Φ by minimizing:
        X                        X                          X                       X
      −    log [p̂(kℓ | a)] + α1   ∥ReLU(wi )∥1 + α2            ReLU(−wi )j + α3       ∥ϕa ∥22 , (4)
          ℓ                          i                       ij                        a

where
                                                  exp(sima (iℓ, jℓ))
              p̂(kℓ | a) =                                                                          (5)
                             exp(sima (iℓ, jℓ)) + exp(sima (iℓ, kℓ)) + exp(sima (jℓ, kℓ))
is the predicted probability that kℓ is the odd-one-out conditioned on a. The first term in Equation (4)
encourages similar face pairs to result in large dot products. The second term (modulated by α1 ∈ R)
promotes sparsity. The third term (modulated by α2 ∈ R) supports interpretability by penalizing
negative values. The last term (modulated by α3 ∈ R) penalizes large weights.
Our conditional decision-making framework is applicable to any task that involves mapping from
inputs to decisions made by humans; it only requires record-keeping during data collection such that
each annotation is associated with the annotator who generated it.
Implementation. When α3 = 0 and σ(ϕa ) = [1, . . . , 1], ∀a, Equation (4) corresponds to the
unconditional MDS objective proposed by Zheng et al. (2019). We refer to unconditional and
conditional models trained on AVFS as AVFS-U and AVFS-C, respectively, and conditional models
whose masks are learned post hoc as AVFS-CPH. An AVFS-CPH model uses a fixed unconditional
model (i.e., AVFS-U) as a feature extractor to obtain face embeddings such that only Φ is trainable.
AVFS models have ResNet18 (He et al., 2016) architectures and output 128-dimensional embeddings.
We use the Adam (Kingma & Ba, 2014) optimizer with default parameters, reserving 10% of AVFS
for validation. Based on grid search, we empirically set α1 = 0.00005 and α2 = 0.01. For AVFS-C
and AVFS-CPH, we additionally set α3 = 0.00001. Across independent runs, we find that only
a fraction of the 128 dimensions are needed and individual dimensions are reproducible. Post-
optimization, we remove dimensions with maximal values (over the stimulus set) close to zero. For
AVFS-U, this results in 22 dimensions (61.9% validation accuracy). Note that we observe that 8/22
dimensions have a Pearson’s r correlation > 0.9 with another dimension. Refer to Appendix A for
further implementation details.

5   E XPERIMENTS

The aim of this work is to learn a face embedding space aligned with human perception. To highlight
the value of AVFS, we evaluate the performance of AVFS embeddings and conditional masks
for predicting face similarity judgments, as well as whether they reveal (1) a human-interpretable
decomposition of the dimensions used in the human decision-making process; and (2) the importance
distinct annotators place on each dimension. We further assess the practicality of the dimensions for
collecting continuous attributes, classification, and comparing dataset attribute disparities.
Embedding methods. Where appropriate, for comparison, we consider embeddings extracted from
face identity verification and face attribute recognition models: CASIA-WebFace (Yi et al., 2014)
is a face verification model trained with an ArcFace (Deng et al., 2019) loss on images from 11K
identities; CelebA (Liu et al., 2015) is a face attribute model trained to predict 40 binary attribute
labels (e.g., “pale skin”, “young”, “male”); and FairFace (Karkkainen & Joo, 2021) and FFHQ
are face attribute models trained to predict gender, age, and ethnicity. All models have ResNet18
architectures and output 128-dimensional embeddings (prior to the classification layer). All baseline
embeddings are normalized to unit-length, where the dot product of two embeddings determines their
similarity. Additional details on the datasets and baselines are presented in Appendix B.


                                                    4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


       Accuracy                                                Spearman’s r


Figure 1: Predicting similarity (same stimuli). Accuracy over 24,060 judgments and Spearman’s r
between the entropy in human- and model-generated triplet odd-one-out probabilities. Even when
trained on a fraction of AVFS judgments (i.e., 12.5%), the learned AVFS-U-12.5% model still
outperforms the baselines. Additional results are presented in Appendix A.


5.1       S AME S TIMULI

Predicting similarity. We analyze whether our model results in stimulus set embeddings such that
we are able to predict human 3AFC judgments not observed during learning. Using images from
the stimulus set of 4,921 faces, we generate 1,000 novel triplets and collect 22–25 unique judgments
per triplet (24,060 judgments) on AMT. As we have 22–25 judgments per triplet, we can reliably
estimate odd-one-out probabilities. The Bayes optimal classifier accuracy corresponds to the best
possible accuracy any model could achieve given the stochasticity in the judgments. The classifier
makes the most probable prediction, i.e., the majority judgment. Thus, its accuracy is equal to the
mean majority judgment probability over the 1,000 triplets, corresponding to 65.5±1% (95% CI).
In addition to accuracy, we report Spearman’s r correlation between the entropy in human- and
model-generated triplet odd-one-out probabilities. Human-generated odd-one-out probabilities are of
the form: (ni , nj , nk )/n, where, without loss of generality, nk /n corresponds to the fraction of n
odd-one-out votes for k. Results are shown in Figure 1. We observe that AVFS models outperform
the baselines with respect to accuracy, while better reflecting human perceptual judgment uncertainty
(i.e., entropy correlation). This holds as we vary the number of AVFS training triplets, for example,
to as few as 12.5% (72K) as evidenced by the AVFS-U-12.5% model. Further, our learned annotator-
specific dimensional importance weights generalize, resulting in a predictive accuracy at or above
the Bayes classifier’s. As hypothesized (Section 3), transforming AVFS into 2AFC triplets (i.e.,
AVFS-2AFC in Figure 1) decreases performance due to a reduction in information.2
Dimensional interpretability. Following Hebart et al. (2020), we qualitatively assess whether
learning on AVFS results in a human-interpretable decomposition of the dimensions used in the
human decision-making process. Let x and ReLU(w) ∈ R22 denote a stimulus set image and its
                                                                              q
AVFS-U model embedding, respectively. We denote by dimj and %tilej the j th dimension and
percentile of dimj stimulus set embedding values, respectively. Suppose gridj is a 5 × 100 face
grid. Column q ∈ [100, . . . , 1] of gridj contains 5 stimulus set faces with the highest dimj values,
                 q−1                          q
satisfying %tilej ≤ ReLU(w)j < %tilej . Thus, from left to right, gridj displays stimulus set
faces sorted in descending order based on their dimj value. We task annotators with writing 1–3
gridj descriptions. After controlling for quality, we obtain 23–58 labels (708 labels) for each j and
categorize the label responses into 35 topics.
Figure 2 evidences a clear relationship between the top 3 dimj topics and dimj labels generated using
CelebA and FairFace models. Across the 22 dimensions, we note the materialization of individual
dimensions coinciding with commonly collected demographic group labels, i.e., “male”, “female”,
“black”, “white”, “east asian”, “south asian”, “elderly”, and “young”. In addition, separate dimensions
surface for face and hair morphology, i.e., “wide face”, “long face”, “smiling expression”, “neutral
expression”, “balding”, and “facial hair”. Significantly, these dimensions, which largely explain the
variation in human judgment behavior, are learned without training on semantic labels.

5.2       N OVEL S TIMULI

Predicting similarity. We evaluate whether AVFS models transfer to novel stimuli by sampling     56
novel face images from FFHQ (not contained in the stimulus set). We then generate all 56

                                                                                       3   = 27,720
   2
       AVFS-2AFC was trained using a triplet margin with a distance swap loss (Balntas et al., 2016).


                                                        5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


a   Dim. 1/22: “south asian”    Dim. 4/22: “female”         Dim. 5/22: “smiling exp.”       Dim. 10/22: “wide face”   Dim. 11/22: “elderly”      Dim. 18/22: “balding”


b   “ancestry”, “skin color”, “fa- “gender expression”, “age “facial expression”, “skin “face shape”, “facial expres- “age related”, “ancestry”, “hair length”, “gender ex-
    cial expression”               related”, “ancestry”      color”, “mouth related”    sion”, “weight related”       “hair color”               pression”, “ancestry”

c   “indian”, “bushy eyebrows”, “female”, “wearing lipstick”, “smiling”,  “high cheek- “double chin”, “high cheek- “70+”, “60–69”, “gray hair”   “bald”, “gray hair”, “wearing
    “latino hispanic”           “heavy makeup”                bones”, “rosy cheeks”    bones”, “smiling”                                         necktie”


Figure 2: Dimensional interpretability. (a) Our interpretation of an AVFS-U dimension with the
highest scoring stimulus set images. (b) Highest frequency human-generated topic labels. (c) CelebA
and FairFace model-generated labels, exhibiting a clear correspondence with human-generated topics.
Face images in this figure have been replaced by synthetic StyleGAN3 (Karras et al., 2021) images
for privacy reasons. Additional dimensions are presented in the dataset documentation (Appendix C).

      Accuracy                                                                                    Spearman’s r


Figure 3: Predicting similarity (novel stimuli). Accuracy over 80,300 judgments and Spearman’s
r between the entropy in human- and model-generated similarity matrices. Our annotator-specific
masks (i.e., AVFS-C and AVFS-CPH models) generalize to triplets composed entirely of novel faces,
resulting in increased predictive accuracy. Additional results are presented in Appendix A.


possible triplets, collecting 2–3 unique judgments per triplet (80,300 judgments) on AMT. We
report accuracy, as well as Spearman’s r between the strictly upper triangular model- and human-
generated similarity matrices. Entry (i, j) in the human-generated similarity matrix corresponds to
the fraction of triplets containing (i, j), where neither was judged as the odd-one-out; and (i, j) in a
model-generated similarity matrix corresponds to the mean p̂(i, j) over all triplets containing (i, j).
Results are shown in Figure 3. We see that AVFS embedding spaces and the learned annotator-specific
masks generalize to triplets composed entirely of novel faces. This non-trivially demonstrates that
AVFS embedding spaces are more closely aligned with the human mental representational space of
faces, than embedding spaces induced by training on semantic labels.
To quantify the number of AVFS-U dimensions required to represent a face while preserving per-
formance, we follow Hebart et al. (2020)’s dimension-elimination approach. We iteratively zero
out the lowest value per face embedding until a single nonzero dimension remains. This is done
per embedding, thus the same dimension is not necessarily zeroed out from all embeddings during
an iteration. To obtain 95–99% of the predictive accuracy we require 6–13 dimensions, whereas to
explain 95–99% of the variance in the similarity matrix we require 15–22 dimensions. This shows
that (1) humans utilize a larger number of dimensions to represent the global similarity structure of
faces than for determining individual 3AFC judgments; and (2) similarity is context-dependent (i.e.,
dynamic), which is not accounted for when representing faces using categorical feature vectors.
Annotator positionality. As shown via our conditional framework, knowledge of the annotator
determining similarity assists in informing the outcome. However, annotators are often framed as
interchangeable (Malevé, 2020; Chancellor et al., 2019). To assess the validity of this assumption, we
randomly swap the annotator associated with each of the collected 80,300 judgments and recompute
the AVFS-CPH model accuracy. Repeating this process 100 times results in a performance drop from
61.7% to 52.8% ± 0.02% (95% CI), evidencing that annotator masks, and hence annotators, are not
arbitrarily interchangeable.
Another interesting question relates to whether an annotator’s sociocultural background influences
their decision making. To evaluate this, we create datasets {(σ(ϕ⊤                         ⊤
                                                                       a ), y)}, where σ(ϕa ) and y ∈
Y are annotator a’s learned mask and self-identified demographic attribute, respectively. For a
particular annotator attribute (e.g., nationality), we limit the dataset to annotators who contributed
≥ 200 judgments and belong to one of the two largest groups with respect to the attribute (e.g.,


                                                                                        6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


a Annotator positionality   b Prototypicality
                            “masculine”         “feminine”       “east asian”   “black”   “white”


Figure 4: (a) Annotator positionality. Average linear SVM AUC when trained to discriminate
between AVFS-CPH annotator-specific masks from different demographic groups. None of the
confidence intervals overlap with chance performance (horizontal black line). Note the abbreviations:
“europe” (“eu”), “asia” (“as”), “western europe” (“euwe”), and “southern asia” (“assa”). (b) Pro-
totypicality. Spearman’s r between human ratings of face typicality and model-generated ratings,
evidencing that social category typicality manifests in the AVFS-U model’s embedding dimensions.



Y = {“american”, “indian”}). Using 10-fold cross-validation, we train linear SVMs (Hearst et al.,
1998) with balanced class weights to predict y from σ(ϕ⊤   a ). Figure 4a shows that for each attribute
none of the AUC confidence intervals include chance performance. Significantly, we are able to
discriminate between nationality-, regional ancestry-, and subregional ancestry-based annotator group
masks with high probability (86–88%). Thus, to mitigate bias, diverse annotator groups are required.
Continuous attribute collection. Following Hebart et al. (2020)’s evaluation protocol, we quan-
titatively validate whether gridj (∀j)—defined in Section 5.1—can be used to collect continuous
attribute values for novel faces from human annotators. We task annotators with placing a novel
face x above a single column q of gridj . Placement is based on the similarity between x and the
faces contained in each column q of gridj . As annotators are not primed with the meaning of gridj ,
accurate placement indicates that the ordering of dimj is visually meaningful.
Let µqj denote the mean dimj embedding value over the stimulus set whose dimj value satisfies
      q−1                           q
%tilej ≤ ReLU(w)j < %tilej . We sample 20 novel faces from FFHQ (not contained in the
stimulus set). ∀(x, gridj ) and collect 20 unique judgments per face (8,800 judgments). ∀x, we
                                                      1
                                                         P20     qn          1
                                                                                P20   qn       22
create a human-generated embedding of the form: [ 20        n=1 µ1 , . . . , 20  n=1 µ22 ] ∈ R  , where
                                   th                                                       20
qn ∈ [100, . . . , 1] denotes the n annotator’s column choice q. We then generate all 3 possible
triplets to create a human-generated similarity matrix K ∈ R20×20 . Entry (i, j) corresponds to
the mean p̂(i, j) over all triplets containing (i, j) with the human-generated embeddings. Using
model-generated embeddings, we create a model-generated matrix, K̂ ∈ R20×20 , in the same way.
Spearman’s r correlation between the strictly upper triangular elements of K and K̂ is 0.83 and
0.86 for AVFS-U and AVFS-CPH embeddings, respectively. This shows that (1) dimensional values
correspond to feature magnitude; and (2) image grids can be used to directly collect continuous
attribute values, sidestepping the limits of semantic category definitions (Keyes, 2018; Benthall &
Haynes, 2019).
Prototypicality. In cognitive science, prototypicality corresponds to the extent to which an entity
belongs to a conceptual category (Rosch, 1973). We examine whether the dimensional value of a
face is correlated with its typicality, utilizing prototypicality rated face images from the Chicago Face
Database (CFD) (Ma et al., 2015; Lakshmi et al., 2021; Ma et al., 2021). Ratings correspond to the
average prototypicality of a face with respect to a binary gender category (relative to others of the
same race) or race category. For each category, we compute the dimensional embedding value or
unnormalized attribute logit of a face from a relevant AVFS-U dimension or attribute recognition
model’s classification layer, respectively.
Figure 4b shows that relevant AVFS-U dimensions are positively correlated with typicality according
to Spearman’s r. Evidently, category typicality—at least for the investigated social category concepts—
manifests in the AVFS dimensions from learning to predict human 3AFC similarity judgments.
Semantic classification. Given the evidence that AVFS-U dimensional values correlate with feature
magnitude, we expect them to be useful for semantic attribute classification. To validate this
hypothesis, we perform attribute prediction on the following labeled face datasets: COCO (Lin et al.,

                                                             7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


       ∗Self-identified label            AVFS-U                 CelebA                   FairFace                 FFHQ                   Model was trained on the test data



∗ CFD: “male”                   ∗ CasCon: “male”             CelebA: “male”                  COCO: “male”                 MIAP: “male”                   FFHQ: “male”


∗ CasCon: “70+”                                                          CelebA: “smiling”       ∗ CFD: “happy”          ∗ CFD: “east asian”           ∗ CFD: “black”
                                     FFHQ: “70+”


      ∗ CFD: “white”                       ∗ CFD: “indian”               CasCon: “light skin”               COCO: “light skin”                  CelebA: “balding”


Figure 5: Semantic classification. AUC results are shown for binary attribute classification using
continuous attribute value predictions. Our AVFS-U model is competitive with the semantically
trained attribute recognition model baselines, despite not having been trained on semantic labels.


2014), OpenImages MIAP (MIAP) (Schumann et al., 2021), CFD, FFHQ, CelebA (Liu et al., 2015),
and Casual Conversations (CasCon) (Hazirbas et al., 2021). Continuous attribute value predictions
are computed in the same manner as in the prototypicality experiment. Results are shown in Figure 5.
We observe that AVFS-U dimensions are competitive with semantically trained recognition models,
even on challenging unconstrained data (e.g., COCO, MIAP).
Attribute disparity estimation. Next we investigate the utility of individual embedding dimensions
for the task of comparing dataset attribute disparities. Suppose we are given n subsets {S1 , . . . , Sn }
sampled from S ∗ , where, ∀c ∈ [1 . . . , n], rc ∈ [0, 0.01, . . . , 0.99, 1] and 1 − rc denote the ground-
truth proportion of Sc = {(xi , yi )}i , labeled y = 0 and y = 1, respectively. We aim to find c with
the lowest ground-truth attribute disparity, i.e., arg minc ∆(c) = arg minc abs(2rc − 1).
We define sim(i, j) = abs(ŷi − ŷj )−1 as the similarity between xi and xj , where ŷ ∈ R is a
predicted continuous attribute value for ground-truth y ∈ {0, 1} given x. ŷ is computed in the same
manner as in the prototypicality and semantic classification experiments. Let K ∈ Rm×m denote
a similarity matrix, where m denotes P  the Pnumber of images and Ki,j = sim(i, j). The average
similarity of samples in a set Sc , is ∝ i j Ki,j (Leinster & Cobbold, 2012). We estimate c as
                    ˆ
follows: arg minc ∆(c)    = arg minc |Sc |−2 i j Ki,j . In all experiments, we set n = 100 and
                                              P P
m = 100. For S ∗ , we use the following labeled face datasets: COCO, MIAP, CFD, FFHQ, CelebA,
and CasCon. Averaging over 100 runs, we report (1) ∆(arg minc ∆(c));  ˆ        and (2) Spearman’s r
           ˆ           ˆ
between {∆(1), . . . , ∆(n)} and {∆(1), . . . , ∆(n)}.
Results are shown in Figure 6. Despite not being trained on semantically labeled data, we observe
that AVFS-U dimensions are competitive with the baselines, in particular AVFS-U disparity scores
are highly correlated with ground-truth disparity scores.


6      D ISCUSSION

Motivated by legal, technical, and ethical considerations associated with semantic labels, we intro-
duced AVFS—a new dataset of 3AFC face similarity judgments over 4,921 faces. We demonstrated
the utility of AVFS for learning a continuous, low-dimensional embedding space aligned with human
perception. Our embedding space, induced under a novel conditional framework, not only enables the
accurate prediction of face similarity, but also provides a human-interpretable decomposition of the
dimensions used in the human-decision making process, and the importance distinct annotators place
on each dimension. We further showed the practicality of the dimensions for collecting continuous
attributes, performing classification, and comparing dataset attribute disparities.
Since AVFS only contains 0.003% of all possible triplets over 4,921 faces, future triplets could be
actively sampled (Lindley, 1956; MacKay, 1992) so as to learn additional face-varying dimensions


                                                                                        8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


      ∗Self-identified label             AVFS-U                  CelebA                FairFace                 FFHQ                   Model was trained on the test data



∗ CFD: “male”                    ∗ CasCon: “male”            CelebA: “male”                COCO: “male”                 MIAP: “male”                 FFHQ: “male”


∗ CasCon: “70+”                                              CelebA: “smiling”             ∗ CFD: “happy”               ∗ CFD: “east asian”          ∗ CFD: “black”
                                 FFHQ: “70+”


                ∗ CFD: “white”                 ∗ CFD: “indian”             CasCon: “light skin”           COCO: “light skin”           CelebA: “balding”


Figure 6: Attribute disparity estimation. Average attribute disparity (y-axis) in data subsets selected
as the most diverse and average Spearman’s r (x-axis) between the ground-truth disparity for each
subset considered and model-estimated disparity scores. Results highlight that disparity scores
derived using AVFS-U model dimensions are highly correlated with ground-truth disparities.



using larger stimulus sets. For example, Roads & Love (2021) selectively sample from an approximate
posterior distribution using variational inference and model ensembles. However, similar to Zheng
et al. (2019)’s MDS approach, judgments are pooled, which disregards an individual annotator’s
decision-making process. As we have shown, annotators are (at least in our task) not interchangeable
and are influenced by their sociocultural backgrounds. Future work could therefore combine our
model of conditional decision-making with active sampling, e.g., seeking at each iteration unlabeled
triplets that maximize expected information gain conditioned on the annotator (or annotator group)
that will be assigned the labeling task.
Our work is not without its limitations. First, we implicitly assumed that the stimulus set was diverse.
Therefore, our current proposal is limited to the proof of concept that we can learn face-varying
dimensions that are both present within the stimuli and salient to human judgments of face similarity.
Our stimulus set was sampled such that the faces were diverse with respect to inferred demographic
subgroup labels. Ideally, these labels would have been self-reported. With the principle of data
minimization in mind, a potential solution would be to collect stimuli from unique individuals that
differ in terms of their country of residence, providing both identity- and geographic-based label
diversity. Notably, country of residence information additionally helps to ensure that each image
subject’s data is protected appropriately (Andrews et al., 2023). Second, the number of (near) nonzero
dimensions depends on the sparsity penalty weight, i.e., α1 in Equation (4), which must be carefully
chosen. We erred on the side of caution (lower penalty) to avoid merging distinct factors, which would
have reduced interpretability. Third, the emergence of a “smiling expression” and “neutral expression”
dimension indicate that annotators did not always follow our instruction to ignore differences in
facial expression. While this may be considered a limitation, our model was able to reveal the use
of these attributes, providing a level of transparency not offered by existing face datasets. Finally,
our annotator pool was demographically imbalanced, which is an unfortunate consequence of using
AMT.
Despite these limitations, we hope that our work inspires others to pursue unorthodox tasks for
learning the continuous dimensions of human diversity, which do not rely on problematic semantic
labels. Moreover, we aim to increase discourse on annotator positionality. As the philosopher Thomas
Nagel suggested, it is impossible to take a “view from nowhere” (Nagel, 1989). Therefore, we need
to make datasets more inclusive by integrating a diverse set of perspectives from their inception.


                                                                                       9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


E THICS S TATEMENT
AVFS contains annotations from a demographically imbalanced set of annotators, which may not
generalize to a set of demographically dissimilar annotators. Moreover, while the stimulus set of
images for which the annotations pertain to were diverse with respect to intersectional demographic
subgroup labels, the labels were inferred by a combination of algorithms and human annotators.
(Refer to the dataset documentation in Appendix C for details on the stimulus set and annotator
distributions.) Therefore, the stimulus set is not representative of the entire human population and
may in actuality be demographically biased. Although we provided evidence that models trained on
AVFS generalize to novel stimuli, it is conceivable that the models could perform poorly on faces with
attributes that were not salient to human judgment behavior on triplets sampled from, or represented
in, the stimulus set of images. Future work could explore active learning so as to reveal additional
attributes that are relevant to human judgments of face similarity and expanding the stimulus set.
Furthermore, the stimulus set (sampled from the permissively licensed FFHQ dataset) was collected
without image subject consent. Reliance on such data is an overarching problem in the computer
vision research community, due to a lack of consensually collected, unconstrained, and diverse
human-centric image data. To preserve the privacy of the image subjects, all face images presented in
this paper have been replaced by StyleGAN3 generated faces with similar embedding values.
To demonstrate that AVFS judgments encode discriminative information, we validated our learned
dimensions in terms of their ability to estimate attribute disparities, as well as to predict binary
attributes and concept prototypicality. Our results show that discriminative attribute classifiers can be
distilled solely from learning to predict similarity judgments, underscoring that we do not need to
explicitly collect face attribute labels from human annotators. Note however, for social constructs
(e.g., gender, race) and emotions, we do not condone classification, as it reifies the idea that an
individual’s social identity or internal state can be inferred from images alone.

R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT
Data and code are publicly available under a Creative Commons license (CC-BY-NC-SA), permitting
noncommercial use cases at https://github.com/SonyAI/a_view_from_somewhere.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was funded by Sony AI.


                                                   10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


R EFERENCES
Jerone TA Andrews, Dora Zhao, William Thong, Apostolos Modas, Orestis Papakyriakopoulos, Shruti
   Nagpal, and Alice Xiang. Ethical considerations for collecting human-centric image datasets.
   arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.03629, 2023.
McKane Andrus, Elena Spitzer, and Alice Xiang. Working to address algorithmic bias? don’t overlook
 the role of demographic data. Partnership on AI. Retrieved from https://www. partnershiponai.
 org/demographic-data, 2020.
McKane Andrus, Elena Spitzer, Jeffrey Brown, and Alice Xiang. What we can’t measure, we can’t
 understand: Challenges to demographic data procurement in the pursuit of fairness. In Proceedings
 of the 2021 ACM Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency, pp. 249–260, 2021.
Yuki M Asano, Christian Rupprecht, Andrew Zisserman, and Andrea Vedaldi. Pass: An imagenet
  replacement for self-supervised pretraining without humans. In Thirty-fifth Conference on Neural
  Information Processing Systems Datasets and Benchmarks Track (Round 1), 2021.
Ioanna Maria Attarian, Brett D Roads, and Michael Curtis Mozer. Transforming neural network
  visual representations to predict human judgments of similarity. In NeurIPS 2020 Workshop
  SVRHM, 2020.
Vassileios Balntas, Edgar Riba, Daniel Ponsa, and Krystian Mikolajczyk. Learning local feature
  descriptors with triplets and shallow convolutional neural networks. In BMVC, volume 1, pp. 3,
  2016.
Lawrence Barsalou. The instability of graded structure: Implications for the nature of concepts. 1987.
Fabiola Becerra-Riera, Annette Morales-González, and Heydi Méndez-Vázquez. A survey on facial
  soft biometrics for video surveillance and forensic applications. Artificial Intelligence Review, 52
  (2):1155–1187, 2019.
Sebastian Benthall and Bruce D Haynes. Racial categories in machine learning. In Proceedings of
  the conference on fairness, accountability, and transparency, pp. 289–298, 2019.
Abeba Birhane and Vinay Uday Prabhu. Large image datasets: A pyrrhic win for computer vision?
  In 2021 IEEE Winter Conference on Applications of Computer Vision (WACV), pp. 1536–1546.
  IEEE, 2021.
Mary E Campbell and Lisa Troyer. The implications of racial misclassification by observers. American
 Sociological Review, 72(5):750–765, 2007.
Qiong Cao, Li Shen, Weidi Xie, Omkar M Parkhi, and Andrew Zisserman. Vggface2: A dataset for
  recognising faces across pose and age. In 2018 13th IEEE international conference on automatic
  face & gesture recognition (FG 2018), pp. 67–74. IEEE, 2018.
Pierluigi Carcagnì, Marco Del Coco, Dario Cazzato, Marco Leo, and Cosimo Distante. A study on
  different experimental configurations for age, race, and gender estimation problems. EURASIP
  Journal on Image and Video Processing, 2015(1):1–22, 2015.
Mathilde Caron, Ishan Misra, Julien Mairal, Priya Goyal, Piotr Bojanowski, and Armand Joulin.
 Unsupervised learning of visual features by contrasting cluster assignments. Advances in Neural
 Information Processing Systems, 33:9912–9924, 2020.
Mathilde Caron, Hugo Touvron, Ishan Misra, Hervé Jégou, Julien Mairal, Piotr Bojanowski, and
 Armand Joulin. Emerging properties in self-supervised vision transformers. In Proceedings of the
 IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 9650–9660, 2021.
Stevie Chancellor, Eric PS Baumer, and Munmun De Choudhury. Who is the “human” in human-
  centered machine learning: The case of predicting mental health from social media. Proceedings
  of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction, 3(CSCW):1–32, 2019.
Xinlei Chen, Haoqi Fan, Ross Girshick, and Kaiming He. Improved baselines with momentum
  contrastive learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.04297, 2020.


                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Yunliang Chen and Jungseock Joo. Understanding and mitigating annotation bias in facial expression
  recognition. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, pp.
  14980–14991, 2021.
Kate Crawford and Trevor Paglen. Excavating ai: The politics of images in machine learning training
  sets. AI and Society, 2019.
Jiankang Deng, Jia Guo, Niannan Xue, and Stefanos Zafeiriou. Arcface: Additive angular margin
   loss for deep face recognition. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision
   and pattern recognition, pp. 4690–4699, 2019.
Emily Denton, Mark Díaz, Ian Kivlichan, Vinodkumar Prabhakaran, and Rachel Rosen. Whose
 ground truth? accounting for individual and collective identities underlying dataset annotation.
 arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.04554, 2021.
Thomas Deselaers and Vittorio Ferrari. Visual and semantic similarity in imagenet. In CVPR 2011,
  pp. 1777–1784. IEEE, 2011.
Diana C Dima, Martin N Hebart, and Leyla Isik. A data-driven investigation of human action
  representations. bioRxiv, 2022.
Cynthia Feliciano. Shades of race: How phenotype and observer characteristics shape racial classifi-
  cation. American Behavioral Scientist, 60(4):390–419, 2016.
Jonathan B Freeman, Andrew M Penner, Aliya Saperstein, Matthias Scheutz, and Nalini Ambady.
  Looking the part: Social status cues shape race perception. PloS one, 6(9):e25107, 2011.
Timnit Gebru, Jamie Morgenstern, Briana Vecchione, Jennifer Wortman Vaughan, Hanna Wallach,
  Hal Daumé III, and Kate Crawford. Datasheets for datasets. arXiv preprint arXiv:1803.09010,
  2018.
Nelson Goodman. Seven strictures on similarity. 1972.
Priya Goyal, Quentin Duval, Isaac Seessel, Mathilde Caron, Mannat Singh, Ishan Misra, Levent
  Sagun, Armand Joulin, and Piotr Bojanowski. Vision models are more robust and fair when
  pretrained on uncurated images without supervision. arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.08360, 2022.
Alex Hanna, Emily Denton, Andrew Smart, and Jamila Smith-Loud. Towards a critical race method-
  ology in algorithmic fairness. In Proceedings of the 2020 conference on fairness, accountability,
  and transparency, pp. 501–512, 2020.
Caner Hazirbas, Joanna Bitton, Brian Dolhansky, Jacqueline Pan, Albert Gordo, and Cristian Canton
  Ferrer. Towards measuring fairness in ai: the casual conversations dataset. IEEE Transactions on
  Biometrics, Behavior, and Identity Science, 2021.
Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image
  recognition. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition,
  pp. 770–778, 2016.
Marti A. Hearst, Susan T Dumais, Edgar Osuna, John Platt, and Bernhard Scholkopf. Support vector
 machines. IEEE Intelligent Systems and their applications, 13(4):18–28, 1998.
Martin N Hebart, Charles Y Zheng, Francisco Pereira, and Chris I Baker. Revealing the multidimen-
 sional mental representations of natural objects underlying human similarity judgements. Nature
 human behaviour, 4(11):1173–1185, 2020.
Martin N Hebart, Oliver Contier, Lina Teichmann, Adam Rockter, Charles Y Zheng, Alexis Kidder,
 Anna Corriveau, Maryam Vaziri-Pashkam, and Chris I Baker. Things-data: A multimodal collection
 of large-scale datasets for investigating object representations in brain and behavior. bioRxiv, 2022.
Gary B Huang, Marwan Mattar, Tamara Berg, and Eric Learned-Miller. Labeled faces in the wild: A
  database forstudying face recognition in unconstrained environments. In Workshop on faces in
 “Real-Life” Images: detection, alignment, and recognition, 2008.


                                                 12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Emilie L Josephs, Martin N Hebart, and Talia Konkle. Emergent dimensions underlying human
 perception of the reachable world. Journal of Vision, 21(9):2154–2154, 2021.
Kimmo Karkkainen and Jungseock Joo. Fairface: Face attribute dataset for balanced race, gender,
  and age for bias measurement and mitigation. In IEEE Winter Conference on Applications of
  Computer Vision (WACV), pp. 1548–1558, 2021.
Tero Karras, Samuli Laine, and Timo Aila. A style-based generator architecture for generative
  adversarial networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
  Pattern Recognition, pp. 4401–4410, 2019.
Tero Karras, Miika Aittala, Samuli Laine, Erik Härkönen, Janne Hellsten, Jaakko Lehtinen, and Timo
  Aila. Alias-free generative adversarial networks. Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 34:852–863, 2021.
Matthew Kay, Cynthia Matuszek, and Sean A Munson. Unequal representation and gender stereotypes
 in image search results for occupations. In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference on
 Human Factors in Computing Systems, pp. 3819–3828, 2015.
Os Keyes. The misgendering machines: Trans/hci implications of automatic gender recognition.
  Proceedings of the ACM on human-computer interaction, 2(CSCW):1–22, 2018.
Davis E King. Dlib-ml: A machine learning toolkit. The Journal of Machine Learning Research, 10:
  1755–1758, 2009.
Diederik P Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1412.6980, 2014.
Bernard Koch, Emily Denton, Alex Hanna, and Jacob Gates Foster. Reduced, reused and recycled:
  The life of a dataset in machine learning research. In Thirty-fifth Conference on Neural Information
  Processing Systems Datasets and Benchmarks Track (Round 2), 2021.
Arvindkumar Krishnakumar, Viraj Prabhu, Sruthi Sudhakar, and Judy Hoffman. Udis: Unsupervised
  discovery of bias in deep visual recognition models. In British Machine Vision Conference (BMVC),
  volume 1, pp. 3, 2021.
Anjana Lakshmi, Bernd Wittenbrink, Joshua Correll, and Debbie S Ma. The india face set: Interna-
  tional and cultural boundaries impact face impressions and perceptions of category membership.
 Frontiers in psychology, 12:161, 2021.
Tom Leinster and Christina A Cobbold. Measuring diversity: the importance of species similarity.
  Ecology, 93(3):477–489, 2012.
Tsung-Yi Lin, Michael Maire, Serge Belongie, James Hays, Pietro Perona, Deva Ramanan, Piotr
  Dollár, and C Lawrence Zitnick. Microsoft coco: Common objects in context. In European
  conference on computer vision, pp. 740–755. Springer, 2014.
Dennis V Lindley. On a measure of the information provided by an experiment. The Annals of
 Mathematical Statistics, 27(4):986–1005, 1956.
Weiyang Liu, Yandong Wen, Zhiding Yu, Ming Li, Bhiksha Raj, and Le Song. Sphereface: Deep
 hypersphere embedding for face recognition. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer
 vision and pattern recognition, pp. 212–220, 2017.
Ziwei Liu, Ping Luo, Xiaogang Wang, and Xiaoou Tang. Deep learning face attributes in the wild. In
  International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), 2015.
Bradley C Love and Brett D Roads. Similarity as a window on the dimensions of object representation.
  Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 25(2):94–96, 2021.
Debbie S Ma, Joshua Correll, and Bernd Wittenbrink. The chicago face database: A free stimulus set
  of faces and norming data. Behavior research methods, 47(4):1122–1135, 2015.
Debbie S Ma, Justin Kantner, and Bernd Wittenbrink. Chicago face database: Multiracial expansion.
  Behavior Research Methods, 53(3):1289–1300, 2021.


                                                 13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


David JC MacKay. Information-based objective functions for active data selection. Neural computa-
  tion, 4(4):590–604, 1992.
Nicolas Malevé. On the data set’s ruins. AI & SOCIETY, pp. 1–15, 2020.
Arthur B Markman. Structural alignment in similarity and difference judgments. Psychonomic
  Bulletin & Review, 3(2):227–230, 1996.
Arthur B Markman and Dedre Gentner. Nonintentional similarity processing. The new unconscious,
  pp. 107–137, 2005.
John McCauley, Sobhan Soleymani, Brady Williams, John Dando, Nasser Nasrabadi, and Jeremy
  Dawson. Identical twins as a facial similarity benchmark for human facial recognition. In 2021
  International Conference of the Biometrics Special Interest Group (BIOSIG), pp. 1–5. IEEE, 2021.
Douglas L Medin, Robert L Goldstone, and Dedre Gentner. Respects for similarity. Psychological
  review, 100(2):254, 1993.
Thomas Nagel. The view from nowhere. Oxford University Press, 1989.
Roy Or-El, Soumyadip Sengupta, Ohad Fried, Eli Shechtman, and Ira Kemelmacher-Shlizerman.
  Lifespan age transformation synthesis. In European Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 739–755.
  Springer, 2020.
Joshua C Peterson, Joshua T Abbott, and Thomas L Griffiths. Evaluating (and improving) the
  correspondence between deep neural networks and human representations. Cognitive science, 42
  (8):2648–2669, 2018.
Brett D Roads and Bradley C Love. Enriching imagenet with human similarity judgments and
  psychological embeddings. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
  Pattern Recognition, pp. 3547–3557, 2021.
Joseph P Robinson, Gennady Livitz, Yann Henon, Can Qin, Yun Fu, and Samson Timoner. Face
  recognition: too bias, or not too bias? In Proceedings of the ieee/cvf conference on computer vision
  and pattern recognition workshops, pp. 0–1, 2020.
Eleanor Rosch. Cognitive representations of semantic categories. Journal of experimental psychology:
  General, 104(3):192, 1975.
Eleanor H Rosch. Natural categories. Cognitive psychology, 4(3):328–350, 1973.
Emilie M Roth and Edward J Shoben. The effect of context on the structure of categories. Cognitive
  psychology, 15(3):346–378, 1983.
Wendy D Roth. The multiple dimensions of race. Ethnic and Racial Studies, 39(8):1310–1338, 2016.
Myron Rothbart and Marjorie Taylor. Category labels and social reality: Do we view social categories
 as natural kinds? 1992.
Olga Russakovsky, Jia Deng, Hao Su, Jonathan Krause, Sanjeev Satheesh, Sean Ma, Zhiheng Huang,
  Andrej Karpathy, Aditya Khosla, Michael Bernstein, Alexander C. Berg, and Li Fei-Fei. ImageNet
  Large Scale Visual Recognition Challenge. International Journal of Computer Vision (IJCV), 115
  (3):211–252, 2015. doi: 10.1007/s11263-015-0816-y.
Amir Sadovnik, Wassim Gharbi, Thanh Vu, and Andrew Gallagher. Finding your lookalike: Measur-
 ing face similarity rather than face identity. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer
 Vision and Pattern Recognition Workshops, pp. 2345–2353, 2018.
Craig A Sanders and Robert M Nosofsky. Training deep networks to construct a psychological feature
  space for a natural-object category domain. Computational Brain & Behavior, 3(3):229–251, 2020.
Morgan Klaus Scheuerman, Alex Hanna, and Emily Denton. Do datasets have politics? disciplinary
 values in computer vision dataset development. Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer
 Interaction, 5(CSCW2):1–37, 2021.


                                                 14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Candice Schumann, Susanna Ricco, Utsav Prabhu, Vittorio Ferrari, and Caroline Rebecca Pantofaru.
  A step toward more inclusive people annotations for fairness. In Proceedings of the AAAI/ACM
  Conference on AI, Ethics, and Society (AIES), 2021.
Carsten Schwemmer, Carly Knight, Emily D Bello-Pardo, Stan Oklobdzija, Martijn Schoonvelde,
  and Jeffrey W Lockhart. Diagnosing gender bias in image recognition systems. Socius, 6:
  2378023120967171, 2020.
Marshall H Segall, Donald Thomas Campbell, and Melville Jean Herskovits. The influence of culture
 on visual perception. Bobbs-Merrill Indianapolis, 1966.
Benny Shanon. On the similarity of features. New ideas in psychology, 6(3):307–321, 1988.
Rosyl S Somai and Peter JB Hancock. Exploring perceived face similarity and its relation to
  image-based spaces: an effect of familiarity. Journal of Vision, 21(9):2149–2149, 2021.
Ryan Steed and Aylin Caliskan. Image representations learned with unsupervised pre-training contain
  human-like biases. In Proceedings of the 2021 ACM Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and
  Transparency, pp. 701–713, 2021.
Andreas Veit, Serge Belongie, and Theofanis Karaletsos. Conditional similarity networks. In
 Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 830–838,
  2017.
Raviteja Vemulapalli and Aseem Agarwala. A compact embedding for facial expression similarity.
  In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp.
  5683–5692, 2019.
Hao Wang, Yitong Wang, Zheng Zhou, Xing Ji, Dihong Gong, Jingchao Zhou, Zhifeng Li, and Wei
  Liu. Cosface: Large margin cosine loss for deep face recognition. In Proceedings of the IEEE
  conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 5265–5274, 2018.
Mei Wang, Weihong Deng, Jiani Hu, Xunqiang Tao, and Yaohai Huang. Racial faces in the wild:
 Reducing racial bias by information maximization adaptation network. In Proceedings of the
 ieee/cvf international conference on computer vision, pp. 692–702, 2019.
Kaiyu Yang, Jacqueline H Yau, Li Fei-Fei, Jia Deng, and Olga Russakovsky. A study of face
  obfuscation in imagenet. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 25313–25330.
  PMLR, 2022.
Dong Yi, Zhen Lei, Shengcai Liao, and Stan Z Li. Learning face representation from scratch. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1411.7923, 2014.
Dora Zhao, Angelina Wang, and Olga Russakovsky. Understanding and evaluating racial biases in
  image captioning. In International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), 2021.
Charles Y Zheng, Francisco Pereira, Chris I Baker, and Martin N Hebart. Revealing interpretable
  object representations from human behavior. In International Conference on Learning Representa-
  tions, 2019.


                                                15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A     I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS

A.1     FACE A LIGNMENT

For each face dataset used in this paper, faces were detected and aligned following the procedure
outlined by Or-El et al. (2020), which utilizes the dlib face detector and 68 landmark shape predic-
tor (King, 2009).

A.2     AVFS M ODELS

Aligned face images were resized to 128 × 128. For training, standard data augmentation was used,
i.e., horizontal mirroring and 112 × 112 random cropping, and image values were normalized to
[−1, 1]. Training was performed using a batch size of 128 on a single Tesla T4 GPU.
For the unconditional AVFS models, guided by the validation loss, we empirically set α1 = 0.00005
and α2 = 0.01 using grid search. The conditional models used the same hyperparameters with the
additional loss term’s weight set to α3 = 0.0001. All models were optimized for 40 epochs with
Adam (Kingma & Ba, 2014) (default parameters) and learning rate 0.001.
Post-optimization, for each trained model, we obtained a core set of dimensions by removing
dimensions with a maximal value (over the stimulus set) close to zero, resulting in a low-dimensional
space. For the AVFS-U trained model, this resulted in 22 dimensions. The threshold for removing
dimensions for all models was determined based on maximizing accuracy on the validation set. For
the AVFS-U model, across five independent runs, the 95% confidence interval (CI) for the number of
dimensions and validation accuracy were 27.4±5.8 and 61.9±0.1%, respectively. Figure 7 shows
that the judgments can be encapsulated using a limited number of the available dimensions and that
the 22 dimensions are approximately replicated across the independent runs.
Note that the AVFS-2AFC model was trained using a triplet margin with a distance swap loss (Balntas
et al., 2016) for 40 epochs with Adam (Kingma & Ba, 2014) (default parameters) and learning rate
0.001.

A.3     BASELINE M ODELS

Aligned face images were resized to 128 × 128. For training, standard data augmentation was used,
i.e., horizontal mirroring and 112 × 112 random cropping, and image values were normalized to
[−1, 1]. Training was performed using a batch size of 512 across 4 Tesla T4 GPUs.
FairFace models. We trained face attribute recognition models using SGD for 45 epochs on the
FairFace dataset. The initial learning rate 0.1 was divided by 10 at epoch 15, 30, and 40. L2 weight
decay and SGD momentum were set to 0.0005 and 0.9, respectively. The FairFace models were
trained to predict age, gender, and ethnicity.
CelebA models. We trained face attribute recognition models using SGD for 45 epochs on the
CelebA dataset. The initial learning rate 0.1 was divided by 10 at epoch 15, 30, and 40. L2 weight

      a Validation accuracy            b Pearson’s r                    c Spearman’s r


Figure 7: AVFS-U model training across independent runs. (a) Validation accuracy as a function
of the number of dimensions retained over five independent runs (95 % CI), empirically evidencing
that the judgments can be encapsulated using a limited number of dimensions. (b) Pearson and (c)
Spearman’s r between each of the 22 dimensions and the best matching dimension from each of the
other four runs (95 % CI), empirically evidencing the reproducibility of the dimensions.


                                                       16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


decay and SGD momentum were set to 0.0005 and 0.9, respectively. The CelebA models were
trained to predict 40 binary attributes.
FFHQ models. As FFHQ is an unlabeled dataset, we used age and gender labels inferred by human
annotators from the FFHQ-Aging dataset. Ethnicity labels were inferred using the pretrained FairFace
model described above. We trained the FFHQ models to predict the inferred age, gender, and ethnicity
labels using SGD for 45 epochs. The initial learning rate 0.1 was divided by 10 at epoch 15, 30, and
40. L2 weight decay and SGD momentum were set to 0.0005 and 0.9, respectively.
CASIA-WebFace models. We trained several face recognition models on the CASIA-WebFace
dataset. The models differ only in terms of the loss minimized, i.e., softmax, ArcFace (Deng et al.,
2019), CosFace (Wang et al., 2018), and SphereFace (Liu et al., 2017). Models were trained using
SGD for 55 epochs. The initial learning rate 0.1 was divided by 10 at epoch 15, 30, and 40. L2
weight decay and SGD momentum were set to 0.0005 and 0.9, respectively.
For the additional baseline models used in Appendix B, we obtained publicly available model weights
for self-supervised and object recognition models. Aligned faces were preprocessed based on the
model used.
Self-supervised models. We used the following pretrained self-supervised models:

    • Self-supervised model trained using the SwAV (Caron et al., 2020) framework on Ima-
      geNet1K (Russakovsky et al., 2015)—an object recognition dataset of 1.3M images over 1K
      object classes, where an estimated 17% of the images contain at least one human face (Yang et al.,
      2022). Model weights can be found at https://github.com/facebookresearch/
      swav.
    • Self-supervised models trained using the SwAV framework on IG-1B (Goyal et al., 2022)—a
      dataset of 1B uncurated Instagram images, containing millions of images of humans. Model
      weights can be found at https://github.com/facebookresearch/vissl/tree/
      main/projects/SEER.
    • Self-supervised models trained using the SwAV, MoCo-v2 (Chen et al., 2020), and DINO (Caron
      et al., 2021) frameworks on PASS (Asano et al., 2021)—a dataset of 1.3M images without
      people. Model weights can be found at https://github.com/yukimasano/PASS.

Object recognition models. We used a object recognition model from PyTorch pretrained using a
softmax loss on ImageNet1K (Russakovsky et al., 2015).

B     E XTENDED E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS

For FairFace, CelebA, and FFHQ models, we additionally consider unnormalized class logit embed-
dings (e.g., denoted CelebA-L), as well as logit embeddings converted to binary vectors based on
class predictions (e.g., denoted CelebA-BL). All baseline embeddings are normalized to unit-length,
where the dot product of two embeddings determines their similarity. Results are shown in Table 1.

C     DATASET D OCUMENTATION

The questions answered in this dataset documentation were proposed by Gebru et al. (2018).

C.1     M OTIVATION

C.1.1    F OR WHAT PURPOSE WAS THE DATASET CREATED ?
Few datasets contain self-identified sensitive attributes, inferring attributes risks introducing additional
biases, and collecting attributes can carry legal risks. Besides, categorical labels can fail to reflect
the continuous nature of human phenotypic diversity, making it difficult to compare the similarity
between same-labeled faces. Motivated by these legal, technical, and ethical considerations, the
dataset was created to enable research on learning human-centric face embeddings aligned with
human perception, as well as studying annotator bias. The dataset does not contain problematic
semantic face attribute labels, rather it consists of face similarity judgments, where each judgment


                                                    17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Table 1: Predicting similarity. (Same Stimuli) Accuracy over 24,060 judgments and Spearman’s
r between the entropy in human- and model-generated triplet odd-one-out probabilities. (Novel
Stimuli) Accuracy over 80,300 judgments and Spearman’s r between the entropy in human- and
model-generated similarity matrices. Note that #Labels is an approximate of the number of labels
collected to create a dataset accounting for consensus.

                                                                                                                Same Stimuli   Novel Stimuli

Data/Model      Loss/Framework                                              #Images    #Labels   Architecture   Acc.      r    Acc.       r

ImageNet1K      Cross-entropy                                                   1.3M    >1.3M    RegNet-32Gf    46.6    0.09   41.7     0.32
FairFace        Cross-entropy                                                    62K     372K    ResNet18       55.9    0.41   51.9     0.67
FairFace-L      Cross-entropy                                                    62K     372K    ResNet18       52.9    0.25   48.6     0.54
FairFace-BL     Cross-entropy                                                    62K     372K    ResNet18       51.7    0.15   47.7     0.54
CelebA          Cross-entropy                                                   178K     7.1M    ResNet18       52.1    0.25   48.9     0.56
CelebA-L        Cross-entropy                                                   178K     7.1M    ResNet18       53.2    0.15   49.6     0.59
CelebA-BL       Cross-entropy                                                   178K     7.1M    ResNet18       47.0    0.14   45.9     0.47
FFHQ            Cross-entropy                                                    70K     140K    ResNet18       50.5    0.16   47.3     0.49
FFHQ-L          Cross-entropy                                                    70K     140K    ResNet18       53.5    0.31   50.5     0.62
FFHQ-BL         Cross-entropy                                                    70K     140K    ResNet18       51.0    0.23   47.3     0.54
CASIA-WebFace   ArcFace                                                         404K     404K    ResNet18       51.6    0.29   46.1     0.40
CASIA-WebFace   Cross-entropy                                                   404K     404K    ResNet18       48.6    0.21   43.2     0.34
CASIA-WebFace   SphereFace                                                      404K     404K    ResNet18       48.3    0.25   43.8     0.35
CASIA-WebFace   CosFace                                                         404K     404K    ResNet18       44.0    0.12   40.8     0.23

AVFS-C          Conditional Equation (4)                                         5K      574K    ResNet18       67.4    0.68   61.7     0.82
AVFS-CPH        Conditional Equation (4)                                         5K      574K    ResNet18       66.5    0.68   61.4     0.82
AVFS-U          Unconditional Equation (4)                                       5K      574K    ResNet18       62.0    0.65   57.5     0.86
AVFS-U-50%      Unconditional Equation (4)                                       5K      287K    ResNet18       61.3    0.61   55.8     0.81
AVFS-U-25%      Unconditional Equation (4)                                       5K      144K    ResNet18       60.6    0.56   55.3     0.80
AVFS-U-12.5%    Unconditional Equation (4)                                       5K       72K    ResNet18       58.6    0.47   55.0     0.79
AVFS-2AFC       Triplet margin with distance swap (Balntas et al., 2016)         5K      574K    ResNet18       60.2    0.46   52.8     0.64

ImageNet1K      SwAV                                                            1.3M        0    ResNet50-w5    43.8    0.08   41.0     0.30
IG-1B           SwAV                                                              1B        0    RegNet-32Gf    47.2    0.18   44.7     0.45
IG-1B           SwAV                                                              1B        0    RegNet-64Gf    48.1    0.16   44.4     0.45
IG-1B           SwAV                                                              1B        0    RegNet-128Gf   46.8    0.15   42.8     0.40
IG-1B           SwAV                                                              1B        0    RegNet-256Gf   47.8    0.17   43.1     0.41
PASS            MoCo-v2                                                         1.3M        0    ResNet50       42.3    0.09   40.5     0.27
PASS            SwAV                                                            1.3M        0    ResNet50       42.4    0.12   40.4     0.27
PASS            DINO                                                            1.3M        0    ViTS-16        43.2    0.10   41.8     0.32


is accompanied by both the identifier and demographic attributes of the annotator who made the
judgment.

C.1.2        W HO CREATED THE DATASET AND ON BEHALF OF WHICH ENTITY ?
The dataset was constructed by the authors Jerone T. A. Andrews, Przemysław Joniak, and Alice
Xiang.

C.1.3        W HO FUNDED THE CREATION OF THE DATASET ?
The dataset was funded by Sony AI.

C.2      C OMPOSITION

C.2.1        W HAT DO THE INSTANCES THAT COMPRISE THE DATASET REPRESENT ?
The instances comprising the dataset represent:

   • Three-alternative forced choice (3AFC) triplet-judgment tuples, where a judgment corresponds
     to the least similar (i.e., odd-one-out) face in a triplet of face images according to a human
     annotator. Refer to Figure 8 for an illustrative example of the 3AFC task presented to annotators.
   • Human-generated topic labels that capture the meaning of a set of learned embedding dimen-
     sions. Refer to Figure 9 for an illustrative example of the dimension labeling task presented to
     annotators.
   • Human-generated image ratings along a set of learned embedding dimensions. Refer to Figure 10
     for an illustrative example of the image rating task presented to annotators.

All instances in the dataset are associated with the unique identifier and demographic attributes of
the annotator who performed the annotation. The identifiers were randomly generated (to preserve


                                                                           18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                              Choose the person that looks least similar to the two other people. Focus on the people, ignor-
                             ing differences in head position, facial expression, lighting, accessories, background, and objects.


                                                                                                               Context


                   Triplet


                   Triplet


                   Triplet


Figure 8: Odd-one-out 3AFC task. Annotators were tasked with choosing the person that looks
least similar to the two other people. Context makes salient context-related properties and the extent
to which faces being compared share these properties. By exchanging a face in a triplet (i.e., altering
the context), each judgment implicitly encodes the dimensions relevant to pairwise similarity. All
face images in the figure were replaced by synthetic StyleGAN3 (Karras et al., 2021) images for
privacy reasons; annotators were shown real images.

                                     Which visual characteristics do you think the people on the left-hand side of the
                                     grid have in common compared to the people on the right-hand side of the grid?


                    100                   99                90                75                50                25                1


Figure 9: Dimension labeling task. Illustrative example of a face image grid for model dimension
j shown to annotators, displaying the stimulus set of 4,921 faces sorted in descending order (from
left to right) based on their dimension j embedding value. Annotators were tasked with writing 1–3
descriptions based on the characteristics they thought were changing along the grid. Annotators were
instructed to view and interact with the entire grid before providing their descriptions. Consistent
descriptions from distinct annotators would suggest that the ordering of the grid is visually meaningful.
All face images in the figure were replaced by synthetic StyleGAN3 images for privacy reasons;
annotators were shown real images.


the privacy of the annotators) by the authors and the demographic attributes correspond to the
self-reported age, nationality, ancestry, and gender identity of an annotator.

C.2.2    H OW MANY INSTANCES ARE THERE IN TOTAL ?

The dataset contains:

   • 638,180 quality-controlled 3AFC instances for training and validation; and 24,060 + 80,300
     quality-controlled 3AFC instances for testing.
   • 738 quality-controlled human-generated topic labels that capture the meaning of a set of learned
     embedding dimensions.
   • 8,800 quality-controlled human-generated image ratings along a set of learned embedding
     dimensions.


                                                                            19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                      Decide where on the grid you would place this person based
                                      on their similarity to the people shown in each column.


                   100        99        90               75               50               25      1


Figure 10: Image rating task. Illustrative example of a face image grid for model dimension j
shown to annotators, displaying the stimulus set of 4,921 faces sorted in descending order (from left
to right) based on their dimension j embedding value. Annotators were tasked with deciding which
column of the grid a novel face (shown above the grid) should be placed on based on its similarity to
the faces in the column. Annotators were instructed to view and interact with the entire grid before
making their decision. As annotators were not primed with the meaning of a grid, accurate placement
would indicate that the ordering of the grid is visually meaningful. All face images in the figure were
replaced by synthetic StyleGAN3 images for privacy reasons; annotators were shown real images.


C.2.3    D OES THE DATASET CONTAIN ALL POSSIBLE INSTANCES OR IS IT A SAMPLE OF
         INSTANCES FROM A LARGER SET ?

Face image stimuli. Starting from the 70,000 FFHQ (Karras et al., 2019) images, the stimulus set of
4,921 face images was constructed by:

  1. Removing faces with an absolute head yaw or pitch angle > π/6, left or right eye occlusion
     score > 20, or eyewear label. This was done to reduce the influence of head pose on human
     behavior and more easily permit eye comparisons.
  2. Removing face images with an age label > 19 years old, so as to exclude images of minors.
  3. Categorizing the remaining faces into 56 intersectional demographic subgroups, which were
     defined based on ethnicity, age, and gender labels.
  4. Randomly sampling face images (without replacement) such that each subgroup would be
     represented in the stimulus set. This was done to ensure that the stimulus set would at least be
     diverse with respect to demographic subgroup labels. Moreover, face images were randomly
     sampled from a subgroup, as opposed to selecting the most confidently labeled, to avoid biasing
     the stimulus set toward stereotypical faces.

Figure 11 shows the intersectional group counts for the 4,921 face images in the stimulus set.
An additional set of 56 images and set of 20 images were sampled from FFHQ for the test set partition
of 80,300 3AFC instances and 8,800 human-generated image rating instances, respectively. Both
of these sets of images were sampled in the same manner as the stimulus set. In addition, they are
disjoint from each other and the stimulus set of 4,921 faces. Figures 12 and 13 show the intersectional
group counts for the set of 56 images and set of 20 images, respectively.
Head yaw and pitch angles, eyewear, and eye occlusion labels were obtained from the FFHQ-
Aging (Or-El et al., 2020) dataset, which Or-El et al. inferred using Face++. Note that FFHQ-Aging
comprises of labels for each face image contained in FFHQ. Age and gender labels were also obtained
from the FFHQ-Aging dataset, which Or-El et al. inferred by employing a group of human annotators
to annotate the face images. Ethnicity was estimated using a pretrained FairFace model (Appendix A).
3AFC instances. The training and validation set of 638,180 quality-controlled 3AFC triplet-judgment
tuples contains 638,180 unique triplets, i.e., a single judgment per unique triplet. The judgments
were obtained from 1,645 eligible annotators. Figure 14 shows the demographic group counts of the


                                                        20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 11: Stimulus set intersectional subgroup counts. Intersectional subgroup counts for the
4,921 face images contained in the stimulus set. There are 56 subgroups represented in the stimulus
set.


Figure 12: Novel stimuli test set intersectional subgroup counts. Intersectional subgroup counts for
the 56 face images used in the test set partition of 80,300 quality-controlled 3AFC triplet-judgment
tuples. There are 48 (from a possible 56) subgroups represented in the 27,720 unique triplets.

annotators as well as the distribution of annotator contributions.3 The quality-controlled instances
    3
      Note the abbreviations: “africa” (“af”), “north africa” (“afna”), “east africa” (“afea”), “middle africa”
(“afma”), “south africa” (“afsa”), “western africa” (“afwa”), “americas” (“am”), “caribbean” (“amc”),“central

                                                     21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 13: Rated image set intersectional subgroup counts. Intersectional subgroup counts for the
20 face images used for collecting human-generated image ratings along the 22 learned embedding
dimensions. There are 18 (from a possible 56) subgroups represented.

Table 2: Annotator exclusion policies and criteria. 3AFC annotations from annotators who provided
overly fast, deterministic, or incomplete judgments were excluded.

                       Policy          Criteria                                                     Min. #judgments

                       Fast #1         > 25% of judgments generated in < 0.8s                                  100
                       Fast #2         > 50% of judgments generated in < 1.1s                                  100
                       Deterministic   > 40% of judgments correspond to a single triplet position              200
                       Incomplete      Submission of an empty judgment                                           1


represent a subset of instances from a larger set of 703,300 3AFC instances. The 703,300 triplets
were sampled from 4,921

                       3   possible triplets (i.e., over 4,921 face images contained in the stimulus set).
Instances were not included in the subset of 638,180 3AFC instances if they were annotated by any
annotator who provided overly fast, deterministic, or incomplete judgments. Refer to the annotator
exclusion policies outlined in Table 2.
The test set partition of 24,060 quality-controlled 3AFC triplet-judgment tuples contains 1,000 unique
triplets with 22–25 unique judgments per triplet. The judgments were obtained from 355 eligible
annotators. Figure 15 shows the demographic group counts of the annotators as well as the distribution
of annotator contributions. The quality-controlled instances represent a subset of instances from a
larger set of 25,000  3AFC instances with 25 unique judgments per triplet. The 1,000 triplets were
sampled from 4,921  3   possible triplets (i.e., over 4,921 face images contained in the stimulus set).
Within the 1,000 triplets, 2,163 face images from the stimulus set of 4,921 face images were used.
The 1,000 triplets are disjoint from the 703,300 triplets sampled for the training and validation set.
Instances were not included in the subset of 24,060 3AFC instances if they were annotated by any
annotator who provided overly fast, deterministic, or incomplete judgments. Refer to the annotator
exclusion policies outlined in Table 2.
The test set partition of 80,300 quality-controlled 3AFC triplet-judgment tuples contains 56

                                                                                                 3 =
27,720 unique triplets, representing all possible triplets that could be sampled from 56 images. Each
triplet has 2–3 judgments from 632 eligible annotators. Figure 16 shows the demographic group
counts of the annotators as well as the distribution of annotator contributions. The quality-controlled
instances represent a subset of instances from a larger set of 83,160 3AFC instances with 3 unique
judgments per triplet. Instances were not included in the subset of 80,300 3AFC instances if they
were annotated by any annotator who provided overly fast, deterministic, or incomplete judgments.
Refer to the annotator exclusion policies outlined in Table 2.
Dimension topic label instances. The 738 quality-controlled human-generated topic labels were
obtained for 22 learned embedding dimensions, representing a subset from 128 dimensions. Figure 17
shows the learned embeddings with the highest frequency topic labels generated by the annotators.
america” (“amca”), “south america” (“amasa”), “northern america” (“amna”), “asia” (“as”), “central asia”
(“asca”), “eastern asia” (“asea”), “south-eastern asia” (“assea”), “southern asia” (“assa”), “western asia” (“aswa”),
“europe” (“eu”), “eastern europe” (“euea”), “northern europe” (“eune”), “southern europe” (“euse”), “western
europe” (“euwe”), “oceania” (“oc”), “australia and new zealand” (“ocanz”), “melanesia” (“ocme”), “micronesia”
(“ocmi”), and “polynesia” (“ocp”).


                                                                   22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                                     Ancestry
                  Gender identity              Nationality
       Age


                                                 Subregional ancestry


                                         Distribution of annotator contributions


Figure 14: 3AFC training and validation set annotator demographics. Annotator age, gender
identity, nationality, ancestry, and subregional ancestry group counts for the 1,645 eligible annotators
who contributed to the training and validation set of 638,180 quality-controlled 3AFC triplet-judgment
tuples. The distribution of per annotator contributions is also shown. Note that for nationality, ancestry,
and subregional ancestry the plots only show groups with ≥ 5 annotators.


The subset of dimensions were selected on the basis of their maximal observed value (over the
stimulus set of 4,921 faces) being sufficiently larger than zero. The topic labels were obtained from
84 eligible annotators. Figure 18 shows the demographic group counts of the annotators as well as
the distribution of annotator contributions. Each of the 22 dimensions has 23–58 topic labels. The
quality-controlled topic labels were arrived at by first removing annotator responses that did not
correspond to words and those that were derogatory or offensive. The filtered responses were then
converted into 35 topic labels: “age”, “age related”, “ancestry”, “ear shape”, “emotion expression”,
“eye color”, “eye related”, “eye shape”, “eyebrow related”, “eyebrow shape”, “face related”, “face
shape”, “facial expression”, “facial hair”, “forehead shape”, “gender expression”, “hair color”, “hair
length”, “hair related”, “hair texture”, “hairstyle”, “head shape”, “health related”, “lips related”, “lips
shape”, “mouth related”, “mouth shape”, “neck related”, “nose related”, “nose shape”, “skin color”,
“skin related”, “skin texture”, “teeth related”, and “weight related”.
Dimension rating labels. The 8,800 quality-controlled human-generated image ratings were obtained
for 22 learned embedding dimensions, representing a subset from 128 dimensions. The subset of
dimensions were selected on the basis of their maximal observed value (over the stimulus set of 4,921
faces) being sufficiently larger than zero. The ratings were obtained from 164 eligible annotators.
Figure 19 shows the demographic group counts of the annotators as well as the distribution of
annotator contributions. Quality control corresponded to excluding incomplete responses, i.e., empty
responses. The 8,800 ratings represent all of the ratings collected from annotators, i.e., all collected
ratings were nonempty.


                                                             23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                     Gender identity        Nationality
                   Age                                                                                 Ancestry


                           Subregional ancestry


                                                                          Distribution of annotator contributions


Figure 15: 3AFC same stimuli test set annotator demographics. Annotator age, gender identity,
nationality, ancestry, and subregional ancestry group counts for the 355 eligible annotators who
contributed to the test set partition of 24,060 quality-controlled 3AFC triplet-judgment tuples. The
distribution of per annotator contributions is also shown. Note that for nationality, ancestry, and
subregional ancestry the plots only show groups with ≥ 5 annotators.

                         Gender identity               Nationality                                                  Ancestry
        Age


                          Subregional ancestry


                                                                                              Distribution of annotator contributions


Figure 16: 3AFC novel stimuli test set annotator demographics. Annotator age, gender identity,
nationality, ancestry, and subregional ancestry group counts for the 632 eligible annotators who
contributed to the test set partition of 80,300 quality-controlled 3AFC triplet-judgment tuples. The
distribution of per annotator contributions is also shown. Note that for nationality, ancestry, and
subregional ancestry the plots only show groups with ≥ 5 annotators.


C.2.4         W HAT DATA DOES EACH INSTANCE CONSIST OF ?
  • Each 3AFC instance consists of a triplet of face image identifiers, 3AFC (i.e., odd-one-out)
    judgment, and annotator identifier (corresponding to the annotator who generated the topic
    label).
  • Each human-generated topic label instance consists of a dimension identifier, topic label, and
    annotator identifier (corresponding to the annotator who generated the topic label).


                                                       24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


a   Dim. 1/22: “south asian”       Dim. 2/22: “long face”      Dim. 3/22: “white”             Dim. 4/22: “feminine”         Dim. 5/22: “smiling exp.”     Dim. 6/22: “masculine”


b   “ancestry”, “skin color”, “fa- “face shape”, “skin color”, “skin color”, “hair color”, “gender exp.”, “facial exp.”, “facial exp.”, “skin color”, “gender exp.”, “skin color”,
    cial exp.”                     “nose shape”                “age related”               “ancestry”                    “emotion exp.”               “ancestry”

c   “indian”, “bushy eyebrows”, “pointy nose”, “attractive”, “white”, “blond hair”, “brown “female”, “wearing lipstick”, “smiling”,  “high cheek- “male”, “sideburns”, “goa-
    “latino hispanic”           “middle eastern”             hair”                         “heavy makeup”                bones”, “rosy cheeks”    tee”



a   Dim. 7/22: “neutral exp.”      Dim. 8/22: “east asian”     Dim. 9/22: “black”             Dim. 10/22: ‘wide face”       Dim. 11/22: “elderly”         Dim. 12/22: “east asian”


b “nose related”, “facial exp.”, “ancestry”, “skin color”, “age “ancestry”, “skin color”, “hair “age related”, “ancestry”, “face shape”, “weight re- “skin color”, “ancestry”, “fa-
    “ancestry”                     related”                    length”                        “hair color”                  lated”, “facial exp.”         cial exp.”

c   “wearing necktie”,    “gray “east asian”, “southeast “black”, “big lips”, “big nose” “high cheekbones”, “double “70+”, “60–69”, “gray hair”          “east asian”, “southeast
    hair”, “no beard”           asian”, “straight hair”                                  chin”, “smiling”                                                asian”, “straight hair”



a   Dim. 13/22: “feminine”         Dim. 14/22: “balding”       Dim. 15/22: “young”            Dim. 16/22: “black”           Dim. 17/22: “facial hair”     Dim. 18/22: “balding”


b “gender exp.”, “hair color”, “gender exp.”, “facial hair”, “age related”, “ancestry”, “skin color”,          “ancestry”, “gender exp.”, “facial exp.”, “hair length”, “gender exp.”,
    “facial exp.”                 “hair length”                “gender exp.”                  “nose shape”                 “facial hair”                 “ancestry”

c   “female”, “wearing lipstick”, “bald”, “gray hair”, “wearing “blond hair”, “0–2”, “pale “black”, “big lips”, “big nose” “sideburns”, “goatee”, “mid- “bald”, “gray hair”, “wearing
    “heavy makeup”                necktie”                      skin”                                                      dle eastern”                 necktie”



a   Dim. 19/22: “east asian”       Dim. 20/22: “elderly”       Dim. 21/22: “wide face”        Dim. 22/22: “white”


b “ancestry”, “skin color”, “fa- “age related”, “ancestry”, “face shape”, “ancestry”, “skin color”, “ancestry”, “hair
    cial exp.”                    “gender exp.”                “skin color”                   color”

c   “east asian”, “southeast “70+”, “60–69”, “gray hair”       “double chin”, “chubby”, “white”, “blond hair”, “brown
    asian”, “pale skin”                                        “high cheekbones”        hair”


Figure 17: Dimensional interpretability. (a) Our interpretation of an AVFS-U dimension with the
highest scoring stimulus set images. (b) Highest frequency human-generated topic labels. (c) CelebA
and FairFace model-generated labels, exhibiting a clear correspondence with human-generated topics.
Face images in this figure have been replaced by synthetic StyleGAN3 images for privacy reasons.
                                                                                Nationality
           Age               Gender identity                                                                                              Ancestry          Subregional ancestry


                                                                     Distribution of annotator contributions


Figure 18: Topic labeling annotator demographics. Annotator age, gender identity, nationality,
ancestry, and subregional ancestry group counts for the 84 eligible annotators who contributed 738
human-generated topic labels that capture the meaning of the 22 learned embedding dimensions.
The distribution of per annotator contributions is also shown. Note that for nationality, ancestry, and
subregional ancestry the plots only show groups with ≥ 5 annotators.

    • Each human-generated image rating instance consists of a dimension identifier, image identifier,
      image rating, and annotator identifier (corresponding to the annotator who generated the topic
      label).


                                                                                         25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                             Gender identity        Nationality
                      Age                                                                              Ancestry


                            Subregional ancestry

                                                                      Distribution of annotator contributions


Figure 19: Image rating annotator demographics. Annotator age, gender identity, nationality,
ancestry, and subregional ancestry group counts for the 164 eligible annotators who contributed 8,800
human-generated image ratings along the 22 learned embedding dimensions. The distribution of per
annotator contributions is also shown. Note that for nationality, ancestry, and subregional ancestry
the plots only show groups with ≥ 5 annotators.


Note that each annotator’s identifier is associated with their demographic attributes (i.e., age, gender
identity, nationality, and ancestry).

C.2.5    I S THERE A LABEL OR TARGET ASSOCIATED WITH EACH INSTANCE ?
   • Each 3AFC instance’s target is a 3AFC judgment.
   • Each human-generated topic label instance’s target is a topic label.
   • Each human-generated image rating instance’s target is an image rating.

C.2.6    I S ANY INFORMATION MISSING FROM INDIVIDUAL INSTANCES ?

No.

C.2.7    A RE RELATIONSHIPS BETWEEN INDIVIDUAL INSTANCES MADE EXPLICIT ?

Yes. Each instance can be mapped to the annotator who labeled it.

C.2.8    A RE THERE RECOMMENDED DATA SPLITS ?

The 3AFC instances are split into training, validation, and testing partitions. All other instances are
for evaluating learned model dimensions, i.e., for the model introduced in the paper.

C.2.9    A RE THERE ANY ERRORS , SOURCES OF NOISE , OR REDUNDANCIES IN THE DATASET ?

No.

C.2.10    I S THE DATASET SELF - CONTAINED , OR DOES IT LINK TO OR OTHERWISE RELY ON
          EXTERNAL RESOURCES ?

The dataset does not include any images, it instead references to image identifiers. The image identi-
fiers can be used to obtain the relevant FFHQ images, which are hosted on NVIDIA Corporation’s
Google Drive: https://github.com/NVlabs/ffhq-dataset.


                                                               26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


C.2.11    D OES THE DATASET CONTAIN DATA THAT MIGHT BE CONSIDERED CONFIDENTIAL ?

The dataset includes the demographic information (i.e., age, nationality, ancestry, and gender identity)
of each annotator; however, all annotators consented to the collection, use, and publication of their
data.

C.2.12    D OES THE DATASET CONTAIN DATA THAT, IF VIEWED DIRECTLY, MIGHT BE
          OFFENSIVE , INSULTING , THREATENING , OR MIGHT OTHERWISE CAUSE ANXIETY ?

No.

C.2.13    D OES THE DATASET RELATE TO PEOPLE ?

The dataset contains annotations corresponding to human judgments of face similarity, as well as
demographic information about each annotator.

C.2.14    D OES THE DATASET IDENTIFY ANY SUBPOPULATIONS ?

The dataset includes the demographic information (i.e., age, nationality, ancestry, and gender identity)
of each annotator.

C.2.15    I S IT POSSIBLE TO IDENTIFY INDIVIDUALS , EITHER DIRECTLY OR INDIRECTLY FROM
          THE DATASET ?

Each annotator’s Amazon Mechnical Turk (AMT) identifier was replaced by an identifier randomly
generated by the authors. The dataset therefore contains de-identified data.

C.2.16    D OES THE DATASET CONTAIN DATA THAT MIGHT BE CONSIDERED SENSITIVE IN ANY
          WAY ?

The dataset includes the demographic information (i.e., age, nationality, ancestry, and gender identity)
of each annotator.

C.3     C OLLECTION PROCESS

C.3.1    H OW WAS THE DATA ASSOCIATED WITH EACH INSTANCE ACQUIRED ?

All data associated with each instance was acquired via AMT, except for the image identifiers which
were obtained from the FFHQ dataset: https://github.com/NVlabs/ffhq-dataset.

C.3.2    W HAT MECHANISMS OR PROCEDURES WERE USED TO COLLECT THE DATA ?

The AMT API was used to collect the data associated with each instance.

C.3.3    I F THE DATASET IS A SAMPLE FROM A LARGER SET, WHAT WAS THE SAMPLING
         STRATEGY ?

Refer to Appendix C.2.3.

C.3.4    W HO WAS INVOLVED IN THE DATA COLLECTION PROCESS AND HOW WERE THEY
         COMPENSATED ?

The authors collected the annotations directly from annotators via AMT. All annotators were required
to have previously completed ≥ 100 human intelligence tasks (HITs) on AMT with ≥ 95% approval
rating. Eligibility was further determined through a prescreening survey, which included a short
multiple-choice English language proficiency test. Since we placed no restriction on annotator
location, in order to be eligible, we required annotators to answer at least two out of three multiple-
choice English language proficiency questions correctly.


                                                  27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Annotators were paid a nominal fee of 0.01 USD for completing a prescreening survey. For all
subsequent tasks, annotators were compensated at a rate of 15 USD per hour, regardless of whether
their work passed quality control checks.

C.3.5    OVER WHAT TIMEFRAME WAS THE DATA COLLECTED ?

From 6 November 2021 to 20 February 2022.

C.3.6    W ERE ANY ETHICAL REVIEW PROCESSES CONDUCTED ?

No.

C.3.7    D ID YOU COLLECT THE DATA FROM THE INDIVIDUALS IN QUESTION DIRECTLY, OR
         OBTAIN IT VIA THIRD PARTIES OR OTHER SOURCES ?

All data was collected directly from the annotators via AMT.

C.3.8    W ERE THE INDIVIDUALS IN QUESTION NOTIFIED ABOUT THE DATA COLLECTION ?

Yes. Annotators were provided with (1) an information sheet and consent form; and (2) a notification
and consent for collection and use of study data form.

C.3.9    D ID THE INDIVIDUALS IN QUESTION CONSENT TO THE COLLECTION AND USE OF THEIR
         DATA ?

Annotators consented to the collection, use, and publication of their age, gender identity, nationality,
ancestry, and task responses.

C.3.10    I F CONSENT WAS OBTAINED , WERE THE CONSENTING INDIVIDUALS PROVIDED WITH
          A MECHANISM TO REVOKE THEIR CONSENT IN THE FUTURE OR FOR CERTAIN USES ?

Annotators were instructed to contact Sony Europe B.V. at Taurusavenue 16, 2132LS Hoofddorp,
Netherlands or privacyoffice.SEU@sony.com to revoke their consent in the future or for
certain uses.

C.3.11     H AS AN ANALYSIS OF THE POTENTIAL IMPACT OF THE DATASET AND ITS USE ON
           DATA SUBJECTS BEEN CONDUCTED ?

A data privacy impact assessment was conducted.

C.4     P REPROCESSING / CLEANING / LABELING

C.4.1    WAS ANY PREPROCESSING / CLEANING / LABELING OF THE DATA DONE ?

To control for quality, any annotator who provided overly fast, deterministic, or incomplete responses
were not included in the dataset. In addition, labels for model dimensions collected from human
annotators were cleaned and converted to topic labels.

C.4.2    WAS THE “ RAW ” DATA SAVED IN ADDITION TO THE
         PREPROCESSED / CLEANED / LABELED DATA ?

The authors retain a copy of the raw data.

C.4.3    I S THE SOFTWARE THAT WAS USED TO PREPROCESS / CLEAN / LABEL THE DATA
         AVAILABLE ?

No.


                                                  28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


C.5     U SES

C.5.1    H AS THE DATASET BEEN USED FOR ANY TASKS ALREADY ?

In the paper, the dataset was used to concurrently learn a face embedding space aligned with human
perception as well as annotator-specific subspaces. The combination of the learned embedding space
and annotator-specific subspaces not only enabled the accurate prediction of face similarity, but
also provided a human-interpretable decomposition of the dimensions used in the human decision-
making process, as well as the importance distinct annotators placed on each dimension. The paper
demonstrated that the individual embedding dimensions (1) are related to concepts of gender, ethnicity,
age, as well as face and hair morphology; and (2) can be used to collect continuous attributes, perform
classification, and compare dataset attribute disparities. The paper further showed that annotators are
influenced by their sociocultural backgrounds, underscoring the need for diverse annotator groups to
mitigate bias.

C.5.2    I S THERE A REPOSITORY THAT LINKS TO ANY OR ALL PAPERS OR SYSTEMS THAT USE
         THE DATASET ?

Refer to https://github.com/SonyAI/a_view_from_somewhere.

C.5.3    W HAT ( OTHER ) TASKS COULD THE DATASET BE USED FOR ?

The dataset could be used for any task related to human perception, human decision-making processes,
metric learning, active learning, bias mitigation, or disentangled representations.

C.5.4    I S THERE ANYTHING ABOUT THE COMPOSITION OF THE DATASET OR THE WAY IT WAS
         COLLECTED AND PREPROCESSED / CLEANED / LABELED THAT MIGHT IMPACT FUTURE
         USES ?

The dataset contains annotations for images contained in the FFHQ dataset of Flickr images. The
images currently have permissive licenses that allow free use, redistribution and adaptation for
noncommercial purposes, however Flickr users are free to request the removal of any of their images
contained in the FFHQ dataset by visiting https://github.com/NVlabs/ffhq-dataset.
Moreover, the dataset contains annotations from a demographically imbalanced set of annotators,
which may not generalize to a set of demographically dissimilar annotators. Furthermore, while the
stimulus set of images for which the annotations pertain to were diverse with respect to intersectional
demographic subgroup labels, the labels were inferred by a combination of algorithms and human
annotators. Therefore, the stimulus set is not representative of the entire human population and may
in actuality be demographically biased.

C.5.5    A RE THERE TASKS FOR WHICH THE DATASET SHOULD NOT BE USED ?

The dataset was created for noncommercial research purposes only. The dataset is not intended for,
and should not be used for, development or improvement of facial recognition technologies.

C.6     D ISTRIBUTION

C.6.1    W ILL THE DATASET BE DISTRIBUTED TO THIRD PARTIES OUTSIDE OF THE ENTITY ON
         BEHALF OF WHICH THE DATASET WAS CREATED ?

The dataset can be accessed by visiting https://github.com/SonyAI/a_view_from_
somewhere.

C.6.2    H OW WILL THE DATASET BE DISTRIBUTED ?

The dataset can be accessed by visiting https://github.com/SonyAI/a_view_from_
somewhere.


                                                  29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


C.6.3    W HEN WILL THE DATASET BE DISTRIBUTED ?
May 2023.

C.6.4    W ILL THE DATASET BE DISTRIBUTED UNDER A COPYRIGHT OR OTHER INTELLECTUAL
         PROPERTY (IP) LICENSE , AND / OR UNDER APPLICABLE TERMS OF USE (T O U)?

The dataset is distributed under a Creative Commons BY-NC-SA license:                  https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/4.0/.

C.6.5    H AVE ANY THIRD PARTIES IMPOSED IP- BASED OR OTHER RESTRICTIONS ON THE DATA
         ASSOCIATED WITH THE INSTANCES ?

No.

C.6.6    D O ANY EXPORT CONTROLS OR OTHER REGULATORY RESTRICTIONS APPLY TO THE
         DATASET OR TO INDIVIDUAL INSTANCES ?

The authors are not aware of any controls or restrictions.

C.7     M AINTENANCE

C.7.1    W HO WILL BE SUPPORTING / HOSTING / MAINTAINING THE DATASET ?
The dataset is supported by the authors and can be accessed by visiting https://github.com/
SonyAI/a_view_from_somewhere.

C.7.2    H OW CAN THE CURATOR OF THE DATASET BE CONTACTED ( E . G ., EMAIL ADDRESS )?
Correspondence to jerone.andrews@sony.com.

C.7.3    I S THERE AN ERRATUM ?
If errors are found, an erratum file will be added to the dataset.

C.7.4    W ILL THE DATASET BE UPDATED ?
The dataset will be versioned.

C.7.5    I F THE DATASET RELATES TO PEOPLE , ARE THERE APPLICABLE LIMITS ON THE
         RETENTION OF THE DATA ASSOCIATED WITH THE INSTANCES ?

No. However, annotators are free to withdraw their consent at any time and for any reason.

C.7.6    W ILL OLDER VERSIONS OF THE DATASET CONTINUE TO BE
         SUPPORTED / HOSTED / MAINTAINED ?

Older versions of the dataset will continue to be hosted, unless they contain information about, or
obtained from, an annotator who has subsequently withdrawn their consent.

C.7.7    I F OTHERS WANT TO EXTEND / AUGMENT / BUILD ON / CONTRIBUTE TO THE DATASET, IS
         THERE A MECHANISM FOR THEM TO DO SO ?

Others should contact the authors if they wish to contribute to the dataset.


                                                   30
