Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


M OMENT D ISTRIBUTIONALLY ROBUST
P ROBABILISTIC S UPERVISED L EARNING
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                             A BSTRACT
         Probabilistic supervised learning assumes the groundtruth itself is a distribution
         instead of a single label, as in classic settings. Common approaches learn with
         a proper composite loss and obtain probability estimates via an invertible link
         function. Typical links such as the softmax yield restrictive and problematic un-
         certainty certificates. In this paper, we propose to make direct prediction of condi-
         tional label distributions from first principles in distributionally robust optimiza-
         tion based on an ambiguity set defined by feature moment divergence. We derive
         its generalization bounds under mild assumptions. We illustrate how to manipulate
         penalties for underestimation and overestimation. Our method can be easily incor-
         porated into neural networks for end-to-end representation learning. Experimental
         results on datasets with probabilistic labels illustrate the flexibility, effectiveness,
         and efficiency of this learning paradigm.


1   I NTRODUCTION
The goal of classical supervised learning is point estimation—predicting a single target from the la-
bel domain given features—usually without justifying the confidence. The outcome distribution of
an event can be inherently uncertain and more desirable than point predictions in some scenarios. For
example, weather predictions that express the uncertainty of events such as rain occurring are more
sensible than binary-valued predictions, while a uniform distribution prediction for the outcome of
a fair dice roll is more sensible than speculating an integral value randomly. On one hand, the pre-
dicted distribution quantifies label uncertainty and is thus more informative than a point prediction,
which is widely studied in weakly supervised learning (Yoshida et al., 2021), boosting (Friedman
et al., 2000) and optimal treatment (Leibovici et al., 2000). On the other hand, the ground truth
naturally comes with multiple targets, possibly with different importances. For instance, there can
be multiple emotions in a human face image, there are different gene expression levels over a period
of time in biological experiments, and many annotators might disagree over a highly ambiguous
instance. In the above settings, each predefined label is part of the ground truth as long as it has a
positive probability in the true distribution. Hence, it is natural to use probabilistic labels in both
training and inference when the ground truth is no longer a point. In the literature, the task of pre-
dicting full distributions from features is called probabilistic supervised learning (Gressmann et al.,
2018).
A probabilistic supervised learning task comes with a probabilistic loss functional quantitatively
measuring the utility of the prediction (Bickel, 2007). Williamson et al. (2016) propose a com-
posite multiclass loss that separates properness and convexity. They illuminate the connection be-
tween classification calibration (Tewari & Bartlett, 2007) and properness (Gneiting & Raftery, 2007;
Dawid, 2007), representing Fisher consistency for classification and probability estimation respec-
tively. A proper loss is minimized when predictions match the true underlying probability, which
implies classification calibration, but not vice versa. Among proper losses, the logarithmic loss
(Good, 1952) severely penalizes underestimation of rare outcomes and assessing the “surprise” of
the predictor in an information-theoretic sense, the Brier score—originally proposed for evaluat-
ing weather forecasts (Brier, 1950)—is useful for assessing prediction calibration, and the spherical
scoring rule (Bickel, 2007) is used when a distribution with lower entropy is desired. A single
proper loss is sometimes not sufficient for scenarios that elicit optimistic or pessimistic predictions
for decision making with practical concerns (Elsberry, 2002; Chapman, 2012). For example, under-
estimating disastrous events may provide very low utility, motivating more pessimistic predictions.


                                                    1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Therefore it is desirable for a proper loss to be flexible in its penalties for deviated predictions that
combine statistical properties of multiple losses.
Deep neural networks typically adopt the softmax function to predict a legal distribution. However,
softmax intentionally renormalizes the logits and therefore assumes that it follows a logistic distri-
bution (Bendale & Boult, 2016). It is poor at calibration, uncertainty quantification and robustness
against overfitting (Joo et al., 2020). The inverse of the canonical link function in Williamson et al.
(2016) can be used to recover probabilities but commonly resembles softmax (Zou et al., 2008).
In this paper, we propose a probabilistic supervised learning method from first principles in dis-
tributionally robust optimization (DRO) for general proper losses that realize desired prediction
properties. Instead of specifying a parametric distribution, it starts with a minimax learning problem
in which the predictor non-parametrically minimizes the the most adverse risk among all distribu-
tions in an ambiguity set defined by empirical feature moments. The ambiguity set represents our
uncertainty about the underlying distribution. By strong duality, we show that the primal DRO prob-
lem is equivalent to a regularized empirical risk minimization (ERM) problem. The regularization
results naturally from the ambiguity set instead of being explicitly imposed. The ERM form also
allows us to derive generalization bounds and make inferences from unseen data. We illustrate a set
of solutions for general proper losses satisfying certain mild conditions and an efficient algorithm
for a weighted sum of two common strictly proper losses. We conduct experiments on real-world
datasets by adapting our method to end-to-end differentiable learning. We defer all technical proofs
to the appendix.
Contributions. Our contributions are summarized as follows. (1) We propose a distributionally
robust probabilistic supervised learning method. (2) We characterize the solutions to the proposed
method and present an efficient algorithm for specific losses. (3) We incorporate our method into
neural networks and perform extensive empirical study on real-world data.


1.1   R ELATED W ORK



Model assessment of probabilistic models via predictive likelihood has been studied in Bayesian
models (Gelman et al., 2014), probabilistic forecasting (Gneiting & Raftery, 2007), machine learn-
ing (Masnadi-Shirazi & Vasconcelos, 2009), conditional density estimation (Sugiyama et al., 2010),
information theory (Reid & Williamson, 2011) and representation learning (Dubois et al., 2020). A
comprehensive framework for probabilistic supervised learning can be found in Gressmann et al.
(2018).
Techniques developed to explicitly tackle multiclass probabilistic classification include multiclass
logistic regression (Collins et al., 2002), support vector machines (Lyu et al., 2019; Wang et al.,
2019), learning from noisy labels (Zhang et al., 2021), weakly supervised learning (Yoshida et al.,
2021), and neural networks (Papadopoulos, 2013; Gast & Roth, 2018). Multilabel classification,
aimed at predicting multiple classes with equal importance, has been analyzed by Cheng et al.
(2010) and Geng (2016) in a general probabilistic setting. Note that confidence calibration (Guo
et al., 2017) has a different objective from probabilistic supervised learning.
Fisher consistency results have been established for classification losses (Tewari & Bartlett, 2007),
structured losses (Ciliberto et al., 2016; Nowak et al., 2020), proper losses (Williamson et al., 2016)
and Fenchel-Young losses (Blondel et al., 2020).
The emerging field of DRO has led to learning methods with ambiguity sets defined by feature
moments (Farnia & Tse, 2016; Mazuelas et al., 2020), ϕ-divergence (Duchi & Namkoong, 2019)
and the Wasserstein distance (Shafieezadeh-Abadeh et al., 2019). The moment-based ambiguity set
adopted in this work originates from maximum entropy (Cortes et al., 2015; Mazuelas et al., 2022),
with similar work studying classification (Asif et al., 2015; Fathony et al., 2016) and structured
prediction (Fathony et al., 2018a;b).


                                                   2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


2     P RELIMINARIES
2.1    N OTATIONS

We adopt the following notations by convention. A bold letter x denotes a vector whereas a normal
letter x represents a scalar. xi or (x)i stands for the i-th coordinate of x. We denote random
variables with capitalization (e.g, X or X) and sets with calligraphic capitalization (e.g, X , A). We
denote by [n] the set {1, 2, . . . , n}. |·| means the absolute value of a scalar or the cardinality of a
set, depending on the context. The ℓp norm of a vector is defined as ∥x∥p ≜ ( i |xi |p )1/p . The
                                                                                      P
indicator function of a subset S of a set X is a mapping IS : X → {0, 1} such that IS (x) = 1 if
x ∈ S and IS (x) = 0 otherwise. I(·) is adopted for events so that I(S) = 1 if event S occurs and
I(S) = 0 otherwise. We write δz as the Dirac point measure at z ∈ Z. A probability simplex of
(d + 1)-dimensional vectors is represented as ∆d , whose superscript is omitted when the context is
clear. We denote by P(Z) the set of all probability distributions on a set Z.

2.2    P ROBABILISTIC L OSS F UNCTIONALS

A loss function measures the quality of a pre-
diction associated with an event. Scoring rules                              1.4                       0-1
are widely adopted to assess probabilistic pre-                                                        log
                                                                                                       Brier
dictions, but can be naturally translated to loss                            1.2
                                                                                                       spherical
functions by appropriate negation and normal-
                                                             expected loss


ization. To illustrate some examples, we con-                                1.0
sider a decision problem in which y ∈ Y is
an outcome and PY ∈ P(Y) is a predicted                                      0.8
distribution over Y. We denote by pY ≜
(PY (y))Ty∈Y a vector of probabilities.                                      0.6

The zero-one loss is defined for determinis-                                 0.4
                                                                                   0.0   0.2   0.4            0.6   0.8   1.0
tic prediction so that a penalty of 1 is in-                                                         PY (1)
curred whenever y ′ and y differ: ℓ01 (y ′ , y) ≜
I(y ′ ̸= y). It extends to probabilistic predic-        Figure 1: The expected value of four loss func-
                                                        tions for three classes with QY (1) = 0.6 and
tions as ℓ01 (PY , y) ≜ 1 − PY (y)1 . The cost-         QY (2) = QY (3) = 0.2. PY (2) = PY (3) as PY (1)
sensitive loss for multiclass classification is         varies. Each loss is normalized to cross (1, 0) and
similarly defined with a confusion cost matrix          (0.5, 0.5) according to the binary case with a hard
        |Y|×|Y|                 P
C ∈ R+          : ℓcs (PY , y) ≜ i∈Y PY (i)Ciy .        label. Best viewed in color.
The multiclass Brier loss, based on the Brier
score or quadratic  scoring rule, measures the mean squared difference between PY and y:
ℓbr (PY , y) ≜ y′ (PY (y ′ ) − I(y ′ = y))2 .
              P

The logarithmic loss, also called log-likelihood loss, incurs a rapidly increasing penalty as the
predicted probability of the target event approaches zero: Llog (PY , y) ≜ − ln PY (y).
The spherical scoring rule can be interpreted as the spherical projection of the true belief onto the
prediction vector. To use it as a loss function, we define ℓsp (PY , y) ≜ 1 − PY (y)/∥pY ∥2 .
                                                  P
For ease of exposition, we define L(P, Q) := y QY (y)ℓ(PY , y) where ℓ(·, ·) : P(Y) × Y → R+
is a probabilistic loss function as illustrated above. A loss L is called proper if L(Q, Q) ≤ L(P, Q)
for all P, Q, and called strictly proper if Q is the unique minimizer of L(·, Q). Figure 1 provides
a graphical comparison of the above losses for prediction with three classes. We can infer that the
zero-one loss is an improper loss.

2.3    P ROBABILISTIC S UPERVISED L EARNING

We study the probabilistic supervised learning task where we are given n training samples
{(x(1) , y (1) ), (x(2) , y (2) ), . . . , (x(n) , y (n) )} drawn i.i.d. from a distribution P on the joint space
    1
                                                                                       / arg maxy′ PY (y ′ )), which
      In the literature, the zero-one loss is sometimes defined as ℓ01 (PY , y) := I(y ∈
is proper, but discontinuous and not strictly proper.


                                                         3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


X × Y, in which X is a feature space and Y is a univariate finite discrete label space. A proba-
bilistic multiclass loss function L : P(Y) × P(Y) → R+ is given. The goal of ERM is to learn from
the samples a mapping h : X → P(Y) to minimize the empirical L-risk of h:
                                                           h                i
                                                                      emp
                          h∗ ∈ arg min RPLemp (h) := EPemp
                                                       X
                                                             L(h(X), PY |X )  ,                (1)
                                  h∈H

where Pemp
       X,Y   represents the empirical distribution and H is a hypothesis space. Here we assume
x may be accompanied with a probabilistic label by aggregating instances with the same x(i) . In
this way, both learning and inference are accomplished in the general setting subsuming classical
supervised learning.

3     M ETHOD
We now present our formulation for learning with general multiclass probabilistic losses. We provide
theoretical results of consistency and generalization. We study the solution for general proper losses
in our formulation and develop an efficient algorithm for two typical proper losses.

3.1   F ORMULATION

We consider a continuous proper loss L to be optimized under the unknown distribution Ptrue . We
assume that a class-sensitive feature function ϕ : X × Y → Rd that maps a data point to a d-
dimensional feature vector is given. Examples include the multi-vector representation and class-
dependent TF-IDF scores. Choosing a good ϕ is a representation learning problem, but as we will
discuss in Section 3.4, it is not a concern once our method is incorporated into neural networks as
a layer. Intuitively, the elements of the vector ϕ(x, y) can be regarded as scores indicating how
well the label y matches with the feature x. For example, with a linear hypothesis hw (x, y) =
⟨w, ϕ(x, y)⟩, a good parameter vector w∗ should yield
                     ⟨w∗ , ϕ(x, y)⟩ > ⟨w∗ , ϕ(x, y ′ )⟩ =⇒ P(x, y) > P(x, y ′ ).

Instead of specifying a parametric form of predictions, we adopt a minimax statistical learning
formulation:

                             min      maxemp EQX L PY |X , QY |X ,                          (2)
                           PY |X ∈P(Y) Q∈A(P   )

where A(P ) := {Q : Q ∈ P(X × Y) ∧ Pemp
           emp
                                                 X = QX ∧ ∥EPemp [ϕ(·, ·)] − EQ [ϕ(·, ·)]∥ ≤ ε}.
The ambiguity set is different from that in Wiesemann et al. (2014) and Farnia & Tse (2016) due to
the inequality and feature mapping respectively. The minimization over the function space H is re-
placed by directly minimizing over P(Y) for each x ∈ X . The probabilistic predictions are chosen
to minimize the worst-case risk evaluated on a set of distributions in an ambiguity set defined by the
empirical distribution Pemp and feature mapping ϕ. The ambiguity set A(Pemp ) includes distribu-
tions that share the same marginal on X and are no more than ε away from Pemp in terms of feature
moment divergence. Note that given any feature function ϕ, the ambiguity set is a compact convex
set. Conceptually, we restrict the support of Q on X to be the same as the empirical distribution for
convenience in both algorithm design and theoretical analysis.
Minimizing the worst-case risk by allowing a certain amount of label uncertainty makes this method
inherently robust. It can also be shown to be equivalent to a dual-norm regularized ERM problem:
Proposition 1 ((Li et al., 2022)). The distributionally robust probabilistic supervised learning prob-
lem based on moment divergence in Eq. (2) can be rewritten as
             min max L PY |X , QY |X + θ ⊺ (EQY̌ |X ϕ(X, Y̌ ) − EPemp ϕ(X, Ỹ )) + ε∥θ∥∗ , (3)

   min EPemp
           X
     θ         P     Q                                                 Ỹ |X
             |                                        {z                                      }
                                                   Ladv (θ,Pemp )
                                                           Ỹ |X


where θ ∈ RD is the vector of Lagrangian multipliers and ∥·∥∗ is the dual norm of ∥·∥.

We give a proof sketch here. Both P(Y) and A(P̃) are non-empty closed convex sets. Since we
assume L is continuous and proper, we know that L(·, Q) is quasi-convex for every Q and L(P, ·) is


                                                     4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


concave for every P by definition. Eq. (2) is therefore a quasi-convex-concave problem and strong
duality holds (Sion, 1958). The regularization is obtained via Lagrangian and Fenchel conjugate.
It is well-known that continuous proper losses are quasi-convex, such as the Brier score, the logarith-
mic score, the spherical score, the Winkler’s score, the ranked probability score, etc. However, some
improper (possibly discrete and non-convex) losses can be quasi-convex in the predicted distribution
(e.g., the zero-one loss). In contrast, surrogate classification losses are usually convex in a parameter
space that is easy
               P to work with, for example, the multiclass hinge loss Weston & Watkins (1998),
ℓww (ψ, y) = y′ ̸=y max{0, 1 + ψy′ − ψy }, and the multiclass logistic loss (Nelder & Wedderburn,
1972), ℓlog (ψ, y) = ln ( y′ exp (ψy′ )) − ψy , where ψ ∈ R|Y| is a vector of class scores.
                          P

From a game theoretic point of view, our formulation in Eq. (2) is equivalent to a two-player zero-
sum game in which the predictor player chooses a distribution to minimize the expected game payoff
while the adversary player chooses one to maximize the game value while constrained to satisfy
certain statistical properties of training data (Grünwald et al., 2004). In the dual problem (Eq. (3)),
the Lagrange multipliers parameterize the payoff function for an augmented game and provide a
new payoff function for unseen data to construct predictors.

3.2   S TATISTICAL P ROPERTIES

It well known that minimizing strictly proper losses leads to Fisher consistent probability estimation
(Williamson et al., 2016). However, minimization of the surrogate risk in Eq. (3) may induce a
sub-optimal classifier because of misalignment between the surrogate loss Ladv and the original
loss L. Fisher consistency provides desirable statistical implications for a surrogate loss such that
minimizing it yields an estimator that also minimizes the original loss.
The adversarial surrogate loss Ladv is endowed with an additional regularization term. It reduces to
a Fenchel-Young loss (Blondel et al., 2020) when the ambiguity radius ε is zero. A conclusion of
consistency can drawn based on Nowak et al. (2020); Blondel et al. (2020) and our assumption that
the groundtruth is probabilistic:
Corollary 2 ((Li et al., 2022)). When ε = 0, Ladv is Fisher consistent with respect to L. Namely,
for any x,
                                     θ∗                       true
                                      |x ∈ arg min L(PY |x , PY |x )
                                   PYtrue
                                                PY |x

                                                       ∗
is the Bayes optimal probabilistic prediction made by θtrue , the solution
                                                                           in Eq. (3) under Ptrue . The
                         θ
prediction made by θ is PY |X ∈ arg minP maxQ L PY |X , QY |X + EQY̌ |X θ ⊺ ϕ(X, Y̌ ).

The consistency result guarantees that the learned probabilistic prediction rules yield Bayes opti-
mal risk as ERM with proper losses in the ideal setting with true distributions and all measurable
functions. Also note that the conclusion holds for all quasi-convex losses.
Basic generalization bounds related to true risk for DRO methods can be derived from measure con-
centration. This approach depends on the choice of ambiguity sets and may have a dimensionality
issue. It is also not appropriate for ambiguity sets defined by low-order moments in this paper.
Thus, we take an alternate approach following Farnia & Tse (2016) to prove excess out-of-sample
risk bounds. We assume ε > 0 to ensure boundedness of ∥θ∥∗ . We establish the following theorem
by making mild assumptions on boundedness on features and losses:
Theorem 3 ((Li et al., 2022)). Given n samples, a non-negative multiclass probabilistic loss L(·, ·)
such that |L(·, ·)| ≤ K, a feature function ϕ(·, ·) such that ∥ϕ(·, ·)∥ ≤ B and a positive ambiguity
level ε > 0, then, for any 0 < δ ≤ 1, with a probability at least 1 − δ, the following excess true
worst-case risk bound holds:
                                                                           r        !
                         L ∗                   L ∗          4KB          3 ln(4/δ)
                max RQ (θemp ) − maxtrue RQ (θtrue ) ≤ √             1+                ,         (4)
             Q∈A(Ptrue )            Q∈A(P )                 ε n          2     2
        ∗        ∗
where θemp and θtrue are the optimal parameters learned in Eq. (3) under the empirical distribu-
      emp                                                                                L
tion P    and true distribution Ptrue , respectively. The original risk of θ under Q is RQ (θ) :=
EQX,Y ,Pθ L(PY |X , QY |X ).
        Y |X


                                                   5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Theorem 3 improves the results of Asif et al. (2015) and Fathony et al. (2016) that only show quali-
tative bounds. Under positive regularization, this bound explains the rate of uniform convergence of
                                            ∗
the true worst-case risk of the estimator θemp   learned through the empirical distribution Pemp to the
                                              ∗
true worst-case risk of the ideal estimator θtrue learned under Ptrue . Although the empirical estimator
is obtained based on a finite set of samples, Theorem 3 justifies the roles which the ambiguity set
A(·), the feature function ϕ(·, ·), the loss function L(·, ·) and the ambiguity parameter ε play in
upper bounding the excess out-of-sample worst-case risk. Intuitively, a larger ε will reject more hy-
potheses that are sensitive with larger dual norms, whereas the worst-case risk scales with the range
of loss and feature functions.

3.3   A LGORITHM

Since L(·, ·) is a continuous quasiconvex-concave function, a saddle point in Eq. (3) given θ must
have a zero derivative with respect to P and Q:
                          X
                             QY |x (y)∂ℓ(PY |x , y)/∂PY |x (y ′ ) + ZPY |x = 0                 (5)
                           y

                                           ℓ(PY |x , y) + θ ⊺ ϕ(x, y) + ZQY |x = 0,                      (6)
                                                                              P
where ZPY |x is the Lagrange multipliers for the simplex constraint y PY |x (y) = 1, similarly for
ZQY |x . Note that ZQY |x is constant for all y given x. If ℓ is local, e.g., ℓ(PY |x , y) is independent of
PY |x (y ′ ) for y ′ ̸= y and if ℓ(·, y) is monotone in PY |x (y) > 0 (without simplex constraints) with
range R, which is the case for the logarithmic loss, Eq.       P(6) always has a solution and the system of
equations for all y along with the simplex constraint y PY |x (y) has a unique solution. With few
assumptions on the boundedness of ℓ and θ ⊺ ϕ, Eq. (6) is ill-posed. Given P∗Y |x from Eq. (6), the
solution Q∗Y |x to Eq. (5) exists iff

                       ∂ℓ(PY |x , 1)/∂PY |x (1) . . .        ∂ℓ(PY |x , |Y|)/∂PY |x (1) 1
                                                                                          
                                 ...                                                      
                    ∂ℓ(P , 1)/∂P (|Y|) . . . ∂ℓ(P , |Y|)/∂P (|Y|) 1
                           Y |x         Y |x                     Y |x         Y |x
                                   1                  ...                 1              0
is singular. By assuming locality and positiveness, there exists a unique solution Q∗Y |x . One benefit
of the proposed method is that users only need to focus on solve Eq. (6) and Eq. (5) for proper losses
while Williamson et al. (2016) additionally require a canonical link function for convexity.
Next we show how the system of equations can always be solved with specific losses. We consider
an additive combination of the multiclass Brier loss and the logarithmic loss, both of which are
continuous strictly proper losses. As indicated by Figure 1, these losses differ primarily in how
they penalize the ground truth label’s prediction probability as it goes to zero and one. The Brier
loss exhibits quadratic growth. The logarithmic loss has a vertical asymptote for labels considered
increasingly unlikely to the point of impossibility by the predictor. They have different penalties for
underestimation and overestimation of the desired prediction. A trade-off between the log loss and
the Brier loss thus provides flexibility to control the cost for misalignment between the prediction
and the observation. See appendix for a discussion on including the ranked probability score and
other specific losses.
We employ this kind of loss in our DRO method and present an efficient algorithm that can be
implemented in practice. With only slight loss of generality and for computational consideration,
we assume a fixed positive weight on the log loss. To begin with, the mixture loss is
                                                                      X
               ℓmix (PY |x , y) = − ln PY |x (y) + β(1 − 2PY |x (y) +   P2Y |x (y ′ )),
                                                                           y′

with derivative
                   ∂ℓmix (PY |x , y)/∂PY |x (y) = −1/PY |x (y) − 2β + 2βPY |x (y).

Scalar β weights the contribution of the Brier loss, to this additive combination, controlling the
sensitivity of the predictor to underestimation. The adversarial surrogate of this mixture loss is


                                                     6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Fisher consistent as a direct corollary. Methods that solely mix the predictions of classifiers designed
for logarithmic loss minimization and Brier loss optimization, may be appealing for their simplicity,
but are demonstrably sub-optimal. For example, with the logistic loss, logistic regression provides
a natural parametric form for the predictor, that equates loss minimization with data likelihood
maximization.
Although the Brier loss is not local, the additional sum of quadratic terms y′ P2Y |x (y ′ ) is constant
                                                                             P

across all y. Therefore Eq. (6) has a closed form expression in terms of the Lambert W function.
Furthermore, the sum over y for all QY |x (y) will cancel out, leaving terms only dependent on the
same y. So Eq. (5) is simplified into an expression of Q in terms of P. Normalizing Q solves ZP ,
yielding the following proposition:
Proposition 4. The DRO method for a probabilistic loss based on logarithmic loss, and β Brier
loss has a solution P∗Y |X for the predictor parameterized by θ defined by the following systems of
equations:
                                                                                          T
      ∀x ∈ X , ∃C ∈ R, ∀y ∈ Y         P∗Y |x (y) = exp(C + θ T ϕ(x, y) − W0 (2βeC+θ ϕ(x,y) )),          (7)

where C is a constant dependent on θ and x but independent of y, W (·) is the principal branch of
the Lambert W function. The corresponding adversary Q∗Y |X is defined as

                 2βP∗2                 ∗
                                                               1 − y 2βP∗2                    ∗
                                                                  P
                    Y |x (y) + ZPY |x PY |x (y)                            Y |x (y)/(1 + 2β P̂Y |x (y))
  Q∗Y |x (y) =                                    and ZPY |x =                                          .
                       1 + 2βP∗Y |x (y)
                                                                  P ∗                     ∗
                                                                   y PY |x (y)/(1 + 2β P̂Y |x (y))
                                                                                                        (8)

Now we show how to solve Eq. (7)
with simplex constraints to obtain Algorithm 1 Distributionally robust learning for probabilis-
P∗Y |x given θ for any x ∈ X . Let tic supervised learning with a mixture of logistic and Brier
C = fy (t) = θ T ϕ(x, y) − ln t − losses
2βt be a function of t = P∗Y |x (y).     Input: ϕ, Pemp X,Y , β, learning rate γ
                                                      ∗
By definition, f (·) is a monotoni-      Output:    θ
cally decreasing function with do-       Initialize θ to be a random vector
main R++ and range R. Its in-            repeat
verse mapping f −1 (·) is monotoni-         for all x ∈ X do
cally decreasing with domain R and             C, P∗Y |X (·|x) ← Bisection(x, ϕ, θ, β) by (7)
range
P −1               P ∗ let g(C) =
        R++ . Therefore,                       Compute Q∗Y |X (·|x) by Eq. (8)
     f
   y y    (C)   =      P
                     y Y |x (y), accord-    end for
ing to the intermediate value theo-         Compute ∂Ladv /∂θ by (9)
rem, therePexists C ∗ ∈ R such that         θ ← θ − γ∂Ladv /∂θ
g(C ∗ ) = y P∗Y |x (y) = 1. Because      until convergence
of their monotonicity, we can find C ∗
and P∗Y |x (·) as a solution to Equation
7 via bisection method. Once P∗Y |X is obtained, we can find Q∗Y |X simply by substitution. After
that, the sub-gradient,
             ∂Ladv /∂θ ≜ EPemp
                           X
                               (EQ∗Y |X [ϕ(X, Y )] − EPemp [ϕ(X, Y )]) + ∂ε∥θ∥∗ /∂θ,                    (9)
                                                              Y |X


can be leveraged to optimize θ. The above steps are summarized in Algorithm 1.

3.4   D IFFERENTIABLE L EARNING

By taking advantage of deep neural networks, our method will be able to jointly optimize data
representation and the Lagrange multipliers:
                                          min EPemp
                                                X
                                                    Ladv (θ, Pemp
                                                              Ỹ |X
                                                                    ),
                                          θ,ϕ

enjoying the benefits of end-to-end representation learning without manually looking for a good
feature mapping ϕ. More off-the-shelf mini-batch training tools could be leveraged as well.


                                                       7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


We show how to make use of our DRO method as a loss layer in neural network training. A net-
work for supervised learning typically has a linear classification layer in the end without activation.
Assume the penultimate layer outputs ϕ(x), the last layer will output a |Y|-dimensional vector
ψ(x) = [(θ (1) )⊺ ϕ(x), . . . , (θ (|Y|) )⊺ ϕ(x)]. This is essentially equivalent to adopting a multivector
representation to construct ϕ. Specifically, given x ∈ Rd and y ∈ [|Y|], the resulting feature vector
v = ϕ(x, y) ∈ Rd|Y| satisfies vyd−d+i = xi for i ∈ [d] and vj = 0 otherwise. Therefore taking
ψ(x) as the input is sufficient for us to compute P∗Y |x and Q∗Y |x . In this way, our method is the loss
layer without learnable parameters, which backpropagates the sub-derivative of loss with respect to
ψ(x) to the linear classification layer:
                                   EPemp
                                     X
                                         (qY |X − pemp
                                                   Y |X ) ∈ ∂Ladv /∂ψ(x).

Recall q and pemp are the probability vectors for Q and Pemp . The sub-gradient with respect to θ is
added to the classification layer.

4      E XPERIMENTS

In the experiments, we consider as the performance measure the L-risk RPL (h), also called the
expected generalization loss. The mixture loss ℓmix of the log loss and Brier loss is adopted. The
                                 1
normalized generalization loss (1+β) RPLtest (h) is estimated based on the test set distribution Ptest
                                                                                                  X,Y .

We compare our adversarial learning approach against neural network models with the softmax and
the spherical softmax function as the final normalization layer (Laha et al., 2018). All the baseline
methods are able to make use of probabilistic labels in both training and testing. We adopt a three-
layer neural network for all the methods, who share the same number of parameters. To make a
more fair comparison, we set ε = 0 such that the final classification layer is unregularized. The
baselines compute the target loss Lmix based on their probability outputs applied to the logits.
We implement all the methods using PyTorch (Paszke et al., 2019). We use Adam (Kingma & Ba,
2014) for optimization. The number of hidden units is set to 50. The number of training steps
is set to 500 with a batch size of 64. We set β = 1. Default values are used for unmentioned
hyperparameters.
We conduct experiments on several real-world datasets, including corel5k (Duygulu et al., 2002),
flags (Gonçalves et al., 2013), Stackex chess (Charte et al., 2015), GpositivePseAAC
and GnegativePseAAC (Xu et al., 2016), having statistics reported in Table 1. The ground truth
labels in these dataset are either originally probabilistic or converted to a uniform distribution for
multi-label classification datasets. At the beginning of each run, we randomly choose 80% of the
dataset as the training set and the remaining 20% for evaluation. We further take 20% of the training
set as the validation set to determine the best parameter for final testing.


Table 1: Dataset statistics and normalized generalization losses with 95% confidence intervals on
each dataset. The best results are indicated in bold. † indicates statistical significance with paired
t-test (p < 0.05).
    Dataset       corel5k        GnegativePseAAC          flags      GpositivePseAAC     Stackex chess
       n            5000               1392                194              519               1672
      |Y|            374                 8                  7                4                 227
    Features        499                440                 19               440               585
    Softmax      2.738 ± 0.013      0.306 ± 0.011   1.294 ± 0.017      0.329 ± 0.014       2.565 ± 0.031
    Spherical   2.907 ± 0.010†      0.307 ± 0.012    1.324 ± 0.037     0.339 ± 0.016†     2.700 ± 0.043†
      Ours      2.738 ± 0.012      0.306 ± 0.011     1.294 ± 0.017      0.329 ± 0.014     2.555 ± 0.037


We repeat the above process 10 times for each dataset on a laptop with a 2.7 GHz Quad-Core Intel
Core i7 CPU. All the methods take less than 1 minute per run in wall time. The results in Table 1
show that our proposed method either has the best performance or achieves similar performance to
the best method with no statistical significance in most of the adopted datasets.
For sensitivity analysis, we fix a random split of the Stackex chess dataset and vary β with other
settings unchanged. The experiments are repeated 10 times. As shown in Figure 2, the expected loss


                                                      8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                               Softmax                                       Softmax
                 4 × 100                       Spherical                                     Spherical
                                               Ours                              3.0         Ours


                 3 × 100                                                         2.9
 expected loss


                                                                 expected loss
                                                                                 2.8


                 2 × 100


                                                                                 2.7


                                                                                 2.6


                           100                             101                         0.0      0.1      0.2   0.3     0.4     0.5   0.6   0.7   0.8
                                   beta                                                                              p noise

Figure 2: Normalized generalization losses with different coefficients or noise levels. Left: varying
β in [0.1, 10.0]. Right: varying probability of contamination in [0, 0.8]. The X axes of the left
subfigure is in logarithmic scale. Best viewed in color.

of our method on the test set is slightly better than baselines. For better illustration, we cut [0.1, 0.5]
off the x-axis because the softmax and our method are indistinguishable without scaling.
Additionally, we study the robustness of our approach by introducing noise to the training set of the
Stackex chess dataset, repeated 10 times. To this end, for each instance x, with a probability
pnoise , we replace the ground truth by a random distribution from P(Y). We vary pnoise from 0 to
0.8. As seen in Figure 2, our method is slightly better when pnoise < 0.4. All the methods become
vulnerable for large pnoise possibly because of the backbone neural network model.


5                   D ISCUSSION AND C ONCLUSION

We proposed a moment-based distributionally robust learning framework for probabilistic super-
vised learning under mild assumptions, showed its equivalence to dual-norm regularization for a
surrogate loss, presented its out-of-sample guarantees, developed efficient algorithms for typical
continuous proper losses, incorporated the proposed method into differentiable learning and con-
ducted experiments on several real-world datasets. We aimed to shed light on this more general
supervised learning setting (Gressmann et al., 2018) and provide a more expressive way of quanti-
fying prediction uncertainty. A drawback of the proposed method is that solving the saddle-point
problem can be difficult for some complicated losses while neural networks equipped with a soft-
max layer makes use of automatic differentiation to avoid facing this issue. Interesting directions for
future investigation include generalizing the learning framework to conditional density estimation
and considering ambiguity sets defined by higher-order moments.


R EFERENCES
Kaiser Asif, Wei Xing, Sima Behpour, and Brian D Ziebart. Adversarial cost-sensitive classification.
  In UAI, pp. 92–101, 2015.

Abhijit Bendale and Terrance E Boult. Towards open set deep networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE
  conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 1563–1572, 2016.

J Eric Bickel. Some comparisons among quadratic, spherical, and logarithmic scoring rules. Deci-
   sion Analysis, 4(2):49–65, 2007.

Mathieu Blondel, André FT Martins, and Vlad Niculae. Learning with fenchel-young losses. Jour-
 nal of Machine Learning Research, 21(35):1–69, 2020.


                                                           9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Glenn W Brier. Verification of forecasts expressed in terms of probability. Monthly weather review,
  78(1):1–3, 1950.
Lee Chapman. Probabilistic road weather forecasting. In Proceedings of the 16th SIRWEC Confer-
  ence, Helsinki, Finland, May 2012, 2012.
Francisco Charte, Antonio J Rivera, Marı́a J del Jesus, and Francisco Herrera. Quinta: A question
  tagging assistant to improve the answering ratio in electronic forums. In Ieee eurocon 2015-
  international conference on computer as a tool (eurocon), pp. 1–6. IEEE, 2015.
Weiwei Cheng, Eyke Hüllermeier, and Krzysztof J Dembczynski. Bayes optimal multilabel classi-
 fication via probabilistic classifier chains. In Proceedings of the 27th international conference on
 machine learning (ICML-10), pp. 279–286, 2010.
Carlo Ciliberto, Lorenzo Rosasco, and Alessandro Rudi. A consistent regularization approach for
  structured prediction. In Advances in neural information processing systems, pp. 4412–4420,
  2016.
Michael Collins, Robert E Schapire, and Yoram Singer. Logistic regression, adaboost and bregman
 distances. Machine Learning, 48(1-3):253–285, 2002.
Corinna Cortes, Vitaly Kuznetsov, Mehryar Mohri, and Umar Syed. Structural maxent models. In
  International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 391–399. PMLR, 2015.
A Philip Dawid. The geometry of proper scoring rules. Annals of the Institute of Statistical Mathe-
  matics, 59(1):77–93, 2007.
Yann Dubois, Douwe Kiela, David J Schwab, and Ramakrishna Vedantam. Learning optimal repre-
  sentations with the decodable information bottleneck. Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 33:18674–18690, 2020.
John Duchi and Hongseok Namkoong. Variance-based regularization with convex objectives. The
  Journal of Machine Learning Research, 20(1):2450–2504, 2019.
Pinar Duygulu, Kobus Barnard, Joao FG de Freitas, and David A Forsyth. Object recognition as
  machine translation: Learning a lexicon for a fixed image vocabulary. In European conference on
  computer vision, pp. 97–112. Springer, 2002.
Russell L Elsberry. Predicting hurricane landfall precipitation: Optimistic and pessimistic views
  from the symposium on precipitation extremes. Bulletin of the American Meteorological Society,
  83(9):1333–1339, 2002.
Farzan Farnia and David Tse. A minimax approach to supervised learning. In Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, pp. 4240–4248, 2016.
Rizal Fathony, Anqi Liu, Kaiser Asif, and Brian Ziebart. Adversarial multiclass classification: A risk
  minimization perspective. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pp. 559–567,
  2016.
Rizal Fathony, Sima Behpour, Xinhua Zhang, and Brian Ziebart. Efficient and consistent adversarial
  bipartite matching. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 1457–1466, 2018a.
Rizal Fathony, Ashkan Rezaei, Mohammad Ali Bashiri, Xinhua Zhang, and Brian Ziebart. Dis-
  tributionally robust graphical models. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 31,
  2018b.
Jerome Friedman, Trevor Hastie, and Robert Tibshirani. Additive logistic regression: a statistical
   view of boosting (with discussion and a rejoinder by the authors). The annals of statistics, 28(2):
   337–407, 2000.
Jochen Gast and Stefan Roth. Lightweight probabilistic deep networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE
  Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 3369–3378, 2018.
Andrew Gelman, Jessica Hwang, and Aki Vehtari. Understanding predictive information criteria for
  bayesian models. Statistics and computing, 24(6):997–1016, 2014.


                                                 10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Xin Geng. Label distribution learning. IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering, 28
  (7):1734–1748, 2016.
Tilmann Gneiting and Adrian E Raftery. Strictly proper scoring rules, prediction, and estimation.
   Journal of the American statistical Association, 102(477):359–378, 2007.
Eduardo Corrêa Gonçalves, Alexandre Plastino, and Alex A Freitas. A genetic algorithm for opti-
  mizing the label ordering in multi-label classifier chains. In 2013 IEEE 25th International Con-
  ference on Tools with Artificial Intelligence, pp. 469–476. IEEE, 2013.
IJ Good. Rational decisions. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society. Series B (Methodological), 14
   (1):107–114, 1952.
Frithjof Gressmann, Franz J Király, Bilal Mateen, and Harald Oberhauser. Probabilistic supervised
  learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1801.00753, 2018.
Peter D Grünwald, A Philip Dawid, et al. Game theory, maximum entropy, minimum discrepancy
  and robust bayesian decision theory. the Annals of Statistics, 32(4):1367–1433, 2004.
Chuan Guo, Geoff Pleiss, Yu Sun, and Kilian Q Weinberger. On calibration of modern neural
  networks. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 1321–1330. PMLR, 2017.
Taejong Joo, Uijung Chung, and Min-Gwan Seo. Being bayesian about categorical probability. In
  International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 4950–4961. PMLR, 2020.
Diederik P Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1412.6980, 2014.
Anirban Laha, Saneem Ahmed Chemmengath, Priyanka Agrawal, Mitesh Khapra, Karthik Sankara-
  narayanan, and Harish G Ramaswamy. On controllable sparse alternatives to softmax. Advances
  in neural information processing systems, 31, 2018.
Leonard Leibovici, Michal Fishman, Henrik C Schonheyder, Christian Riekehr, Brian Kristensen,
  Ilana Shraga, and Steen Andreassen. A causal probabilistic network for optimal treatment of
  bacterial infections. IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering, 12(4):517–528,
  2000.
Yeshu Li, Danyal Saeed, Xinhua Zhang, Brian Ziebart, and Kevin Gimpel. Moment distributionally
  robust tree structured prediction. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35, 2022.
Shengfei Lyu, Xing Tian, Yang Li, Bingbing Jiang, and Huanhuan Chen. Multiclass probabilistic
  classification vector machine. IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning Systems,
  2019.
Hamed Masnadi-Shirazi and Nuno Vasconcelos. On the design of loss functions for classification:
  theory, robustness to outliers, and savageboost. In Advances in neural information processing
  systems, pp. 1049–1056, 2009.
Santiago Mazuelas, Andrea Zanoni, and Aritz Pérez. Minimax classification with 0-1 loss and
  performance guarantees. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:302–312, 2020.
Santiago Mazuelas, Yuan Shen, and Aritz Pérez. Generalized maximum entropy for supervised
  classification. IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, 2022.
John Ashworth Nelder and Robert WM Wedderburn. Generalized linear models. Journal of the
  Royal Statistical Society: Series A (General), 135(3):370–384, 1972.
Alex Nowak, Francis Bach, and Alessandro Rudi. Consistent structured prediction with max-min
  margin markov networks. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 7381–7391.
  PMLR, 2020.
Harris Papadopoulos. Reliable probabilistic classification with neural networks. Neurocomputing,
  107:59–68, 2013.


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Adam Paszke, Sam Gross, Francisco Massa, Adam Lerer, James Bradbury, Gregory Chanan, Trevor
  Killeen, Zeming Lin, Natalia Gimelshein, Luca Antiga, et al. Pytorch: An imperative style,
  high-performance deep learning library. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 32:
  8026–8037, 2019.
Mark D Reid and Robert C Williamson. Information, divergence and risk for binary experiments.
 The Journal of Machine Learning Research, 12:731–817, 2011.
Soroosh Shafieezadeh-Abadeh, Daniel Kuhn, and Peyman Mohajerin Esfahani. Regularization via
  mass transportation. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 20(103):1–68, 2019.
Shai Shalev-Shwartz and Shai Ben-David. Understanding machine learning: From theory to algo-
  rithms. Cambridge university press, 2014.
Maurice Sion. On general minimax theorems. Pacific Journal of mathematics, 8(1):171–176, 1958.
Masashi Sugiyama, Ichiro Takeuchi, Taiji Suzuki, Takafumi Kanamori, Hirotaka Hachiya, and
 Daisuke Okanohara. Conditional density estimation via least-squares density ratio estimation.
 In Proceedings of the Thirteenth International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statis-
 tics, pp. 781–788, 2010.
Ambuj Tewari and Peter L Bartlett. On the consistency of multiclass classification methods. Journal
 of Machine Learning Research, 8(May):1007–1025, 2007.
Xin Wang, Hao Helen Zhang, and Yichao Wu. Multiclass probability estimation with support vector
  machines. Journal of Computational and Graphical Statistics, 28(3):586–595, 2019.
Jason Weston and Chris Watkins. Multi-class support vector machines. Technical report, Citeseer,
  1998.
Wolfram Wiesemann, Daniel Kuhn, and Melvyn Sim. Distributionally robust convex optimization.
 Operations Research, 62(6):1358–1376, 2014.
Robert C Williamson, Elodie Vernet, and Mark D Reid. Composite multiclass losses. Journal of
  Machine Learning Research, 17:1–52, 2016.
Jianhua Xu, Jiali Liu, Jing Yin, and Chengyu Sun. A multi-label feature extraction algorithm via
   maximizing feature variance and feature-label dependence simultaneously. Knowledge-Based
   Systems, 98:172–184, 2016.
Shuhei M Yoshida, Takashi Takenouchi, and Masashi Sugiyama. Lower-bounded proper losses for
  weakly supervised classification. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 12110–
  12120. PMLR, 2021.
Mingyuan Zhang, Jane Lee, and Shivani Agarwal. Learning from noisy labels with no change to the
 training process. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 12468–12478. PMLR,
 2021.
Hui Zou, Ji Zhu, and Trevor Hastie. New multicategory boosting algorithms based on multicategory
  fisher-consistent losses. The Annals of Applied Statistics, 2(4):1290, 2008.


A    T ECHNICAL P ROOFS
Proposition 1. The distributionally robust probabilistic supervised learning problem based on mo-
ment divergence in Eq. (2) can be rewritten as
              min max L PY |X , QY |X + θ ⊺ (EQY̌ |X ϕ(X, Y̌ ) − EPemp ϕ(X, Ỹ )) + ε∥θ∥∗ ,

    min EPemp
           X
      θ         P   Q                                                 Ỹ |X
              |                                      {z                                    }
                                                Ladv (θ,Pemp )
                                                        Ỹ |X


where θ ∈ RD is the vector of Lagrangian multipliers and ∥·∥∗ is the dual norm of ∥·∥.


                                                12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Proof. Recall the primal problem

                                        min             maxemp EQX L PY |X , QY |X ,
                                     PY |X ∈P(Y) Q∈A(P        )

where A(Pemp ) := {Q : Q ∈ P(X × Y) ∧ Pemp
                                       X = QX ∧ ∥EPemp [ϕ(·, ·)] − EQ [ϕ(·, ·)]∥ ≤ ε}.
                                                                          emp
Note the feature function ϕ(·) is fixed and given. The constraint sets P(Y) and A(P ) are convex.
The objective function L(P, Q) is quasi-convex in P by (Williamson et al., 2016) and concave in Q
because it is affine in Q. Therefore strong duality holds by Sion’s minimax theorem (Sion, 1958):

                              maxemp     min EQX L PY |X , QY |X .
                                     Q∈A(P     ) PY |X ∈P(Y)


Let C(u) := {u : ∥u − EPemp ϕ(·)∥ ≤ ε}. Rewrite the problem with this constraint:

                             sup min EPemp
                                        X
                                             L PY |X , QY |X − IC (u)
                                         Q,u        P

                                 s.t. u = EPemp
                                            X QY̌ |X
                                                     ϕ(X, Y̌ ),
where IC (·) is the indicator function with IC (x) = 0 if x ∈ C and +∞ otherwise. The simplex
constraints of P and Q are omitted.
The dual problem by relaxing the equality constraint is
                             L PY |X , QY |X − IC (u) + θ ⊺ EPemp      ϕ(X, Y̌ ) − θ ⊺ u,

         sup min min EPemp
                        X                                     X QY̌ |X
           Q,u   θ       P

where θ is the vector of Lagrange multipliers.
Given X = x, optimization of QY̌ |x and PŶ |x can be done independently. Again by strong duality,
we can rearrange the terms:
                  min max L PY |X , QY |X + θ ⊺ EQY̌ |X ϕ(X, Y̌ ) + sup −IC (u) − θ ⊺ u.

        min EPemp
               X
           θ             P       Q                                                    u

The associated dual norm ∥·∥∗ of the norm ∥·∥ is defined as
                                              ∥z∥∗ := sup{z ⊺ x : ∥x∥ ≤ 1},
based on which we are able to simplify the optimization over u as
  sup −IC (u) − θ ⊺ u = sup −θ ⊺ u = sup −θ ⊺ (EPemp ϕ(·) − εe) = −θ ⊺ EPemp ϕ(·) + ε∥θ∥∗ .
   u                             u∈C                    e:∥e∥≤1


Plugging it back to the dual problem, we have
               min max L PY |X , QY |X + θ ⊺ (EQY̌ |X ϕ(X, Y̌ ) − EPemp ϕ(X, Ỹ )) + ε∥θ∥∗ .

    min EPemp
            X
       θ             P       Q                                                       Ỹ |X


Corollary 2. When ε = 0, Ladv is Fisher consistent with respect to L. Namely, for any x,
                                                θ∗                       true
                                                 |x ∈ arg min L(PY |x , PY |x )
                                              PYtrue
                                                             PY |x
                                                       ∗
is the Bayes optimal probabilistic prediction made by θtrue , the solution in Eq. (3) under Ptrue .

Proof. Our setting differs from Nowak et al. (2020) in the fact that we use a distribution as the
ground truth. By defining y ∗ (µ) as the gold standard probabilistic prediction and Y as the set of all
possible probabilistic predictions in Proposition C.2 in Nowak et al. (2020), we have
                                         θ∗
                                        PŶtrue
                                            |x
                                                ∈ Conv(arg min L(PY |x , Ptrue
                                                                          Y |x )).
                                                                  PŶ |x

Because L is assumed continuous proper, any convex combination of minimizers is also a minimizer.
Therefore,
                                               θ∗
                                              PŶtrue
                                                  |x
                                                      ∈ arg min L(PY |x , Ptrue
                                                                           Y |x ).
                                                             PŶ |x


                                                                  13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Theorem 3. Given n samples, a non-negative multiclass probabilistic loss L(·, ·) such that
|L(·, ·)| ≤ K, a feature function ϕ(·, ·) such that ∥ϕ(·, ·)∥ ≤ B and a positive ambiguity level
ε > 0, then, for any 0 < δ ≤ 1, with a probability at least 1 − δ, the following excess true worst-
case risk bound holds:
                                                                         r          !
                         L ∗                  L ∗         4KB          3    ln(4/δ)
               max RQ     (θemp ) − maxtrue RQ  (θtrue ) ≤ √      1+                  ,
             Q∈A(Ptrue )           Q∈A(P )                 ε n         2       2
        ∗        ∗
where θemp and θtrue are the optimal parameters learned in Eq. (3) under the empirical distribu-
      emp                                                                                L
tion P    and true distribution Ptrue , respectively. The original risk of θ under Q is RQ (θ) :=
                                                    θ

EQX,Y ,Pθ L(PY |X , QY |X ) with prediction PY |X ∈ arg minP maxQ L PY |X , QY |X +
          Y |X

EQY̌ |X θ ⊺ ϕ(X, Y̌ ).

Proof. Define the adversarial surrogate risk of θ with respect to P̃ as
 RP̃S (θ) := EP̃X min max L PY |X , QY |X + θ ⊺ (EQY̌ |X ϕ(X, Y̌ ) − EP̃

                                                                                        ϕ(X, Ỹ )) + ε∥θ∥∗ .
                          P    Q                                                Ỹ |X



      ∗                               ∗
Let θtrue ∈ arg minθ RPStrue (θ) and θemp ∈ arg minθ RPSemp (θ) be the optimal parameters learned with
 true        emp
PX,Y and PX,Y respectively.
Given x, define the decoded prediction by θ as
                         PθY |x ∈ arg min max L PY |X , QY |X + θ ⊺ EQY̌ |X ϕ(X, Y̌ ).

                                         P   Q

Let the original risk of loss L under some distribution Q be

                                    L
                                  RQ  (θ) := EQX L PθY |X , QY |X .

According to Proposition 1, for any fixed P, we have similarly

 maxemp EQX L PθY |X , QY |X ≜ min EPemp                               + θ ⊺ (EQY̌ |X ϕ(X, Y̌ ) − EPemp ϕ(X, Ỹ )) + ε∥θ∥∗ .

                                           X
                                              max L   PY |X , Q Y |X
Q∈A(P     )                                  θ       Q                                                      Ỹ |X


                                               ∗         ∗
We start by looking at the worst-case risk of θtrue and θemp .
                   L ∗
              max RQ (θemp )
        Q∈A(Ptrue )
                            θ∗
     = min EPtrue
              X
                  max  L    P Y
                               emp
                                |X  , Q Y |X   + θ ⊺ (EQY̌ |X ϕ(X, Y̌ ) − EPtrue
                                                                             Y |X
                                                                                  ϕ(X, Y )) + ε∥θ∥∗
        θ          Q
                      θ∗
                        emp                   ∗                                                 ∗
     ≤EPtrue
         X
             max  L   PY |X , Q  Y |X    + θemp  · (EQY̌ |X ϕ(X, Y̌ ) − EPtrue
                                                                           Y |X
                                                                                 ϕ(X, Y )) + ε∥θemp ∥∗ ,
                 Q
                                            ∗                                                ∗
where the last inequality holds because θemp  is not necessarily a minimizer. Similarly for θtrue ,
                                      ∗
           L ∗                        θ                  ∗                                              ∗
 maxtrue RQ  (θtrue ) ≤ EPtrue
                          X             |X , QY |X + θtrue · (EQY̌ |X ϕ(X, Y̌ ) − EPY |X ϕ(X, Y )) + ε∥θtrue ∥∗ .
                               max L PYtrue                                         true
Q∈A(P     )                          Q


On the other hand,
                     ∗
                      θtrue                ∗                                                      ∗
     EPtrue
        X
            max  L   PY |X  , Q  Y |X   + θtrue · (EQY̌ |X ϕ(X, Y̌ ) − EPtrue
                                                                         Y |X
                                                                                  ϕ(X, Y )) + ε∥θtrue ∥∗
             Q

                 min max L PY |X , QY |X + θ ⊺ (EQY̌ |X ϕ(X, Y̌ ) − EPtrue

   = min EPtrueX                                                                   Y |X
                                                                                        ϕ(X, Y )) + ε∥θ∥∗
       θ          P    Q

                      max L PY |X , QY |X + θ ⊺ (EQY̌ |X ϕ(X, Y̌ ) − EPtrue

   = min min EPtrueX                                                               Y |X
                                                                                        ϕ(X, Y )) + ε∥θ∥∗
       P     θ         Q
                           ∗
                              θ                   ⊺
   ≤ min EPtrueX
                 max L PYtrue   |X , QY |X + θ (EQY̌ |X ϕ(X, Y̌ ) − EPY |X ϕ(X, Y )) + ε∥θ∥∗
                                                                             true
         θ              Q
                       L ∗
    =     max         RQ (θtrue ),
        Q∈A(Ptrue )



                                                      14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                    ∗
where the first equality holds according to the definition of θtrue    . The above two inequalities imply
the equality:
                                        ∗
            L ∗                         θtrue               ∗                                                 ∗
  maxtrue RQ  (θtrue ) = EPtrue
                           X
                                max L  PY |X  , Q Y |X   + θtrue · (EQY̌ |X ϕ(X, Y̌ ) − EPtrue
                                                                                          Y |X
                                                                                               ϕ(X, Y )) + ε∥θtrue ∥∗ .
Q∈A(P       )                        Q


Therefore,
                L ∗                      L ∗
         max   RQ (θemp ) − maxtrue RQ     (θtrue )
      Q∈A(Ptrue )              Q∈A(P )
                    ∗
                     θ                   ∗                                                    ∗
   ≤(EPtrue
        X              |X , QY |X + θemp · (EQY̌ |X ϕ(X, Y̌ ) − EPY |X ϕ(X, Y )) + ε∥θemp ∥∗ )
            max L PYtrue                                               true
             Q
                       ∗
                         θtrue              ∗                                                   ∗
     − (EPtrue
            X
               max L   P Y |X   , QY |X + θtrue · (EQY̌ |X ϕ(X, Y̌ ) − EPtrue
                                                                            Y |X
                                                                                 ϕ(X, Y )) + ε∥θtrue ∥∗ ).
                    Q
                                                                                                                  (10)

The main idea is thus to use uniform convergence bound. Firstly, by substituting Q = Ptrue , note
that

min max L PY |X , QY |X + θ ⊺ (EQY̌ |X ϕ(X, Y̌ ) − EPtrue                                true

                                                     Y |X
                                                          ϕ(X, Y )) ≥ min  L   P Y |X , PY  |X   ≥ 0.
 P      Q                                                                                   P

                                                               ∗        ∗
We can get an upper bound of the norm of any optimal solution θtrue or θemp as follows:

            ∗                   ∗                                                      ∗        K
                 ∥∗ ≤ RPStrue (θtrue ) ≤ RPStrue (0) ≤ EPtrue

     0 + ε∥θtrue                                              L PY |X , QY |X ≤ K =⇒ ∥θtrue ∥∗ ≤ .
                                                         X
                                                                                                ε

Let ψ(X, Y ) := θ ⊺ ϕ(X, Y ) and ψx := (ψ(x, Y ))Y ∈Y . Define

      f (θ, P̃) := EP̃X min max L PY |X , QY |X + θ ⊺ (EQY̌ |X ϕ(X, Y̌ ) − EP̃

                                                                                       ϕ(X, Ỹ ))
                         P   Q                                                   Ỹ |X

                ≜ EP̃X max L PθY |X , QY |X + θ ⊺ (EQY̌ |X ϕ(X, Y̌ ) − EP̃       ϕ(X, Ỹ ))
                        Q                                                  Ỹ |X

                ≜ EP̃X max L PθY |X , QY |X + (EQY̌ |X ψ(X, Y̌ ) − EP̃       ψ(X, Ỹ ))
                              Q                                                       Ỹ |X


                    ≜ g(ψ, P̃).

Let qx ∈ ∆ be the probability vector of QY̌ |x and eY be the standard basis vector with Y -th entry
equal to 1. We have that for any (x, Y ),
 ∂                                                  ∂
    g(ψ, δ(x,Y ) ) ⊆ Conv({qx − eY : qx ∈ ∆}) =⇒ ∥     g(ψ, δ(x,Y ) )∥1 ≤ max ∥qx − eY ∥1 ≤ 2,
∂ψx                                                ∂ψx                    qx ∈∆

where δ(x,Y ) is the Dirac point measure. g(ψ, P̃) is therefore 2-Lipschitz with respect to the ℓ1
norm. As per the assumption, ∥ϕ(·, ·)∥ ≤ B. This further implies that
                                                4KB                                                      K
f (θ1 , δ(x1 ,Y1 ) ) − f (θ2 , δ(x2 ,Y2 ) ) ≤         ∀θ1 , θ2 , x1 , x2 , Y1 , Y2   s.t.     ∥θi ∥∗ ≤       ∀i = 1, 2.
                                                 ε                                                       ε

We then follow the proof of Theorem 3 in Farnia & Tse (2016). According to Theorem 26.12 in
Shalev-Shwartz & Ben-David (2014), by uniform convergence, for any δ ∈ (0, 2], with a probability
at least 1 − 2δ ,
                                                              r          !
                      ∗      true     ∗      emp 4KB             ln(4/δ)
                  f (θemp , P ) − f (θemp , P ) ≤ √      1+                .
                                                  ε n               2

                                ∗
According to the definition of θtrue , the following inequality holds:
                            ∗                 ∗            ∗                  ∗
                        f (θemp , Pemp ) + ε∥θemp ∥∗ − f (θtrue , Pemp ) − ε∥θtrue ∥∗ ≤ 0.


                                                          15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


       ∗
Since θtrue do not depend on samples, according to the Hoeffding’s inequality, with a probability
1 − δ/2,
                                                              r
                            ∗       emp      ∗       true 2KB ln(4/δ)
                        f (θtrue , P ) − f (θtrue , P ) ≤ √            .
                                                          ε n      2

Applying the union bound to the above three inequations, with a probability 1 − δ, we have
                                                                               r        !
          ∗     true     ∗            ∗      true     ∗        4KB           3 ln(4/δ)
     f (θemp , P ) + ε∥θemp ∥∗ − f (θtrue , P ) − ε∥θtrue ∥∗ ≤ √       1+                  .
                                                                ε n          2      2

As stated by Inequation (10), we conclude with the following excess risk bound:
                                                                        r       !
                         L ∗                 L ∗         4KB          3 ln(4/δ)
               max RQ (θemp ) − maxtrue RQ (θtrue ) ≤ √          1+               .
             Q∈A(Ptrue )           Q∈A(P )               ε n          2      2


Proposition 4. The DRO method for a probabilistic loss based on logarithmic loss, and β Brier
loss has a solution P∗Y |X for the predictor parameterized by θ defined by the following systems of
equations:
                                                                                      T
      ∀x ∈ X , ∃C ∈ R, ∀y ∈ Y        P∗Y |x (y) = exp(C + θ T ϕ(x, y) − W0 (2βeC+θ ϕ(x,y) )),
where C is a constant dependent on θ and x but independent of y, W (·) is the principal branch of
the Lambert W function. The corresponding adversary Q∗Y |X is defined as

              2βP∗2                  ∗
                                                             1 − y 2βP∗2                     ∗
                                                                P
    ∗             Y |x (y) + ZPY |x PY |x (y)                             Y |x (y)/(1 + 2β P̂Y |x (y))
  QY |x (y) =                                 and Z P      =                                           .
                     1 + 2βP∗Y |x (y)                 Y |x           ∗                   ∗
                                                                P
                                                                  y PY |x (y)/(1 + 2β P̂Y |x (y))


Proof. Recall the saddle-point optimality condition:
                            X
                                QY (y)∂ℓ(PY , y)/∂PY (y ′ ) + ZPY = 0
                               y

                              ℓ(PY , y) + θ ⊺ ϕ(x, y) + ZQY = 0.
Dependence on x is omitted when context is clear. Substituting ℓmix yields:
                           1
              QY (y)(−         − 2β) + 2βPY (y) + ZPY = 0
                        PY (y)
                                             X
               − ln PY (y) + β(1 − 2PY (y) +    P2Y (y ′ )) + θ ⊺ ϕ(x, y) + ZQY = 0.
                                                 y′

Note that C := β + β y′ P2Y (y ′ ) + ZQY is constant across all y’s given θ, x. Thus for fixed θ, x,
                     P
                   ∗
we have for some Cθ,x ,
                          ∗
                         Cθ,x + θ · ϕ(x, y) = ln PY (y) + 2βPY (y) ∀y ∈ Y,
which is equivalent to
                                                                     ∗
                               2βPY (y)e2βPY (y) = 2βeθ·ϕ(x,y)+Cθ,x .
By the definition of the Lambert W function,
                                                                 ∗
                                   2βPY (y) = W (2βeθ·ϕ(x,y)+Cθ,x ).
                     ∗
Since 2βeθ·ϕ(x,y)+Cθ,x ≥ 0, the principal branch W0 of the Lamber W function is always applica-
ble. Also by the formula e−W (x) = Wx(x) , we have
                                                                 ∗       T
                              ∗
                PY (y) = exp(Cθ,x + θ T ϕ(x, y) − W0 (2βeCθ,x +θ ϕ(x,y) )) ∀y.


                                                  16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Let P∗Y (for a given θ) be a solution to this set of equations that also satisfies                ∗
                                                                                            P
                                                                                               y PY (y) = 1. By
Eq. (5), the optimal Q satisfies
                                    2βP∗Y (y) + ZPY   2βP∗2             ∗
                                                         Y (y) + ZPY PY (y)
                      Q∗Y (y) =          1          =                       .
                                      P∗ (y) + 2β
                                                          1 + 2βP∗Y (y)
                                          Y


ZPY must be chosen to properly normalize Q∗Y (y):
                X                   X              1         X          2βP∗Y (y)
                    Q∗Y (y) = ZPY             1            +          1            =1
                 y                    y P∗    (y) + α + 2β    y   P ∗ (y) + α + 2β
                                            Y                       Y
                            P       2βP∗Y (y)                     ∗2
                        1 − y 1 +α+2β                   P     2βP Y (y)
                                                     1 − y 1+(α+2β)P    ∗ (y)
                 ∗               P∗ (y)
           =⇒ ZPY = P             Y
                                     1            = P        P∗ (y)
                                                                        Y
                                                                              .
                                       1                      Y
                                y          +α+2β                 y 1+(α+2β)P∗
                                    P∗ (y)
                                     Y                                      Y (y)

Both ZP∗Y and Q∗Y (y) are positive because P∗Y      ∈ P(Y) is a solution.

B    M ORE L OSSES
The discrete ranked probability vector assumes an ordering relationship in Y, i.e., Y :=
{1, 2, . . . , |Y|}. The score can be written as
                                             |Y| i
                                             X    X
                             ℓrp (PY , y) :=    [   PY (j) − I(i ≥ y)]2 .
                                                i=1 j=1

The mixture loss of the log loss, Brier loss and ranked probability loss can be written as
                                                                                  |Y| i
                                                          X                       X   X
    ℓmix (PY , y) = − ln PY (y) + β(1 − 2PY (y) +               P2Y (y ′ )) + α      [  PY (j) − I(i ≥ y)]2 .
                                                           y′                     i=1 j=1

Substituting the loss into Eq. (6) yields
                                        |Y| i                                     |Y|
             1                          X   X                                    X
QY (y)(−          − 2β) + 2βPY (y) + 2α         PY (j) + ZPY − 2α(|Y| − y + 1 −       (i − y)QY (i)) = 0
           PY (y)                       i=y j=1                                 i=y+1
                                                                                                            (11)
                                    X
− ln PY (y) + β(1 − 2PY (y) +             P2Y (y ′ )) + θ ⊺ ϕ(x, y) + ZQY
                                     y′
                     i|Y|          |Y| i            y−1 i
                  XX               X  X             XX
                              2
+ α(|Y| − y + 1 +  [   PY (j)] − 2       PY (j) + 2       PY (j)) = 0.                                      (12)
                     i=1 j=1                   i=1 j=1                  i=1 j=1
           P|Y| Pi                  P|Y| Pi
Notice that i=1 [ j=1 PY (j)]2 −2 i=1 j=1 PY (j) is constant across all y. By absorbing them
into constant C, we also observe that the equation for y only depends on PY (y ′ ) for y ′ < y in the
      Py−1 Pi
term i=1 j=1 PY (j). Therefore, P∗Y (y) can be found in increasing order of y from 1 to |Y|.
Given P∗Y , consider Eq. (11) in matrix form:
  −1/PY (1) − 2β             2α           4α        ...       2(|Y| − 1)α               1        QY (1)      C1
                                                                                                             
         0           −1/PY (2) − 2β 2α             ...       2(|Y| − 2)α               1   QY (2)   C2 
         ...                 ...          ...       ...           ...                  . . .  . . .  =  . . . 
                                                                                                             

         0                   0            0        ...     −1/PY (|Y|) − 2β            1     QY (|Y|)   C|Y| 
          1                   1            1        ...            1                    0         ZPY         1.
This is not an unreduced Hessenberg matrix. However, notice that as ZPY increases, QY (|Y|) also
increases by the penultimate equation. This in turn increases QY (|Y|−1) according to the third from
last equation. Therefore, the solution Q∗Y without the simplex constraint increases monotonically
as ZPY increases. We can use bisection method again to find the Q∗Y that also satisfies the simplex
constraint.


                                                      17
