P USHING THE ACCURACY-G ROUP ROBUSTNESS F RON -
TIER WITH I NTROSPECTIVE S ELF - PLAY

 Jeremiah Zhe Liu, Krishnamurthy Dj Dvijotham, Jihyeon Lee, Quan Yuan,
 Balaji Lakshminarayanan∗ , Deepak Ramachandran∗
 Google Research
 {jereliu,dvij,jihyeonlee,yquan, balajiln,ramachandrand}@google.com

                                                        A BSTRACT

                Standard empirical risk minimization (ERM) training can produce deep neural
                network (DNN) models that are accurate on average but underperform in under-
                represented population subgroups, especially when there are imbalanced group
                distributions in the long-tailed training data. Therefore, approaches that improve
                the accuracy - group robustness tradeoff frontier of a DNN model (i.e. improving
                worst-group accuracy without sacrificing average accuracy, or vice versa) is of
                crucial importance. Uncertainty-based active learning (AL) can potentially im-
                prove the frontier by preferentially sampling underrepresented subgroups to create
                a more balanced training dataset. However, the quality of uncertainty estimates
                from modern DNNs tend to degrade in the presence of spurious correlations and
                dataset bias, compromising the effectiveness of AL for sampling tail groups. In this
                work, we propose Introspective Self-play (I SP), a simple approach to improve the
                uncertainty estimation of a deep neural network under dataset bias, by adding an
                auxiliary introspection task requiring a model to predict the bias for each data point
                in addition to the label. We show that I SP provably improves the bias-awareness
                of the model representation and the resulting uncertainty estimates. On two real-
                world tabular and language tasks, I SP serves as a simple “plug-in” for AL model
                training, consistently improving both the tail-group sampling rate and the final
                accuracy-fairness trade-off frontier of popular AL methods.

1         I NTRODUCTION
Modern deep neural network (DNN) models are commonly trained on
large-scale datasets (Deng et al., 2009; Raffel et al., 2020). These datasets
often exhibit an imbalanced long-tail distribution with many small popu-
lation subgroups, reflecting the nature of the physical and social processes
generating the data distribution (Zhu et al., 2014; Feldman & Zhang,
2020). This imbalance in training data distribution, i.e., dataset bias,
prevents deep neural network (DNN) models from generalizing equitably                       Figure 1: Example of accuracy-
to the underrepresented population groups (Hasnain-Wynia et al., 2007).                     fairness frontier. Under a more bal-
                                                                                            anced training data distribution, the
Accuracy-Group Robustness Frontier: In response, the existing bias                          model can attain a better accuracy-
                                                                                            fairness frontier (Red) when com-
mitigation literature has focused on improving training procedures under a                  pared to training under an imbal-
fixed and imbalanced training dataset, striving to balance performance be-                  anced distribution (Blue) at every
tween model accuracy and fairness (e.g., the average-case v.s. worst-group                  tradeoff level λ (Equation (1)).
performance) (Agarwal et al., 2018; Martinez et al., 2020; 2021). Formally, this goal corresponds to
identifying an optimal model f ∈ F that attains the Pareto efficiency frontier of the accuracy-group
robustness trade-off (e.g., see Figure 1), so that under the same training data D = {yi , xi }ni=1 , we
cannot find another model f 0 ∈ F that outperforms f in both accuracy and worst-group performance.
In the literature, this accuracy-group robustness frontier is often characterized by a trade-off objective
(Martinez et al., 2021):
                             fλ = arg min Fλ ( f |D);   Fλ ( f |D) := Racc ( f |D) + λ Rrobust ( f |D),                     (1)
                                    f ∈F
where Racc and Rrobust are risk functions for a model’s accuracy and group robustness (modeled
here-in as worst-group accuracy), and λ > 0 a trade-off parameter. Then, fλ cannot be outperformed
by any other f 0 at the same trade-off level λ . The entire frontier under a dataset D can then be

    ∗
        Co-senior authors.



                                                              1
characterized by finding fλ that minimizes the robustness-accuracy objective (1) at every trade-off
level λ , and tracing out its (Racc , Rrobust ) performances (Figure 1).
Goal: However, the limited size of the tail-group examples restricts the DNN model’s worst-group
performance, leading to a compromised accuracy-group robustness frontier (Zhao & Gordon, 2019;
Dutta et al., 2020), and thus we ask: Under a fixed learning algorithm, can we meaningfully push
the model’s accuracy-group robustness frontier by improving the training data distribution using
active learning? That is, denoting by Dα,n = {(yi , xi )}ni=1 a training dataset with K subgroups and
the group size distribution α = [α1 , . . . , αK ], we study whether a model’s accuracy-group robustness
performance Fλ can be improved by rebalancing the group distribution of the training data Dα,n , i.e.,
we seek to optimize an outer problem:               h               i
                                     minimize min Fλ ( f |Dα,n ) ,                                   (2)
                                       α∈∆|G |   f ∈F

where ∆K is the simplex of all possible group distributions (Rolf et al., 2021). Our key observation
is that given a sampling model with well-calibrated uncertainty (i.e., the model uncertainty is
well-correlated with generalization error), active learning (AL) can preferentially acquire tail-group
examples from unlabelled data without needing group annotations, and add them to the training data
to reach a more balanced data distribution (Branchaud-Charron et al., 2021). Appendix A.5 discusses
the connection between group robustness with fairness.
Challenges with DNN Uncertainty under Bias: However, recent work suggests that a DNN model’s
uncertainty estimate is less trustworthy under spurious correlations and distributional shift, potentially
compromising the AL performance under dataset bias. For example, Ovadia et al. (2019) show
that a DNN’s expected calibration error increases as the testing data distribution deviates from the
training data distribution, and Ming et al. (2022) show that a DNN’s ability in detecting out-of-
distribution examples is significantly hampered by spurious patterns. Looking deeper, Liu et al.
(2022); Van Amersfoort et al. (2020) suggest that this failure mode in DNN uncertainty can be caused
by an issue in representation learning known as feature collapse, where the DNN over-focuses on
correlational features that help to distinguish between output classes on the training data, but ignore
the non-predictive but semantically meaningful input features that are important for uncertainty
quantification (Figure 2). In this work, we show that this failure mode can be provably mitigated by a
training procedure we term introspective training (Section 2). Briefly, introspective training adds
an auxiliary introspection task to model training, asking the model to predict whether an example
belongs to an underrepresented group. It comes with a guarantee in injecting bias-awareness into
model representation (Proposition 1), encouraging it to learn diverse hidden features that distinguish
the minority-group examples from the majority, even if these features are not correlated with the
training labels. Hence it can serve as a simple “plug-in” to the training procedure of any active
learning method, leading to improved uncertainty quality for tail groups (Figure 2).
Contributions: In summary, our contributions are:
• We introduce Introspective Self-play (I SP), a simple training approach to improve a DNN model’s
  uncertainty quality for underrepresented groups (Section 2). Using group annotations from the
  training data, I SP conducts introspective training to provably improve a DNN’s representation
  and uncertainty quality for the tail groups. When group annotations are not available, I SP can
  be combined with a cross-validation-based self-play procedure that uses a noise-bias-variance
  decomposition of the model’s generalization error (Domingos, 2000).
• Theoretical Analysis. We theoretically analyze the optimization problem in Equation (2) under a
  group-specific learning rate model (Rolf et al., 2021) (Section 3). Our result elucidates the depen-
  dence of the group distribution α in the model’s best-attainable accuracy-group robustness frontier
  Fλ . In particular, it confirms the theoretical necessity of up-sampling the underrepresented groups
  for obtaining the optimal accuracy-group robustness frontier, and reveals that underrepresentation
  is in fact caused by an interplay of the subgroup’s learning difficulty and its prevalence in the
  population.
• Empirical Effectiveness. Under two challenging real-world tasks (census income prediction
  and toxic comment detection), we empirically validate the effectiveness of I SP in improving the
  performance of AL with a DNN model under dataset bias (Section 4). For both classic and state-
  of-the-art uncertainty-based AL methods, ISP improves tail-group sampling rate, meaningfully
  pushing the accuracy-group robustness frontier of the final model.
Appendix D surveys related work.


                                                    2
Notation and Problem Setup. We consider a dataset D where each labeled example {xi , yi } is
associated with a discrete group label gi ∈ G = {1, . . . , |G |}. We denote D = P(y, x, g) the joint
distribution of the label, feature and groups, so that D can be understood as a size-n set of i.i.d.
samples from D We denote the prevalence of each group as γg = E(y,x,g)∼D (1G=g ) and associate
dataset bias with the imbalance in group distribution P(G) = [γ1 , . . . , γ|G | ] (Rolf et al., 2021). In
the applications we consider, there exists a subset of underrepresented groups B ⊂ G which are
not sufficiently represented in the population distribution D so that γg   |G1 | for g ∈ B (Sagawa
et al., 2019; 2020). We denote L(y, ŷ) as a loss function from the Bregman divergence family, and
F the hypothesis space of predictors f : X 7→ Y . We require the model class F to be sufficiently
expressive so it can model the Bayes-optimal predictor ỹ(x) = arg min0y Ey∼P(y|x) (L(y, y0 ))). We also
assume F has a certain degree of smoothness, so that the model f ∈ F cannot arbitrarily overfit to
the noisy labels in the training set.1

2        M ETHOD
In this section, we introduce Introspective Self-play (I SP), a simple training approach to improve
model quality in representation learning and uncertainty quantification under dataset bias. Briefly,
I SP performs introspective training by adding a underrepresention prediction head to the model and
training it to distinguish whether an example (yi , xi , gi ) is from the set of underrepresented groups B
(Section 2.1). When the underrepresentation label bi = I(gi ∈ B) is not available, I SP estimates it
based on a cross-validation-based procedure we term cross-validated self-play (Section 2.2). As we
will show, I SP carries a guarantee for the model’s representation learning and uncertainty estimation
quality under dataset bias (Proposition 1).

2.1        I NTROSPECTIVE T RAINING
We consider models of the form p(y|x) = σ fy (x) = σ βy> h(x) , where h : X → RD is a D-


dimensional embedding function, βy ∈ RD the output weights, and σ (·) the activation function. Given
model fy = βy> h, introspective training adds a bias head fb = βb> h to the model, so it becomes a
multi-task architecture f = ( fy , fb ) with shared embedding:

       p(y|x) = σ ( fy (x)), p(b|x) = σsigmoid ( fb (x)); where ( fy , fb ) = βy> h + by , βb> h + bb . (3)


Given examples D = {xi , yi , gi }ni=1 , we generate the underrepresentation labels as bi = I(gi ∈ B)
and train the model with the target and underrepresentation labels (yi , bi ) by minimizing a standard
multi-task learning objective:
                                           L((yi , bi ), xi ) = L(yi , fy (xi )) + Lb (bi , fb (xi )),                                           (4)
where L is the standard loss function for the task, and Lb is the cross-entropy loss. As a result,
given training examples {xi }ni=1 , introspective training not only trains the model to predict the
outcome yi , but also instructs it to recognize its potential bias bi by predicting whether xi is from an
underrepresented group.
Despite its simplicity, introspective training has a significant impact on the model’s representation
learning that is particularly important for quantifying uncertainty when dataset exhibits significant bias.
Figure 2 illustrates this on a binary classification task under severe group imbalance (Sagawa et al.,
2020), where we compare two dense ResNet ensemble models trained using the introspection objective
v.s. the empirical risk minimization (ERM) objective (i.e., only use L(yi , fy (xi )) in Equation (4)),
respectively.
Comparing figures 2a and 2e, we observe that the decision boundaries for the predicted label are very
similar between introspective training and ERM. However, the predictive variance (obtained via a
Gaussian process (GP) layer (Liu et al., 2022)) exhibits sizable differences. In particular, the variance
estimates for introspective training are uniformly high outside of the two clouds of underrepresented
groups in the data. However, for ERM, the model confidence is high along the decision boundary,
even in the unseen regions without training data. This is due to the fact that when training with ERM,
the representation collapses in the direction that is not correlated with training label (i.e., parallel
1
    In the case of over-parameterized models, this usually implies F is subject to certain regularization appropriate for the model class (e.g., early
    stopping for SGD-trained neural networks) (Li et al., 2020).



                                                                           3
to decision boundary) and does not retrain any input information regarding the underrepresented
groups in its representation (fig. 2g). However, with introspective training, the representations indeed
are morphed to reflect the differences between the underrepresented examples and the majority
group (as can be seen in figures fig. 2g vs fig. 2c), helping the model to better distinguish them in
the representation space, and hence lead to improved uncertainty estimate in the neighborhood of
underrepresented examples. Appendix E.1 contains further description.


                                                                              (c) Representation Space            (d) Representation Space
          (a) Predicted Probability          (b) Predictive Variance             Introspective Training              Introspective Training
             Introspective Training            Introspective Training      Colored by Predicted Probability.   Colored by Predicted Underrep.


          (e) Predicted Probability          (f) Predictive Variance             (g) Representation Space      (h) Predicted Underreprentation
                 ERM Training                      ERM Training                        ERM Training                  Introspective Training

    Figure 2: Prediction, uncertainty quantification, and representation learning behavior of introspective training v.s. ERM training in a binary clas-
    sification task under severe group imbalance (n = 5000) (Sagawa et al., 2020). Here, blue and orange indicates the two classes, and each class
    contains a minority group (the tiny clusters on the diagonal with n < 5) and a majority group (the large clusters on the off-diagonal). Column
    1-2 depicts the models’ predictive probability and predictive uncertain surface in the data space. Column 3 depicts the models’ decision sur-
    face in the last-layer representation space, colored by the predictive probability of the target label. Column 4 depicts the introspective-trained
    model’s predicted bias probability in the representation space (fig. 2d) and in the data space (fig. 2h), colored by the predictive probability of
    the underrepresentation. Appendix E.1 described further detail.

Formally, introspective training induces the below guarantee on the model’s bias-awareness in its
hidden representation and uncertainty estimates:
Proposition 1 (Introspective Training induces Bias-awareness). Denote ob (x) = p(x|b = 1)/p(x|b =
0) the odds for x belongs to the underrepresented group B. For a well-trained model f = ( fy , fb )
that minimizes the introspective training objective (4), so that p(b = 1|x) = σ ( fb (x)), we then have:
  (I) (Bias-aware Hidden Representation) The hidden representation h(x) is aware of the likelihood
      ratio of whether an example x belongs to the underrepresented group b = I(g ∈ B), i.e.
      p(x|b = 1)/p(x|b = 0), such that:
                                                                p(b = 1)
                               βb> h(x) + bb = log ob (x) + log          .                      (5)
                                                                p(b = 0)
 (II) (Bias-aware Embedding Distance) For two examples (x1 , x2 ), the embedding distance
      ||h(x1 ) − h(x2 )||2 is lower bounded by (up to a scaling constant) the odds ratio of whether x1
      belongs to the underrepresented groups versus that for x2 :
                                                   1               ob (x1 )       ob (x2 )
                         ||h(x1 ) − h(x2 )||2 ≥          × max log          , log           ,        (6)
                                                ||βb ||2           ob (x2 )       ob (x1 )
      such that the distance between a pair of minority and majority examples (x1 , x2 ) is large due to
      the high values of the log odds ratio.
The proof is in Appendix G. Part (I) provides a consistency guarantee for the hidden representation
h(·)’s ability in expressing the likelihood of whether an example x belongs to the underrepresented
group B , i.e., bias awareness. The form of (5) is similar to the representation learning guarantee in
the noise contrastive learning literature, as it shares the same underlying principle of encouraging
feature diversity and disentanglement via contrastive comparison between groups (Gutmann &
Hyvärinen, 2010; Sugiyama et al., 2010; Hyvarinen & Morioka, 2016) . Part (II) is a corollary
of (5) and provides a direct guarantee on the model’s learned embedding distance. It states that
under introspective training, the model cannot discard important input features that distinguishes


                                                                             4
the minority-group examples from the majority group, even if they are not predictive of the target
label. In this way, the model is guarded from collapsing the representation of majority and minority
examples together (i.e., making ||h(x1 ) − h(x2 )||2 excessively small for two examples (x1 , x2 ) from
the majority and minority group, respectively), creating difficulty for identifying underrepresented
groups in the feature space with uncertainty-based active learning. Empirically, we find the benefit of
introspective training extends to other uncertainty-based active learning signals as well (e.g., margin
and ensemble diversity, see Section 4.2). Appendix C contains further discussion.

2.2        E STIMATING UNKNOWN BIAS VIA C ROSS - VALIDATED S ELF - PLAY
So far, we introduced introspective training in the setting where the group annotation gi is available
on training data, so that the underrepresentation label bi = I(gi ∈ B) can be directly computed. In
this section, we consider how to estimate the underrepresentation label bi when it is absent, so that I SP
can be applied to the setting where group annotations gi is too expensive to obtain. A popular practice
in the literature is to estimate dataset bias as the predictive error of a single (biased) model. That is,
given a trained model fD , prior work (Clark et al., 2019; He et al., 2019; Nam et al., 2020; Sanh et al.,
2020; Liu et al., 2021) estimates the underrepresentation label as the observed error L(yi , fD (xi )).
To better understand this estimator for the generalization error of the underrepresented groups, we
perform a noise-bias-variance decomposition (Domingos (2000)) of the model error L(y, fD ), which
reveals, in the expectation of the random draws of the dataset D ∼ D:
                                                 + L(ỹ(x), f¯(x)) + ED L( f¯(x), fD (x)) ,

          ED [L(y, fD (x))] = ED L(y, ỹ(x))                                                          (7)
          |      {z       } |       {z      }         |    {z     }         |        {z       }
                        error                      noise                           bias                              variance

where ỹ(x) = arg miny0 Ey∼P(y|x)                      [L(y, y0 )]
                                                  is the (Bayes) optimal predictor and f¯(x) =
arg min f ED [L( f , fD (x))] is the ‘ensemble’ predictor of the single models { fD }D∼D trained from
random data draws (see Appendix A.2 for a review). From (7), we see that for the purpose of estimat-
ing generalization error due to dataset bias, the naive estimator b̂0 = L(y, fD ) based on single-model
error suffers from two issues: (1) b̂0 conflates noise (typically arising from label noise or feature
ambiguity) with the dataset bias signal we wish to capture, potentially leading to compromised quality
in real datasets (Lahoti et al., 2020; Li et al., 2022). (2) As b̂0 is calculated from a single model, its
estimate of the variance term (an important component of generalization error (Yang & Xu, 2020)) is
often not stable. This is exacerbated when b̂0 is computed from the training error, since DNNs tend
to severely underestimate the model variance on training data (Liu et al., 2021).2
This observation motivates us to propose cross-validated self-play, a simple method to estimate a
model’s generalization gap. Briefly, given training data D divided into K splits, we train a bootstrap
ensemble of K models { fk }Kk=1 with ERM training, where each fk sees a fraction of the training data
(see Appendix Fig. 5). As a result, for each (xi , yi ), there exists a collection of in-sample predictions
{ fin,k0 (xi )}Kk0in=1 trained on data splits containing (xi , yi ), and a collection of out-of-sample predictions
{ fout,k (xi )}Kk=1 out
                        trained on data splits not containing (xi , yi ). Then, the self-play estimator of the
model’s generalization gap is 3
                           b̂i = Ek [L(yi , fout,k (xi ))] −L(yi , f¯in (xi )) = Ek [L( f¯in (xi ), fout,k (xi ))].                          (8)
                                 |         {z            } |       {z        }
                                          estimated error          estimated noise

where f¯in is the ensemble prediction based on in-sample predictors fin,k0 , the expectation Ek is taken
with respect to the out-of-sample predictions, and we are estimating the Bayes optimal predictor
ỹ using the in-domain prediction f¯in (since the model class F is subject to suitable regularization,
the f¯in ’s do not arbitrarily overfit the noisy labels). Note that under the well-specified setting, f¯in
converges asymptotically to the Bayes optimal predictor ỹ as n → ∞. In practice, we can ensure the
validity of L(yi , f¯in (xi )) as an estimator of noise by applying early stopping with a stability criterion
based on out-of-sample predictions f¯out (xi ) (Li et al., 2020; Song et al., 2020). Compared to the
standard alternatives in the literature (e.g., single-model error L(y, fD )), the self-play estimator b̂i has

2
    As an illustrative example, the generalization error of a ridge regression model under orthogonal design and group-specific noise is
                                (λ θ )2      σ2n
                                    g
    ED (L(y, fD (xg ))) = σg2 + (n +λ )2
                                         + (n +λg)2 , where σg is the noise level for group g ∈ G , ng is the sample size for group g ∈ G , and λ
                                 g           g
    is the ridge regularization parameter. See AppendixpF for details.
3
    In this work, we use mean squared error L(y, f ) = (y − σsigmoid ( f ))2 for the generalization gap computation, so that b̂i ∈ [0, 1].



                                                                           5
the appealing property of controlling noise (by using f¯in ) while better estimating variance (by using
expectations over f¯out,k ), thereby constituting a more informative signal for the underrepresented
groups under dataset bias, label noise and feature ambiguity. Appendix B.2 contains additional
comments, and Appendix H develops a data-dependent bound for group detection performance.
Method Summary: Introspective Self-play. Combining the self-play bias estimation and intro-
spective training together, we arrive at Introspective Self-play (I SP), a simple two-stage method that
provably improves the representation quality and uncertainty estimates of a DNN for underrepre-
sented population groups. Figure 3 illustrates the full I SP procedure. I SP first (optionally) estimates
underrepresentation labels using cross-validated self-play if the group annotation is not available,
and then conducts introspective training to train the model to recognize its own bias while learning
to predict the target label. For the unlabelled data to be sampled, the resulting model generates (1)
predictive probability p(y|x), (2) uncertainty estimates v̂(x) and (3) predicted probability for under-
representation p(b|x) = σ ( fb (x)), offering a rich collection of active learning signals for downstream
applications.
                                                                       Training Data


                   Stage I: Label Estimation                    Stage II: Introspective Training



Figure 3: The two-stage Introspective Self-play (I SP) model: In the first stage, we first train a bootstrap ensemble of DNN’s on cross-validation
splits of the data (Figure 5). At the end of Stage I training, we can use the in-sample and out-of-sample predictions of the ensemble to estimate
the underrepresentation label bi of each training data point xi by computing the generalization gap (Equation (8)). Then in Stage II, we use
the underrepresentation labels bi to train the actual sampling model via introspective training (Equation (4)), and use it to generate the active
learning signals (e.g., predictive probability p(y|x), predictive variance v(x) and predicted underrepresentation p(b|x)) for the unlabelled set.

3     T HEORETICAL A NALYSIS : I MPROVING ACCURACY-G ROUP ROBUSTNESS
      F RONTIER BY O PTIMIZING T RAINING DATA D ISTRIBUTION
Denote by ∆K the K-simplex so that ∀α = [α1 , . . . , αK ] ∈ ∆K , ∑k αk = 1 and ∀k, αk > 0. Let Dα,n
denote a dataset of size n sampled with group allocations α ∈ ∆|G | , i.e., αg represents the fraction of
the dataset sampled from group g ∈ G . Our goal is to find the optimal allocation that minimizes a
weighted combination of the population risk and the worst-case risk over all subgroups.
Definition 1 (Risk and Fairness Risk). Given f ∈ F , let R( f |α, n) := ∑g∈G γg R( f |G = g) be the
risk where γ ∈ ∆|G | represents the true subgroup proportions in the underlying data distribution,
and Rfair ( f ) be the fairness risk which is the worst-case risk among the groups g ∈ G : Rfair ( f ) :=
maxg R( f |G = g).
Let R̂ and R̂fair denote the empirical estimates of R, Rfair estimated based on the finite dataset Dα,n :
                        ∑(x,y)∈Dα,n,g L ( f (x) , y)
     R̂α,n,g ( f ) =                                 , R̂α,n ( f ) = ∑ γg R̂α,n,g ( f ) , R̂fair,α,n ( f ) = max R̂α,n,g ( f )
                                |Dα,n,g |                            g                                        g


where Dα,n,g is the subset of Dα,n with group label g. Let fˆ denote the classifier obtained as per
γ-weighted empirical risk minimization (ERM) fˆα,n = arg min f ∈F R̂α,n ( f ).
Definition 2 (Accuracy-Fairness Frontier Risk). For non-negative weighting coefficients ω ∈ [0, 1],
the accuracy-fairness frontier risk is defined as:
                                      Fω (α, n) := ωE[R( fˆα,n )] + (1 − ω)E[Rfair ( fˆα,n )]                                                (9)

where the expectation is taken wrt the randomness inherent in fˆ as it is estimated based on a random
dataset Dα,n drawn iid from the underlying data distribution.
As we sweep over ω going from 0 to 1 and find the best classifier/allocation for each value, we would
trace an accuracy fairness frontier as in Figure 1.
Analyzing optimal allocation
                          h between i subgroups. We theoretically analyze the optimization
         ∗
problem α = arg minα∈∆|G | Fω (α, n) . We build on the theoretical models for group-specific scaling


                                                                        6
laws of generalization error introduced in previous work. (Chen et al., 2018; Rolf et al., 2021). We
assume that the group-specific true risk decays with the size of the dataset at a rate of the form:
                            E[R fˆα,n |G = g ] = cg (αg n)−p + τn−q + δ


for some p > 0, q > 0, cg > 0, τ, δ > 0. The first term represents the impact of the group representation,
the second the aggregate impact of the dataset size, and the third term a constant offset (the irreducible
risk for this group). In particular, cg represents the “difficulty“ of learning group g, as the larger cg is,
the higher the risk is for group g for any given allocation α.
Theorem 1 (Optimal Group-size Allocation for Accuracy-Fairness Frontier Risk (Informal)). The
                                                                                            1
optimal allocation α ? is of the form αg? ∝ (γg cg θg ) p+1 where θg ≥ ω represents an up-sampling factor
                                                                                                                                                                       −1/p
for group g. Let g1 , g2 , . . . be the subgroups sorted in ascending order according to the value γg cg ,
which represents the subgroup representation normalized by the difficulty of learning the subgroup.
Then, it holds that there exists an integer k > 0 such that θgi = ω for i = k, . . . |G |, θgi > ω for
i = 1, . . . , k. Thus, the subgroups with low normalized representation are systematically up-sampled
in the optimal allocation.

Based on the above theorem, we can the set of underrepresented groups as B = {g1 , g2 , . . . gk }.,
validating the idea that underrepresented groups can be formally defined. While the result above
is derived under a simplified theoretical model, it validates the intuition behind ISP: indeed, ISP
attempts to infer whether datapoints belong to B and systematically up-samples them via active
learning to increase the overall representation and achieve an allocation closer to the theoretically
optimal allocation defined above. We present a full theorem statement and proof in Appendix I and a
discussion in Appendix C.2

4     E XPERIMENTS
We first demonstrate that for each task, I SP meaningfully improves the tail-group sampling rate and
the accuracy-group robustness performance of state-of-the-art AL methods (Section 4.1), and then
conduct detailed ablation analysis to understand how the choice of different underrepresentation
labels impacts (1) the final model’s accuracy-group robustness performance when trained on data
collected by different AL methods; and (2) the sampling performance of different active sampling
signals (Section 4.2).
Datasets. We consider two challenging real-world datasets: Census Income (Le Quy et al., 2022)
that contains 32,561 training records from the 1994 U.S. census survey. The task is to predict whether
an individual’s income is >50K, and the tail groups are female or non-white individuals with high
income. We also consider Toxicity Detection (Borkan et al., 2019) that contains 405,130 online
comments from the CivilComments platform. The goal is to predict whether a given comment is toxic,
and the tail groups are demographic identities × label class (male, female, White, Black, LGBTQ,
Muslim, Christian, other religion) × (toxic, non-toxic) following Koh et al. (2021).

                    AL Training             Group identity label   Training Mechanism   Underrepresentation                  Available Sampling Signal
                        Method                 in train set?                                 Label bi
                      (Random)                       X                      -             Group Identity         Random
               RWT (Idrissi et al., 2022)            X               Reweighting          Group Identity         Margin / Diversity / Variance
               DRO (Sagawa et al., 2019)             X              Worst-group Loss      Group Identity         Margin / Diversity / Variance
                     I SP-Identity                   X               Introspection        Group Identity         Margin / Diversity / Variance / Predicted Underrep.
                       (ERM)                         ×                      -                  Train Error       Margin / Diversity / Variance
                 JTT (Liu et al., 2021)              ×                Reweighting              Train Error       Margin / Diversity / Variance
                      ISP - Gap                      ×                Introspection         Generalization Gap   Margin / Diversity / Variance / Predicted Underrep.


Table 1: Training methods to be compared in the experiment study. Components proposed in this work are highlighted in red. The two baselines
(Random) & (ERM) does not use underrepresentation label to train AL model, and only use it as reweighting signal for the reweighted training
of the final model. For detailed definition of the sampling signals, see Appendix E.2.
AL Baselines and Method Variations. For all tasks, we use a 10-member DNN ensemble
 f = { fk }10
           k=1 as the AL model, and replace their last layers with a random-feature GP layer (Liu et al.,
2022) in order to compute posterior variance (see Appendix A.4). We compare the impact of different
training methods in two settings depending on whether the group identity label will be annotated in
the labelled set (they are never available in the unlabelled set). As shown in Table 1, when group label
is available, we compare I SP-identity (i.e., I SP with group identity as training label bi = I(gi ∈ B))
to a group-specific reweighting (RWT) (Idrissi et al., 2022) and a group DRO (Sagawa et al., 2019)
baselines (Idrissi et al., 2022) When the group label is not known, we consider I SP-Gap using the
self-play-estimated generalization gap b̂i = Ek [L( f¯in (xi ), fout,k (xi ))] as the representation label (i.e.,


                                                                                        7
Equation (8)), and compare it to an ensemble of Just Train Twice (JTT) which uses the ensemble
training error b̂i = Ek [L(yi , fin,k (xi ))] to determine the training set. We also compare to an ERM
baseline which trains the AL models with a routine ERM objective, but uses error for the reweighted
training of the final model. We consider other method combinations in the ablation study.
Active Learning Protocol and Final Accuracy-Group Robustness Evaluation. For active learn-
ing, we start with a randomly sampled initial dataset, and conduct active learning for 8 rounds until
reaching roughly half of the training set (to ensure there’s sufficient variation in the sampled data
between methods). To evaluate the accuracy-group robustness performance of the final model, given
a dataset collected by an AL method, we train a final model using the standard re-weighting objec-
tive ∑(x,y)6∈B̂ Lce (y, f (x)) + λ ∑(x,y)∈B̂ Lce (y, f (x)) where B̂ is the set of underrepresented examples
identified by the underrepresentation label, i.e., (xi , yi ) ∈ B̂ if b̂i > t. We vary the thresholds t and
the up-weight coefficient λ over a 2D grid to get a collection of model accuracy-group robustness
performances (i.e., accuracy v.s. worst-group accuracy), and use them to identify the Pareto frontier
defined by this combination of data and reweighting signal. Appendix E.2 describes further detail.
    AL Training         Group identity label                        Census Income                                                  Toxicity Detection
     Method                in train set?       Tail Sampling Rate   Combined Acc.   Worst-group Acc.   Tail Sampling Rate             Combined Acc.     Worst-group Acc.
      (Random)                  X                    0.475              0.746            0.659               0.556                        0.708              0.490
        RWT                     X                    0.797              0.772            0.761               0.857                        0.709              0.482
         DRO                    X                    0.755              0.759            0.729               0.841                        0.710              0.506
 I SP-Identity (Ours)           X                    0.907              0.785            0.774               0.905                        0.719              0.506
       ERM                       ×                   0.791              0.736            0.658               0.852                        0.735              0.539
        JTT                      ×                   0.839              0.752            0.695               0.866                        0.747              0.571
  I SP-Gap (Ours)                ×                   0.839              0.770            0.753               0.867                        0.759              0.597


Table 2: The tail-group sampling rate and final-model accuracy v.s. group robustness performances under different AL model training methods.
Here we show the best active learning signal for each task (i.e., variance for Census Income, and margin for toxicity detection). Tail Sampling
Rate: The ratio between num. of sampled tail group examples (in final round) v.s. the total num. of tail group in population. Combined Acc:
The combined accuracy-robustness score defined as (acc + worst-group acc)/2. It is proportional to the perimeter of the rectangle defined by a
point on the accuracy-group robustness curve.                                                                                            (Random)
                                                                                                                                                                     RWT
                                                                                                                                                                     ISP-Identity
                                                                                                                                   0.75
4.1       M AIN R ESULTS                                                                                                                                             ERM
                                                                                                                                                                     JTT
                                                                                                                                                                     ISP-Gap


Table 2 shows sampling performance and the final-model group robust- 0.70
ness-accuracy performance of each AL model training method (described 0.65                                             Worst Acc

in Table 1), and Figure 4 visualizes the full accuracy-fairness frontier of
the final models (trained on the data and re-weighting signals provided 0.60
by that method). Our main conclusions are: (1) Effectiveness of I SP 0.55
training: Compared to non-I SP baselines, we find I SP consistently im-           0.78 0.79 0.80 0.81 0.82 0.83 0.84 0.85 0.86
                                                                                                    Accuracy

proves a AL model’s active learning (measured by tail-group sampling Figure 4: Accuracy-Group Robust-
                                                                              ness Frontier for Census Income.
rate) and accuracy-group robustness performance (measured by combined
accuracy, which is defined as (accuracy + worst-group accuracy)/2). This advantage is seen in both
settings where the group label is available or unavailable. In particular, in Figure 4, the final model
from I SP-Gap (pink dashed line, trained on actively sampled data and using estimated underrep-
resentation label for final-model re-weighted training) almost dominates Random (blue solid line,
trained on randomly sampled data and using true group label for final model training) despite not
having access to true group label in the final reweighted training, highlighting the importance of
the data distribution in the model’s accuracy-group robustness performance (i.e., Equation (2)). (2)
Label Quality Matters: Comparing the variants of I SP (Identity v.s. Gap) in Table 2, we see a clear
impact of the quality of introspection signal to the performance of the AL model. For example, for
active learning performance, we see that the sampling rate I SP-Identity is significantly better than
I SP-Error. However, for toxicity detection where the group label suffers an under-coverage issue
(i.e., the group definition excludes potentially identity-mention comments where raters disagree, see
Data section of Appendix E.2), we see that I SP-Error in fact strongly outperforms I SP-Identity in
accuracy-group robustness performance. This validates the observation from previous literature on
the failure mode of bias-mitigation methods when the available group annotation does not cover all
sources of dataset bias, and speaks to the importance of high quality estimation methods that can
detect underpresentation in the presence of unknown sources of bias (Zhou et al., 2021).

4.2       A BLATION A NALYSIS
In the main results above, we have (1) used the same underrepresentation label for both the AL-model
introspective training and the final-model reweighted training, and (2) focused on the most effective
active sampling signal under each task. In this section, we conduct ablations by decoupling the signal
combinations along these two axes.


                                                                                8
Impact of Data Distribution and Reweighting Signal to Accuracy-Group Robustness Frontier
First, we investigate the joint impact of data distribution and reweighting signal on the final models’
accuracy-group robustness performance. We train the final model under data collected by different
AL policy (Random v.s Margin v.s. Group Identity, etc), and perform reweighted training using
different underrepresentation labels (Error v.s. Gap v.s. Group Identity) and compare to an ERM
baseline without reweighted training (Section 4.2). As shown, holding the choice of reweighted signal
constant and compare across data distributions (i.e., comparing across columns within each row), we
observe that the data distribution in general has a non-trivial impact on the final model’s accuracy-
group robustness performance. Specifically, under appropriate sampling signal, data collected by
I SP-Gap (which has no access to true group identity label) can lead to model performance that is
competitive with data collected by I SP-Identity (e.g., the third v.s. fourth columns). Comparing
across reweighting signals within each dataset (i.e., compare across rows within each column), we
see that all underrepresentation labels brings a meaningful improvement over the ERM baseline, with
Group Identity bringing the most significant improvement when it is of high quality (i.e., Census
Income), and Gap bringing the most improvement when group annotation is imperfect (i.e., Toxicity
Detection).
                      Final Model                   AL Method, Census Income                                AL Method, Toxicity Detection
                   Reweighting Signal
                                         Random      Margin     Variance     Group Identity        Random     Diversity   Margin   Group Identity
                        (ERM)             0.692       0.669      0.719             0.720            0.698       0.699     0.702        0.703
                         Error            0.706       0.683      0.750             0.743            0.758       0.761     0.744        0.752
                         Gap              0.692       0.694      0.770             0.777            0.776       0.776     0.758        0.810
                     Group Identity        0.746      0.756       0.778            0.785            0.711       0.701     0.705        0.713


Table 3: Impact to final-model group robustness-accuracy performance (measured by combined accuracy = acc + worst-group acc)/2) of the
choice of reweighting signal (rows), across dataset collected by different active learning methods (columns). Random: data collected via
random sampling. Margin/Variance/Diversity: data collected using introspective-trained AL model (with Gap as underrepresentation label)
using the said sampling signal. Group Identity: data collected by introspective-trained AL model with group identity as introspection signal,
using the best sampling signal for the task (Variance for census income and Margin for toxicity detection).


Impact of Underrepresentation Label on Different Sampling Signals. Finally, we evaluate the
choice of introspection signal on the sampling performance of a introspective-trained AL-model,
under different types of sampling signals (Table 4). As this evaluation is computationally expensive
(requiring multiple active learning experiments for all underrepresentation label v.s. sampling signal
combinations), here we focus on the Census Income task. As shown, we observe the introspective
training brings a consistent performance boost across different types of sampling signals (esp. when
using Group Identity), highlighting the appeal of introspective training as a “plug-in” method that
meaningfully boost the performance of a wide range of active learning methods. Interestingly,
we also observe the “Predicted Underrep.” (i.e., the underrepresentation prediction in p(b|x) in
Figure 3) is exceptionally effective when the group identity is available (tail sampling rate > 0.95)
but underperforms classic active learning signals otherwise, cautioning the proper use of p(b|x) as a
sampling signal depending on the availability of group labels.
                                          Underrep.                         AL Method, Census Income
                                           Label              Margin      Diversity    Variance        Predicted Underrep.
                                            Error             0.780        0.324           0.771                0.671
                                            Gap               0.803        0.276           0.839                0.708
                                        Group Identity        0.873        0.330           0.907                0.967

Table 4: Impact to AL performance (measured by tail sampling rate) of the choice of introspection signal (rows) across different active learning
methods (columns).

5     C ONCLUSION
In this work, we introduced Introspective Self-play (I SP), a novel training approach to improve a
DNN’s representation learning and uncertainty quantification quality under dataset bias. I SP uses
a multi-task introspective training approach to encourage DNNs to learn diverse and bias-aware
features for the underrepresented groups. When underrepresented group identities are not available,
I SP bootstraps them using a novel cross-validated self-play procedure that disentangles dataset bias
from irreducible noise while also generating a more stable estimate of variance. Theoretical analysis
reveals that the optimal per-group up-sampling factors are in fact determined by an interplay of
the original group rates and the group-specific scaling factors. Models trained on data acquired by
I SP generally surpass recent competitive baselines such as RWT and JTT on the accuracy-group
robustness frontier.


                                                                                   9
Future Directions. Overall, our results are a concrete step to a recent but critical effort in the
community to build a more holistic perspective of model performance, addressing key challenges
of robustness and equity. Future work could more thoroughly investigate the relation of the noise,
bias, and variance components of generalization error to underrepresentation examples, as well as the
effectiveness of introspective training under different settings including training epochs, model regu-
larization, batch size. For example, specialized training objectives such as generalized cross entropy
(GCE) (Zhang & Sabuncu, 2018) or focal loss (FL) (Lin et al., 2017) may improve the statistical
power of different components of generalization error in detecting the underrepresented groups. On
the other hand, batch size may impact the quality of the learned representation under introspective
training, in a manner analogous to that of the contrastive training (Chen et al., 2020a). Our framework
could also be extended to other settings such as semi-supervised learning, or incorporate other kinds
of introspection signals, such as those from the interpetability or differential privacy literature.

Ethical Statements. This work proposes novel approach to encourage DNN models to learn
diverse, bias-aware features in model representation, for the purpose of improving DNN model’s
uncertainty quantification ability under dataset bias. Our method encourages DNNs to better identify
underrepresented data subgroups during data collection, and eventually achieve a more balanced
performance between model accuracy and group robustness by training on a more well-balanced
dataset. We evaluated the method on two already publicly available dataset and uses existing metrics
in the literature. No new data is collected as part of the current study.
The technique we developed in this work is simple and general-purpose, with potentially broad appeal
to various downstream applications (e.g., recommendations, NLP, etc). However, two limitations
highlighted by our work is that (1) when the group annotation information is imperfect, building
a bias-mitigation procedure around such annotation may lead to suboptimal performance, and (2)
in the presence of noisy labels, a noisy estimate of under-representation may also compromise the
performance of the procedure. Therefore, practitioner should take caution in rigorously evaluate the
effectiveness of the procedure in their application, taking effort to carefully evaluate the estimation
result of underrepresentation labels to ensure proper application of the technique without incurring
unexpected consequences.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors would like to sincerely thank Ian Kivlichan at Google Jigsaw, Clara Huiyi Hu, Jie Ren,
Yuyan Wang, Tania Bedrax-Weiss at Google Research, and Martin Strobel at National University of
Singapore for the insightful comments and helpful discussions.

R EFERENCES
Jacob D Abernethy, Pranjal Awasthi, Matthäus Kleindessner, Jamie Morgenstern, Chris Russell,
  and Jie Zhang. Active sampling for min-max fairness. In Kamalika Chaudhuri, Stefanie Jegelka,
  Le Song, Csaba Szepesvari, Gang Niu, and Sivan Sabato (eds.), Proceedings of the 39th Inter-
  national Conference on Machine Learning, volume 162 of Proceedings of Machine Learning
  Research, pp. 53–65. PMLR, 17–23 Jul 2022.

Ben Adlam and Jeffrey Pennington. Understanding double descent requires a fine-grained bias-
  variance decomposition. Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:11022–11032,
  2020.

Alekh Agarwal, Alina Beygelzimer, Miroslav Dudı́k, John Langford, and Hanna Wallach. A
  reductions approach to fair classification. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp.
  60–69. PMLR, 2018.

Sharat Agarwal, Sumanyu Muku, Saket Anand, and Chetan Arora. Does data repair lead to fair
  models? curating contextually fair data to reduce model bias. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
  Winter Conference on Applications of Computer Vision, pp. 3298–3307, 2022.

Alexander Amini, Ava P Soleimany, Wilko Schwarting, Sangeeta N Bhatia, and Daniela Rus.
  Uncovering and mitigating algorithmic bias through learned latent structure. In Proceedings of the
  2019 AAAI/ACM Conference on AI, Ethics, and Society, pp. 289–295, 2019.


                                                  10
Hadis Anahideh, Abolfazl Asudeh, and Saravanan Thirumuruganathan. Fair active learning. Expert
  Systems with Applications, 199:116981, 2022.
Martin Arjovsky. Out of distribution generalization in machine learning. PhD thesis, New York
 University, 2020.
Martin Arjovsky, Léon Bottou, Ishaan Gulrajani, and David Lopez-Paz. Invariant risk minimization.
 arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.02893, 2019.
Jordan T Ash, Chicheng Zhang, Akshay Krishnamurthy, John Langford, and Alekh Agarwal. Deep
  batch active learning by diverse, uncertain gradient lower bounds. In International Conference on
  Learning Representations, 2019.
Hyojin Bahng, Sanghyuk Chun, Sangdoo Yun, Jaegul Choo, and Seong Joon Oh. Learning de-biased
  representations with biased representations. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp.
  528–539. PMLR, 2020.
Pierre Bayle, Alexandre Bayle, Lucas Janson, and Lester Mackey. Cross-validation confidence
  intervals for test error. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:16339–16350,
  2020.
Alex Beutel, Jilin Chen, Zhe Zhao, and Ed H Chi. Data decisions and theoretical implications when
  adversarially learning fair representations. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.00075, 2017.
Joseph K Blitzstein and Jessica Hwang. Introduction to probability. Crc Press Boca Raton, FL, 2015.
Avrim Blum, Adam Kalai, and John Langford. Beating the hold-out: Bounds for k-fold and
  progressive cross-validation. In Proceedings of the twelfth annual conference on Computational
  learning theory, pp. 203–208, 1999.
Daniel Borkan, Lucas Dixon, Jeffrey Sorensen, Nithum Thain, and Lucy Vasserman. Nuanced metrics
  for measuring unintended bias with real data for text classification. In Companion proceedings of
  the 2019 world wide web conference, pp. 491–500, 2019.
Stephen P Boyd and Lieven Vandenberghe. Convex optimization. Cambridge university press, 2004.
Frédéric Branchaud-Charron, Parmida Atighehchian, Pau Rodrı́guez, Grace Abuhamad, and Alexan-
   dre Lacoste. Can active learning preemptively mitigate fairness issues?      arXiv preprint
   arXiv:2104.06879, 2021.
Jonathon Byrd and Zachary Lipton. What is the effect of importance weighting in deep learning? In
  International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 872–881. PMLR, 2019.
Tianle Cai, Ruiqi Gao, Jason Lee, and Qi Lei. A theory of label propagation for subpopulation shift.
  In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 1170–1182. PMLR, 2021.
William Cai, Ro Encarnacion, Bobbie Chern, Sam Corbett-Davies, Miranda Bogen, Stevie Bergman,
 and Sharad Goel. Adaptive sampling strategies to construct equitable training datasets. In 2022
 ACM Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency, FAccT ’22, pp. 1467–1478,
 New York, NY, USA, 2022. Association for Computing Machinery. ISBN 9781450393522. doi:
 10.1145/3531146.3533203.
Kaidi Cao, Colin Wei, Adrien Gaidon, Nikos Arechiga, and Tengyu Ma. Learning imbalanced
  datasets with label-distribution-aware margin loss. Advances in neural information processing
  systems, 32, 2019.
Kaidi Cao, Yining Chen, Junwei Lu, Nikos Arechiga, Adrien Gaidon, and Tengyu Ma. Heteroskedas-
  tic and imbalanced deep learning with adaptive regularization. In International Conference on
  Learning Representations, 2020.
Simon Caton and Christian Haas. Fairness in machine learning: A survey. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2010.04053, 2020.
Irene Chen, Fredrik D Johansson, and David Sontag. Why is my classifier discriminatory? Advances
   in neural information processing systems, 31, 2018.


                                                11
Ting Chen, Simon Kornblith, Mohammad Norouzi, and Geoffrey Hinton. A simple framework for
  contrastive learning of visual representations. In International conference on machine learning, pp.
  1597–1607. PMLR, 2020a.
Yining Chen, Colin Wei, Ananya Kumar, and Tengyu Ma. Self-training avoids using spurious features
  under domain shift. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:21061–21071, 2020b.
Pengyu Cheng, Weituo Hao, Siyang Yuan, Shijing Si, and Lawrence Carin. Fairfil: Contrastive
  neural debiasing method for pretrained text encoders. In International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2020.
Valeriia Cherepanova, Vedant Nanda, Micah Goldblum, John P Dickerson, and Tom Goldstein.
  Technical challenges for training fair neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2102.06764, 2021.
Jianfeng Chi, William Shand, Yaodong Yu, Kai-Wei Chang, Han Zhao, and Yuan Tian. Conditional
   supervised contrastive learning for fair text classification. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.11485, 2022.
Christopher Clark, Mark Yatskar, and Luke Zettlemoyer. Don’t take the easy way out: Ensemble
  based methods for avoiding known dataset biases. arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.03683, 2019.
Mark Collier, Basil Mustafa, Efi Kokiopoulou, Rodolphe Jenatton, and Jesse Berent. Correlated
 input-dependent label noise in large-scale image classification. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
 Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 1551–1560, 2021.
Elliot Creager, Jörn-Henrik Jacobsen, and Richard Zemel. Environment inference for invariant
  learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 2189–2200. PMLR, 2021.
Antoine de Mathelin, François Deheeger, Mathilde Mougeot, and Nicolas Vayatis. Discrepancy-based
  active learning for domain adaptation. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2021.
Jia Deng, Wei Dong, Richard Socher, Li-Jia Li, Kai Li, and Li Fei-Fei. Imagenet: A large-scale
   hierarchical image database. In 2009 IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition,
   pp. 248–255. Ieee, 2009.
Emily Diana, Wesley Gill, Michael Kearns, Krishnaram Kenthapadi, and Aaron Roth. Minimax
 group fairness: Algorithms and experiments. In Proceedings of the 2021 AAAI/ACM Conference
 on AI, Ethics, and Society, pp. 66–76, 2021.
Pedro Domingos. A unified bias-variance decomposition and its applications. In 17th International
  Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 231–238, 2000.
Mengnan Du, Subhabrata Mukherjee, Guanchu Wang, Ruixiang Tang, Ahmed Awadallah, and Xia
 Hu. Fairness via representation neutralization. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
 34:12091–12103, 2021.
Michael Dusenberry, Ghassen Jerfel, Yeming Wen, Yian Ma, Jasper Snoek, Katherine Heller, Balaji
 Lakshminarayanan, and Dustin Tran. Efficient and scalable bayesian neural nets with rank-1
 factors. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 2782–2792. PMLR, 2020.
Sanghamitra Dutta, Dennis Wei, Hazar Yueksel, Pin-Yu Chen, Sijia Liu, and Kush Varshney. Is there
  a trade-off between fairness and accuracy? a perspective using mismatched hypothesis testing. In
  International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 2803–2813. PMLR, 2020.
Sebastian Farquhar, Yarin Gal, and Tom Rainforth. On statistical bias in active learning: How and
  when to fix it. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2020.
Vitaly Feldman and Chiyuan Zhang. What neural networks memorize and why: Discovering the long
  tail via influence estimation. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:2881–2891,
  2020.
Yarin Gal and Zoubin Ghahramani. Dropout as a bayesian approximation: Representing model
  uncertainty in deep learning. In international conference on machine learning, pp. 1050–1059.
  PMLR, 2016.


                                                 12
Yarin Gal, Riashat Islam, and Zoubin Ghahramani. Deep bayesian active learning with image data.
  In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 1183–1192. PMLR, 2017.
Karan Goel, Albert Gu, Yixuan Li, and Christopher Re. Model patching: Closing the subgroup
  performance gap with data augmentation. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2020.
Umang Gupta, Aaron M Ferber, Bistra Dilkina, and Greg Ver Steeg. Controllable guarantees for
 fair outcomes via contrastive information estimation. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on
 Artificial Intelligence, volume 35, pp. 7610–7619, 2021.
Michael Gutmann and Aapo Hyvärinen. Noise-contrastive estimation: A new estimation principle
 for unnormalized statistical models. In Proceedings of the thirteenth international conference on
 artificial intelligence and statistics, pp. 297–304. JMLR Workshop and Conference Proceedings,
 2010.
Kimia Hamidieh, Haoran Zhang, and Marzyeh Ghassemi. Evaluating and improving robustness of
  self-supervised representations to spurious correlations. In ICML 2022: Workshop on Spurious
  Correlations, Invariance and Stability, 2022.
Romana Hasnain-Wynia, David W Baker, David Nerenz, Joe Feinglass, Anne C Beal, Mary Beth
  Landrum, Raj Behal, and Joel S Weissman. Disparities in health care are driven by where minority
  patients seek care: examination of the hospital quality alliance measures. Archives of internal
  medicine, 167(12):1233–1239, 2007.
Marton Havasi, Rodolphe Jenatton, Stanislav Fort, Jeremiah Zhe Liu, Jasper Snoek, Balaji Lakshmi-
 narayanan, Andrew Mingbo Dai, and Dustin Tran. Training independent subnetworks for robust
 prediction. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2020.
He He, Sheng Zha, and Haohan Wang. Unlearn dataset bias in natural language inference by fitting
  the residual. arXiv preprint arXiv:1908.10763, 2019.
Max Hort, Zhenpeng Chen, Jie M Zhang, Federica Sarro, and Mark Harman. Bia mitigation for
 machine learning classifiers: A comprehensive survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.07068, 2022.
Neil Houlsby, Ferenc Huszar, Zoubin Ghahramani, and Mate Lengyel. Bayesian active learning for
  classification and preference learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1112.5745, 2011.
Aapo Hyvarinen and Hiroshi Morioka. Unsupervised feature extraction by time-contrastive learning
  and nonlinear ica. Advances in neural information processing systems, 29, 2016.
Badr Youbi Idrissi, Martin Arjovsky, Mohammad Pezeshki, and David Lopez-Paz. Simple data
  balancing achieves competitive worst-group-accuracy. In Conference on Causal Learning and
  Reasoning, pp. 336–351. PMLR, 2022.
Pavel Izmailov, Sharad Vikram, Matthew D Hoffman, and Andrew Gordon Gordon Wilson. What are
  bayesian neural network posteriors really like? In International conference on machine learning,
  pp. 4629–4640. PMLR, 2021.
Sangwon Jung, Sanghyuk Chun, and Taesup Moon. Learning fair classifiers with partially annotated
  group labels. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
  Recognition, pp. 10348–10357, 2022.
Bingyi Kang, Saining Xie, Marcus Rohrbach, Zhicheng Yan, Albert Gordo, Jiashi Feng, and Yannis
  Kalantidis. Decoupling representation and classifier for long-tailed recognition. In International
  Conference on Learning Representations, 2019.
Byungju Kim, Hyunwoo Kim, Kyungsu Kim, Sungjin Kim, and Junmo Kim. Learning not to learn:
  Training deep neural networks with biased data. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
  Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 9012–9020, 2019.
Nayeong Kim, Sehyun Hwang, Sungsoo Ahn, Jaesik Park, and Suha Kwak. Learning debiased
  classifier with biased committee. In ICML 2022: Workshop on Spurious Correlations, Invariance
  and Stability, 2022.


                                                13
Polina Kirichenko, Pavel Izmailov, and Andrew Gordon Wilson. Last layer re-training is sufficient
  for robustness to spurious correlations. In ICML 2022: Workshop on Spurious Correlations,
  Invariance and Stability, 2022.
Andreas Kirsch, Joost Van Amersfoort, and Yarin Gal. Batchbald: Efficient and diverse batch
  acquisition for deep bayesian active learning. Advances in neural information processing systems,
  32, 2019.
Pang Wei Koh, Shiori Sagawa, Henrik Marklund, Sang Michael Xie, Marvin Zhang, Akshay Bal-
  subramani, Weihua Hu, Michihiro Yasunaga, Richard Lanas Phillips, Irena Gao, et al. Wilds: A
  benchmark of in-the-wild distribution shifts. In International Conference on Machine Learning,
  pp. 5637–5664. PMLR, 2021.
Suraj Kothawade, Atharv Savarkar, Venkat Iyer, Ganesh Ramakrishnan, and Rishabh Iyer. Clinical:
  Targeted active learning for imbalanced medical image classification. In Ghada Zamzmi, Sameer
  Antani, Ulas Bagci, Marius George Linguraru, Sivaramakrishnan Rajaraman, and Zhiyun Xue
  (eds.), Medical Image Learning with Limited and Noisy Data, pp. 119–129, Cham, 2022. Springer
  Nature Switzerland. ISBN 978-3-031-16760-7.
David Krueger, Ethan Caballero, Joern-Henrik Jacobsen, Amy Zhang, Jonathan Binas, Dinghuai
  Zhang, Remi Le Priol, and Aaron Courville. Out-of-distribution generalization via risk extrapola-
  tion (rex). In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 5815–5826. PMLR, 2021.
Ravi Kumar, Daniel Lokshtanov, Sergei Vassilvitskii, and Andrea Vattani. Near-optimal bounds for
  cross-validation via loss stability. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 27–35.
  PMLR, 2013.
Preethi Lahoti, Alex Beutel, Jilin Chen, Kang Lee, Flavien Prost, Nithum Thain, Xuezhi Wang, and
  Ed Chi. Fairness without demographics through adversarially reweighted learning. Advances in
  neural information processing systems, 33:728–740, 2020.
Balaji Lakshminarayanan, Alexander Pritzel, and Charles Blundell. Simple and scalable predictive
  uncertainty estimation using deep ensembles. Advances in neural information processing systems,
  30, 2017.
Tai Le Quy, Arjun Roy, Vasileios Iosifidis, Wenbin Zhang, and Eirini Ntoutsi. A survey on datasets for
  fairness-aware machine learning. Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Data Mining and Knowledge
  Discovery, pp. e1452, 2022.
Jungsoo Lee, Eungyeup Kim, Juyoung Lee, Jihyeon Lee, and Jaegul Choo. Learning debiased
  representation via disentangled feature augmentation. Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 34:25123–25133, 2021.
Jungsoo Lee, Jeonghoon Park, Daeyoung Kim, Juyoung Lee, Edward Choi, and Jaegul Choo.
  Biasensemble: Revisiting the importance of amplifying bias for debiasing. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2205.14594, 2022.
Daniel Levy, Yair Carmon, John C Duchi, and Aaron Sidford. Large-scale methods for distributionally
  robust optimization. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:8847–8860, 2020.
Mingchen Li, Mahdi Soltanolkotabi, and Samet Oymak. Gradient descent with early stopping is
 provably robust to label noise for overparameterized neural networks. In International conference
 on artificial intelligence and statistics, pp. 4313–4324. PMLR, 2020.
Yi Li and Nuno Vasconcelos. Repair: Removing representation bias by dataset resampling. In
  Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 9572–
  9581, 2019.
Yunyi Li, Maria De-Arteaga, and Maytal Saar-Tsechansky. More data can lead us astray: Active data
  acquisition in the presence of label bias. arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.07723, 2022.
Tsung-Yi Lin, Priya Goyal, Ross Girshick, Kaiming He, and Piotr Dollár. Focal loss for dense object
  detection. In Proceedings of the IEEE international conference on computer vision, pp. 2980–2988,
  2017.


                                                 14
Evan Z Liu, Behzad Haghgoo, Annie S Chen, Aditi Raghunathan, Pang Wei Koh, Shiori Sagawa,
  Percy Liang, and Chelsea Finn. Just train twice: Improving group robustness without training
  group information. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 6781–6792. PMLR,
  2021.
Jeremiah Zhe Liu, Shreyas Padhy, Jie Ren, Zi Lin, Yeming Wen, Ghassen Jerfel, Zack Nado, Jasper
   Snoek, Dustin Tran, and Balaji Lakshminarayanan. A simple approach to improve single-model
   deep uncertainty via distance-awareness. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.00403, 2022.
Sheng Liu, Jonathan Niles-Weed, Narges Razavian, and Carlos Fernandez-Granda. Early-learning
  regularization prevents memorization of noisy labels. Advances in neural information processing
  systems, 33:20331–20342, 2020.
Francesco Locatello, Gabriele Abbati, Thomas Rainforth, Stefan Bauer, Bernhard Schölkopf, and
  Olivier Bachem. On the fairness of disentangled representations. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 32, 2019a.
Francesco Locatello, Stefan Bauer, Mario Lucic, Gunnar Raetsch, Sylvain Gelly, Bernhard Schölkopf,
  and Olivier Bachem. Challenging common assumptions in the unsupervised learning of disentan-
  gled representations. In international conference on machine learning, pp. 4114–4124. PMLR,
  2019b.
Russell Lyons and Yuval Peres. Probability on trees and networks, volume 42. Cambridge University
  Press, 2017.
Wesley J Maddox, Pavel Izmailov, Timur Garipov, Dmitry P Vetrov, and Andrew Gordon Wilson.
 A simple baseline for bayesian uncertainty in deep learning. Advances in Neural Information
 Processing Systems, 32, 2019.
David Madras, Elliot Creager, Toniann Pitassi, and Richard Zemel. Learning adversarially fair and
  transferable representations. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 3384–3393.
  PMLR, 2018.
Rafid Mahmood, Sanja Fidler, and Marc T Law. Low-budget active learning via wasserstein distance:
  An integer programming approach. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2021.
Natalia Martinez, Martin Bertran, and Guillermo Sapiro. Minimax pareto fairness: A multi objective
  perspective. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 6755–6764. PMLR, 2020.
Natalia L Martinez, Martin A Bertran, Afroditi Papadaki, Miguel Rodrigues, and Guillermo Sapiro.
  Blind pareto fairness and subgroup robustness. In International Conference on Machine Learning,
  pp. 7492–7501. PMLR, 2021.
Kayo Matsushita, Kayo Matsushita, and Hasebe. Deep active learning. Springer, 2018.
Ninareh Mehrabi, Fred Morstatter, Nripsuta Saxena, Kristina Lerman, and Aram Galstyan. A survey
  on bias and fairness in machine learning. ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR), 54(6):1–35, 2021.
Matthias Minderer, Josip Djolonga, Rob Romijnders, Frances Hubis, Xiaohua Zhai, Neil Houlsby,
 Dustin Tran, and Mario Lucic. Revisiting the calibration of modern neural networks. Advances in
 Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:15682–15694, 2021.
Yifei Ming, Hang Yin, and Yixuan Li. On the impact of spurious correlation for out-of-distribution
  detection. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 36, pp.
  10051–10059, 2022.
Junhyun Nam, Hyuntak Cha, Sungsoo Ahn, Jaeho Lee, and Jinwoo Shin. Learning from failure:
  De-biasing classifier from biased classifier. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  33:20673–20684, 2020.
Radford M Neal. Bayesian learning for neural networks, volume 118. Springer Science & Business
  Media, 2012.


                                               15
Yaniv Ovadia, Emily Fertig, Jie Ren, Zachary Nado, David Sculley, Sebastian Nowozin, Joshua
  Dillon, Balaji Lakshminarayanan, and Jasper Snoek. Can you trust your model’s uncertainty?
  evaluating predictive uncertainty under dataset shift. Advances in neural information processing
  systems, 32, 2019.

Sungho Park, Jewook Lee, Pilhyeon Lee, Sunhee Hwang, Dohyung Kim, and Hyeran Byun. Fair
  contrastive learning for facial attribute classification. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference
  on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 10389–10398, 2022.

Andrija Petrović, Mladen Nikolić, Sandro Radovanović, Boris Delibašić, and Miloš Jovanović. Fair:
  Fair adversarial instance re-weighting. Neurocomputing, 476:14–37, 2022.

David Pfau. A generalized bias-variance decomposition for bregman divergences. Unpublished
  Manuscript, 2013.

Colin Raffel, Noam Shazeer, Adam Roberts, Katherine Lee, Sharan Narang, Michael Matena, Yanqi
  Zhou, Wei Li, Peter J Liu, et al. Exploring the limits of transfer learning with a unified text-to-text
  transformer. J. Mach. Learn. Res., 21(140):1–67, 2020.

Ruggero Ragonesi, Riccardo Volpi, Jacopo Cavazza, and Vittorio Murino. Learning unbiased repre-
  sentations via mutual information backpropagation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference
  on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 2729–2738, 2021.

Piyush Rai, Avishek Saha, Hal Daumé III, and Suresh Venkatasubramanian. Domain adaptation
  meets active learning. In Proceedings of the NAACL HLT 2010 Workshop on Active Learning for
  Natural Language Processing, pp. 27–32, 2010.

John Rawls. Justice as fairness: A restatement. Harvard University Press, 2001.

John Rawls. A theory of justice. In Ethics, pp. 229–234. Routledge, 2004.

Pengzhen Ren, Yun Xiao, Xiaojun Chang, Po-Yao Huang, Zhihui Li, Brij B Gupta, Xiaojiang Chen,
  and Xin Wang. A survey of deep active learning. ACM computing surveys (CSUR), 54(9):1–40,
  2021.

Esther Rolf, Theodora T Worledge, Benjamin Recht, and Michael Jordan. Representation matters:
  Assessing the importance of subgroup allocations in training data. In International Conference on
  Machine Learning, pp. 9040–9051. PMLR, 2021.

Shiori Sagawa, Pang Wei Koh, Tatsunori B Hashimoto, and Percy Liang. Distributionally robust
  neural networks. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2019.

Shiori Sagawa, Aditi Raghunathan, Pang Wei Koh, and Percy Liang. An investigation of why
  overparameterization exacerbates spurious correlations. In International Conference on Machine
  Learning, pp. 8346–8356. PMLR, 2020.

Victor Sanh, Thomas Wolf, Yonatan Belinkov, and Alexander M Rush. Learning from others’
  mistakes: Avoiding dataset biases without modeling them. arXiv preprint arXiv:2012.01300, 2020.

Burr Settles. Active learning literature survey. Machine Learning, 15(2):201–221, 1994.

Amr Sharaf, Hal Daume III, and Renkun Ni. Promoting fairness in learned models by learning to
 active learn under parity constraints. In 2022 ACM Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and
 Transparency, pp. 2149–2156, 2022.

Aili Shen, Xudong Han, Trevor Cohn, Timothy Baldwin, and Lea Frermann. Contrastive learning for
  fair representations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2109.10645, 2021.

Changjian Shui, Fan Zhou, Christian Gagné, and Boyu Wang. Deep active learning: Unified and
  principled method for query and training. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence
  and Statistics, pp. 1308–1318. PMLR, 2020.


                                                   16
Changjian Shui, Qi Chen, Jiaqi Li, Boyu Wang, and Christian Gagné. Fair representation learning
  through implicit path alignment. In Kamalika Chaudhuri, Stefanie Jegelka, Le Song, Csaba
  Szepesvari, Gang Niu, and Sivan Sabato (eds.), Proceedings of the 39th International Conference
  on Machine Learning, volume 162 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 20156–
  20175. PMLR, 17–23 Jul 2022.
Agnieszka Słowik and Léon Bottou. On distributionally robust optimization and data rebalancing. In
  International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pp. 1283–1297. PMLR, 2022.
Nimit Sohoni, Jared Dunnmon, Geoffrey Angus, Albert Gu, and Christopher Ré. No subclass left
  behind: Fine-grained robustness in coarse-grained classification problems. Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 33:19339–19352, 2020.
Nimit Sohoni, Maziar Sanjabi, Nicolas Ballas, Aditya Grover, Shaoliang Nie, Hamed Firooz, and
  Christopher Ré. Barack: Partially supervised group robustness with guarantees. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2201.00072, 2021.
Hwanjun Song, Minseok Kim, Dongmin Park, and Jae-Gil Lee. Prestopping: How does early
 stopping help generalization against label noise? In ICML 2020 Workshop on Uncertainty and
 Robustness in Deep Learning, 2020.
Masashi Sugiyama, Taiji Suzuki, and Takafumi Kanamori. Density ratio estimation: A comprehensive
 review (statistical experiment and its related topics). RIMS Kokyuroku, 1703:10–31, 2010.
Ki Hyun Tae and Steven Euijong Whang. Slice tuner: A selective data acquisition framework for
  accurate and fair machine learning models. In Proceedings of the 2021 International Conference
  on Management of Data, pp. 1771–1783, 2021.
Jingru Tan, Changbao Wang, Buyu Li, Quanquan Li, Wanli Ouyang, Changqing Yin, and Junjie Yan.
   Equalization loss for long-tailed object recognition. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference
   on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 11662–11671, 2020.
Enzo Tartaglione, Carlo Alberto Barbano, and Marco Grangetto. End: Entangling and disentangling
  deep representations for bias correction. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer
  vision and pattern recognition, pp. 13508–13517, 2021.
Damien Teney, Ehsan Abbasnejad, and Anton van den Hengel. Unshuffling data for improved
  generalization in visual question answering. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International
  Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 1417–1427, 2021.
Christopher J Tosh and Daniel Hsu. Simple and near-optimal algorithms for hidden stratification
  and multi-group learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 21633–21657.
  PMLR, 2022.
Dustin Tran, Jeremiah Liu, Michael W Dusenberry, Du Phan, Mark Collier, Jie Ren, Kehang Han,
  Zi Wang, Zelda Mariet, Huiyi Hu, et al. Plex: Towards reliability using pretrained large model
  extensions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.07411, 2022.
Yao-Hung Hubert Tsai, Tianqin Li, Martin Q Ma, Han Zhao, Kun Zhang, Louis-Philippe Morency, and
  Ruslan Salakhutdinov. Conditional contrastive learning with kernel. In International Conference
  on Learning Representations, 2021a.
Yao-Hung Hubert Tsai, Martin Q Ma, Han Zhao, Kun Zhang, Louis-Philippe Morency, and Ruslan
  Salakhutdinov. Conditional contrastive learning: Removing undesirable information in self-
  supervised representations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.02866, 2021b.
Iulia Turc, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. Well-read students learn better:
   On the importance of pre-training compact models. arXiv preprint arXiv:1908.08962, 2019.
Prasetya Ajie Utama, Nafise Sadat Moosavi, and Iryna Gurevych. Mind the trade-off: Debiasing
  nlu models without degrading the in-distribution performance. In Proceedings of the 58th Annual
  Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 8717–8729, 2020a.


                                                17
Prasetya Ajie Utama, Nafise Sadat Moosavi, and Iryna Gurevych. Towards debiasing nlu models
  from unknown biases. In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
  Language Processing (EMNLP), pp. 7597–7610, 2020b.
Joost Van Amersfoort, Lewis Smith, Yee Whye Teh, and Yarin Gal. Uncertainty estimation using a
  single deep deterministic neural network. In International conference on machine learning, pp.
  9690–9700. PMLR, 2020.
Joost van Amersfoort, Lewis Smith, Andrew Jesson, Oscar Key, and Yarin Gal. On feature collapse
  and deep kernel learning for single forward pass uncertainty. arXiv preprint arXiv:2102.11409,
  2021.
Xuezhi Wang, Tzu-Kuo Huang, and Jeff Schneider. Active transfer learning under model shift. In
 International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 1305–1313. PMLR, 2014.
Florian Wenzel, Kevin Roth, Bastiaan S Veeling, Jakub Swiatkowski, Linh Tran, Stephan Mandt,
  Jasper Snoek, Tim Salimans, Rodolphe Jenatton, and Sebastian Nowozin. How good is the bayes
  posterior in deep neural networks really? arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.02405, 2020a.
Florian Wenzel, Jasper Snoek, Dustin Tran, and Rodolphe Jenatton. Hyperparameter ensembles for
  robustness and uncertainty quantification. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  33:6514–6527, 2020b.
Christopher KI Williams and Carl Edward Rasmussen. Gaussian processes for machine learning,
  volume 2. MIT press Cambridge, MA, 2006.
Andrew G Wilson and Pavel Izmailov. Bayesian deep learning and a probabilistic perspective of
  generalization. Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:4697–4708, 2020.
Andrew Gordon Wilson, Zhiting Hu, Ruslan Salakhutdinov, and Eric P Xing. Deep kernel learning.
  In Artificial intelligence and statistics, pp. 370–378. PMLR, 2016.
Binhui Xie, Longhui Yuan, Shuang Li, Chi Harold Liu, Xinjing Cheng, and Guoren Wang. Active
  learning for domain adaptation: An energy-based approach. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference
  on Artificial Intelligence, volume 36, pp. 8708–8716, 2022.
Sang Michael Xie, Ananya Kumar, Robbie Jones, Fereshte Khani, Tengyu Ma, and Percy Liang. In-
  n-out: Pre-training and self-training using auxiliary information for out-of-distribution robustness.
  In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2020.
Da Xu, Yuting Ye, and Chuanwei Ruan. Understanding the role of importance weighting for deep
  learning. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2020.
Yadollah Yaghoobzadeh, Soroush Mehri, Remi Tachet des Combes, Timothy J Hazen, and Alessandro
  Sordoni. Increasing robustness to spurious correlations using forgettable examples. In Proceedings
  of the 16th Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics:
  Main Volume, pp. 3319–3332, 2021.
Yuzhe Yang and Zhi Xu. Rethinking the value of labels for improving class-imbalanced learning.
  Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:19290–19301, 2020.
Jingzhao Zhang, Aditya Krishna Menon, Andreas Veit, Srinadh Bhojanapalli, Sanjiv Kumar, and
   Suvrit Sra. Coping with label shift via distributionally robust optimisation. In International
   Conference on Learning Representations, 2020.
Michael Zhang, Nimit Sharad Sohoni, Hongyang R Zhang, Chelsea Finn, and Christopher Ré.
 Correct-n-contrast: A contrastive approach for improving robustness to spurious correlations. In
 NeurIPS 2021 Workshop on Distribution Shifts: Connecting Methods and Applications, 2021.
Zhilu Zhang and Mert Sabuncu. Generalized cross entropy loss for training deep neural networks
  with noisy labels. Advances in neural information processing systems, 31, 2018.
Bowen Zhao, Chen Chen, Qi Ju, and Shutao Xia. Learning debiased models with dynamic gradient
  alignment and bias-conflicting sample mining. arXiv preprint arXiv:2111.13108, 2021.


                                                 18
Han Zhao and Geoff Gordon. Inherent tradeoffs in learning fair representations. Advances in neural
  information processing systems, 32, 2019.
Chunting Zhou, Xuezhe Ma, Paul Michel, and Graham Neubig. Examining and combating spurious
  features under distribution shift. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 12857–
  12867. PMLR, 2021.
Wei Zhu, Haitian Zheng, Haofu Liao, Weijian Li, and Jiebo Luo. Learning bias-invariant repre-
 sentation by cross-sample mutual information minimization. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
 International Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 15002–15012, 2021.
Xiangxin Zhu, Dragomir Anguelov, and Deva Ramanan. Capturing long-tail distributions of object
  subcategories. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
  pp. 915–922, 2014.


                                               19
A     A DDITIONAL BACKGROUND
A.1    R ECAP : N OTATION AND P ROBLEM S ETUP.
Dataset with subgroups: We consider a dataset D where each example {xi , yi } (xi ∈ X denotes the
features and yi ∈ Y the label) is associated with a discrete group label gi ∈ G = {1, . . . , |G |}.
Joint data distribution: We denote D = P(y, x, g) as the joint distribution of the label, feature and
groups, so that D above can be understood as a size-n set of i.i.d. samples from D. Notice that
this formulation implies a flexible noise model P(y|x, g) that depends on (x, g). It also implies a
flexible group-specific distribution P(y, x|g), where the joint distribution of (y, x) varies by group.
Note however that we do assume that the group label does not have additional predictive power
beyond appropriate representation of the features, i.e., there exists a representation function h∗ such
that for z = h∗ (x), we have P(y|z, g) = P(y|z), i.e., the semantic, label-relevant features are invariant
across subgroups (Arjovsky et al., 2019; Creager et al., 2021; Shui et al., 2022). Note however that
we do assume that the group label does not have additional predictive power beyond appropriate
representation of the features, i.e., there exists a representation function h∗ such that for z = h∗ (x),
we have P(y|z, g) = P(y|z), i.e., the semantic, label-relevant features are invariant across subgroups
(Arjovsky et al., 2019; Creager et al., 2021; Shui et al., 2022)
Subgroup prevelance: We denote the prevalence of each group as γg = E(y,x,g)∼D (1G=g ). As a result,
the notion of dataset bias is reflected as the imbalance in group distribution P(G) = [γ1 , . . . , γ|G | ]
(Rolf et al., 2021). In the applications we consider, it is often feasible to identify a subset of
underrepresented groups B ⊂ G which are not sufficiently represented in the population distribution
D and have γg   |G1 | (Sagawa et al., 2019; 2020). To this end, we also specify D ∗ = P(y, x|g)P∗ (g)
an optimal distribution, where P∗ (g) is an ideal group distribution (i.e., uniform such that P∗ (g) =
γg∗ = |G1 | ) so that all groups have sufficient representation in the data.
Loss function: We assume a loss function L(y, ŷ), that denotes the loss incurred when the predicted
label is ŷ while the actual label is y.
Hypothesis space: We consider learning a predictor from a hypothesis space F of functions
 f : X 7→ Y . We assume that the hypothesis space is well-specified, i.e., that it contains the Bayes-
optimal predictor ỹ : X → Y :
                                     ỹ (x) = arg min Ey∼P(y|x) (L y, y0 ).

                                             y0 ∈Y

We require the model class F to come with certain degree of smoothness, so that the model f ∈ F
cannot arbitrarily overfit to the noisy labels during the course of training. In the case of over-
parameterized models, this usually implies F is subject to certain regularization that is appropriate
for the model class (e.g., early stopping for SGD-trained neural networks) (Li et al., 2020).

A.2    D ISENTANGLING MODEL ERROR UNDER NOISE AND BIAS
Given a dataset D ∼ D and a loss function L , we consider learning the prediction function
 fD = arg min f ∈F L( f , y|D), where L(y, f |D) = ∑{xi ,yi }∈D L(yi , f (xi )). Following the previous work
(Pfau, 2013), we denote the ensemble predictor f¯ = arg min f ∈F ED∼D (L( fD , f )) over ensem-
ble members fD ’s, where each fD is trained on a random draw of training dataset D ∼ D, and
ỹ (x) = arg miny0 ∈Y Ey∼P(y|x) (L (y, y0 )) the (Bayes) optimal predictor. For test example {yi , xi }, we
can decompose the predictive error of a trained model fD (x) using a generalized bias-variance
decomposition for Bregman divergence:
Proposition A.1 (Noise-Bias-Variance Decomposition under Bregman divergence (Domingos, 2000;
Pfau, 2013)). Given a loss function of the Bregman divergence family, for a test example {y, x} the
expected prediction loss L(y, fD (x)) of an empirical predictor fD can be decomposed as:
           ED L(y, fD (x)) = ED L(y, ỹ(x)) + L(ỹ(x), f¯(x)) + ED L( f¯(x), fD (x))

                                                                                                         (10)
                                 |      {z       }    |      {z    }            |       {z        }
                                     Noise                Bias                   Uncertainty

Given a fixed data distribution D, the first term ED L(y, f ∗ (x)) quantifies

                                                                                the irreducible noise that
is due to the stochasticity in the noisy observation y. The third term ED L( f¯(x), fD (x)) quantifies the

variance in the prediction, which can be due to variations in the finite-size data D, the stochasticity
in the randomized learning algorithm F × D → fD , or the randomness in the initialization of an
overparameterized model (Adlam & Pennington, 2020). Finally, the middle term L(ỹ(x), f¯(x))


                                                     20
quantifies the bias between ỹ(x) (i.e., the “true label”) and the ensemble predictor f¯ learned from the
empirical data D ∼ D. It is inherent to the specification of the model class and cannot be eliminated by
ensembling, e.g., it can be caused by model misspecification, missing features, or regularization. To
make the idea concrete, consider a simple example where we fit a ridge regression model f (xi ) = β > xi
to the Gaussian observation data yi = θ > xi + ε, ε ∼ N(0, σ 2 ) under an imbalanced experiment design,
where we have |G | treatment groups and ng observations in each group. Here, xi = [1gi =1 , ..., 1gi =|G | ]
is a |G | × 1 one-hot indicator of the membership of gi for each group in G , and θ = [θ1 , . . . , θ|G | ] is
the true effect for each group. Then, under ridge regression, the noise-bias-variance decomposition for
                                    (λ θ )2       σ 2n
group g is ED (L(y, fD )) = σ 2 + (n +λ
                                      g
                                        )2
                                           + (n +λg)2 , where the regularization parameter λ modulates a
                                    g          g
trade-off between the bias and variance terms.

A.3    F URTHER D ECOMPOSITION
Further Uncertainty Decomposition for Probabilistic Models As an aside, when the predictive
model fD is probabilistic (e.g., the model generates a posterior predictive distribution P( f |D) rather
than a point estimate f ), the variance in Equation (10) is further decomposed as:
            ED L( f¯(x), fD (x)) = ED L( f¯(x), µD (x)) + ED E f ∼P( f |D) L(µD (x), f (x))

                                                                                                    (11)
                                     |       {z        } |                  {z             }
                                           Ensemble Diversity                   Posterior Variance

where µD (x) = E f ∼P( f |D) [ f (x)] is the posterior mean, and vD (x) = E f ∼P( f |D) L(µD (x), f (x)) is the
posterior variance of each ensemble member. As shown, comparing to an ensemble of deterministic
models, the ensemble of probabilistic models provides additional flexibility in quantifying model
uncertainty via the extra term of expected posterior variance.

Further Bias Decomposition for Minority Groups For the examples x coming from the under-
represented groups with γg   |G1 | , the bias term can be further decomposed into:

                            L(ỹ(x), f¯(x)) = L(ỹ(x), f¯∗ (x)) + E ( f¯∗ (x), f¯(x)),                            (12)
                                              |     {z        } |          {z       }
                                                   Bias, Model       Excess Bias, Data

where f¯∗ = arg min f ∈F ED∗ ∼D ∗ (L( fD∗ , f )) is the optimal ensemble predictor based on size-n datasets
D∗ sampled from the optimal distribution D ∗ where all groups have equal representation. Here,
L(ỹ(x), f¯∗ (x)) is the bias inherent to the model class and cannot be eliminated by ensembling. It
can be caused by model misspecification, missing features, or regularization. On the other hand,
E ( f¯∗ (x), f¯(x)) = L(ỹ(x), f¯(x)) − L(ỹ(x), f¯∗ (x)) indicates the “excess bias” for the underrepresented
groups caused by the imbalance in the group distribution P(G) in the data-generation distribution D.
To make the idea concrete, consider the ridge regression example from the previous section, where
                                                                                          (λ θ )2    σ 2n
the noise-bias-variance decomposition for group g is ED (L(y, fD )) = σ 2 + (n +λ
                                                                                g
                                                                                  )2
                                                                                     + (n +λg)2 , with the
                                                                                           g         g
regularization parameter λ modulating a trade-off between the bias and variance terms (Appendix F).
                                                                                                            (λ θ )∗2
Consequently, for an underrepresented group with small size γg   |G1 | , its predictive bias (n +λ     g
                                                                                                         )2
                                                                                                            is
                                                                                                     g
exacerbated due to lacking sufficient statistical information to counter the regularization bias, incuring
an excessive bias of E ( f¯∗ (x), f¯(x)) ≈ nγ ∗ γgg (γg∗ −γg ) when compared to an optimal ensemble predictor
                                            λθ
                                             g
f¯∗ trained from a perfectly balanced size-n datasets with γg∗ = 1/|G |.

A.4    M ODERN UNCERTAINTY ESTIMATION TECHNIQUES IN DEEP LEARNING
For a deep classifier p(x) = σ ( f (x)) with logit function f (x) = β > h(x) and h(x) ∈ RM the last-layer
hidden embeddings, the modern deep uncertainty methods quantifies model uncertainty by enabling
it to generate random samples from a predictive distribution. That is, for a model trained on data
D = {(xi , yi )}ni=1 , given a test data point xtest , the model can return a size-K sample:

                                       { fk (xtest )}Kk=1 ∼ P( f |xtest , D).
For example, in Monte Carlo Dropout (Gal & Ghahramani, 2016), the samples is generated by
perturbing the dropout mask in the learned predictive function f (·) = β > h(·)’s embedding function


                                                         21
h(·), while in Deep Ensemble (Lakshminarayanan et al., 2017), the sample comes directly from the
multiple parallel-trained ensemble members. Finally, in a neural Gaussian process model (Wilson
et al., 2016; Liu et al., 2022; van Amersfoort et al., 2021), the samples are generated from a Gaussian
process model using the hidden embedding function h(x) as the input. For example, for classification
problems, the predictive variance of the Gaussian process model v(xtest ) = Var( f |xtest , D) can be
expressed as (Williams & Rasmussen (2006), Chapter 3):
                                   v(xtest ) = k(xtest )>
                                                        1×n Vn×n k(xtest )n×1 ;

where Vn×n is a fixed matrix computed from training data, and k(xtest ) = [k(xtest , x1 ), . . . , k(xtest , xn )]
is a vector of kernel distances between xtest and the training examples {xi }ni=1 . The kernel function k
is commonly defined to be a monotonic function of the hidden embedding distance, e.g., k(xtest , xi ) =
exp(−||h(xtest ) − h(xi )||22 ) for the RBF kernel. As a result, the predictive uncertainty for a data points
xi is determined by the distance between xtest from the training data {xi }ni=1 . Consequently, a DNN
model’s quality in representation learning has non-trivial impact on its uncertainty performance.
Although first mentioned in the context of neural Gaussian process, this connection between the
quality of representation learning and the quality of uncertainty quantification also holds for state-of-
the-art techniques such as Deep Ensemble, as model averaging cannot eliminate the systematic errors
in representation learning and consequently the issue in uncertainty quantification (for example, see
Figure 6 and the corresponding ensemble uncertainty surface Figure 2f).

Neural Gaussian Process Ensemble In this work, to comprehensively investigate the effect of
different uncertainty techniques, we should to use a Deep Ensemble of neural Gaussian process as
our canonical model. That is, we parallel train K neural Gaussian process models { fk }Kk=1 . Then,
given a test data point xtest , each ensemble member will return a predictive distribution with means
{µk (x)}Kk=1 and variances {vk (x)}Kk=1 . Then, we can generate model prediction as Ek [µk (x)], and
quantify uncertainty in one of the two ways:
                                    Ensemble Diversity : Vark (µk (x));
                                     Posterior Variance : Ek (vk (x)),
where Vark , Ek are empirical means and variances over the ensemble members. As shown, they
correspond to the two components of the total model variance under squared error introduced in A.3.
We investigate the effectiveness of these two uncertainty signals in the experiments.

A.5    C ONNECTION BETWEEN GROUP ROBUSTNESS AND FAIRNESS
The notion of group robustness (e.g., worst-group accuracy) we considered in this work corresponds
to the notion of minimax fairness or Rawlsian max-min fairness (Lahoti et al., 2020; Martinez et al.,
2020; 2021; Diana et al., 2021). The philosophical foundation of this notion has been well-established
(Rawls, 2001; 2004). There have been notable works developed for both analyzing accuracy-fairness
tradeoff under this notion (e.g., Martinez et al. (2020; 2021)), and for improving fairness performance
without explicit annotation (i.e., ARL, (Lahoti et al., 2020)). It is also identified as the original
objective of the well-known Invariant Risk Minimization (IRM) work for invariant learning (Arjovsky
et al. (2019), Section 2).
To this end, under a sampling model with well-calibrated uncertainty, the active learning procedure
as discussed in introduction is expected to carry benefit for model fairness as well. Specifically,
in the context of fairness-aware learning, this means a sampling model with calibrated uncertainty
preferentially samples the under-represented protected group, leading to a sampled training set
with more balanced representation among population subgroups, and consequently reducing the
between-group generalization gap in the trained model and promoting its fairness properties.


                                                       22
B      M ETHOD S UMMARY
B.1      A LGORITHM

Algorithm 1 Introspective Self-play (I SP)
  Inputs: Training data Dtrain = {yi , xi }ni=1 ; (Optional) Group annotation Gtrain = {gi }ni=1 ;
                                             0
          Unlabelled data D pool = {x j }nj=1 .
                                                   0                                   0                                    0
    Output: Predicted probability {p(y|x j )}nj=1 ; Bias probability {p(b|x j )}nj=1 ; Predictive variance {v(x j )}nj=1 .

    . Stage I: Label Generation
    if Gtrain 6= 0/ then
        Btrain = {bi = I(gi ∈ B)};                   . Make underrepresentation label using group annotation gi .
    else
        B̂train = Sel f PlayBiasEstimation(Dtrain ).    . Estimate underrepresentation label using Algorithm 2

    . Stage II: Introspective Training
    Train fˆ on Dtrain with multi-task introspective objective L((yi , bi ), xi ).                             . Equation (4)
                                                                                              0
    Evaluate fˆ on x j ∈ D pool to generate sampling signals {p(y|x j ), p(b|x j ), v(x j )}nj=1 .             . Equation (3)


Algorithm 2 Underrepresentation Label Estimation via Cross-validated Self-play
  Inputs: Training data Dtrain = {yi , xi }ni=1 .
  Output: Estimate underrepresentation labels B̂train .

    Train K-fold cross-validated ensemble { fk }Kk=1 with Dtrain .
    Compute in-sample and out-of-sample ensemble predictions { fin,k (xi )}K                           Kout
                                                                                 k=1 , { f out,k (xi )}k=1 for all xi ∈ Dtrain .
                                                                                   in


    Estimate underrepresentation labels as B̂train = {bi = Ek [L( f¯in (xi ), fout,k (xi ))]}i=1 .
                                                                                             n              . (Equation (8))


B.2      E STIMATING G ENERALIZATION G AP USING C ROSS - VALIDATED E NSEMBLE
Practical Comments. Note that due to its cross validation nature, the self-play bias estimator b̂i
estimates the generalization error of a weaker model (i.e., trained on a smaller data size ncv < n).
This is in fact consistent with the practice in the previous debasing literature, where the main model
is trained on the error signals from weaker and more biased models (Clark et al., 2019; He et al.,
2019; Nam et al., 2020).
Further, in the context of SGD-trained neural networks, it is important to properly estimate the f¯in (xi )
so it does not overfit to the training label, via early stopping (Li et al., 2020; Liu et al., 2020). This
is easy to do in the context of cross validation: during training, we collect the estimated bias b̂i,t
across the training epochs
                             t = 1, . . . , T , and select the optimal stopping point t as the first time the
out-of-sample error E L(yi , fout,k (xi )) stablizes. In practice, we specify the early-stopping criteria
as when the running average (within a window T 0 = 5) of the cross validation error first stablizes
below a threshold ε. This is to prevent the situation where the errors for some hard-to-learn examples
keep oscillating throughout training and never stabilize.

Is perfect group identification necessary? In fact, it is not necessary to perfectly identify all
the subgroup examples to improve the final model’s tradeoff frontier. For example, when there
exists hard-to-learn majority-group examples and also easy-to-learn minority-group examples (also
known as ”benign bias” examples in the debiasing literature (Nam et al., 2020)), the active sampling
budget is better spent in sampling some of the hard-to-learn majority examples over the easy-to-learn
minority examples, so that the final tradeoff frontier is meaningfully improved both in the directions
of subgroup performance and of overall accuracy. To this end, including some hard-to-learn majority
examples (detected by the loss-based procedure) into introspective training help us to achieve that.
This is exactly the case in the toxicity detection experiments (Section 4). As shown in Table 2,
comparing between ISP-Identity v.s. ISP-Gap (trained on true group label v.s. cross-validation
estimated label), the ISP-Gap attains a significantly stronger accuracy-fairness performance while
sampling less minority examples. This is likely caused by the cross-validation estimator’s ability in
capturing challenging, non-identity-related examples instead of the easy-to-learn and identity-related


                                                              23
examples, which resulted in less sampling redundancy in the minority group (i.e., the identity-related
comments), and led to improved tradeoff frontier for the final model.

B.3     H YPERPARAMETERS AND C OMPUTATIONAL C OMPLEXITY
Hyper-parameters The full I SP procedure contains 3 hyper-parameters: The (optional) cross-
validated self-play in Stage I contains all three hyper-parameters: (1) the number of ensemble models
K and (2) the number of examples ncv to train each model. Both are standard to the bootstrap ensemble
procedure, and we set them to K = 10 and ncv = n/K in this work to ensure the total computation
complexity is comparable to training a single model on the full dataset. (3) the early stopping criteria
ε for noise estimation (as discussed in the previous section B.2), we set it heuristically to ε = 0.1 in
this work after visual inspection of the validation learning curves. The introspective training in Stage
II does not contain additional hyperparameter other than the standard supervised learning parameters
(e.g., learning rate and training epochs). We set these parameters based on a standard supervised
learning hyperparameter sweep based on the full data.

Computation Complexity When the group annotation is available, the computation complexity
of the I SP procedure (i.e., Stage II only) should be equivalent to the standard ERM procedure. On
the other hand, the computational complexity of the full I SP procedure (Stage I + II) should be
comparable to that of a standard two-stage debiasing method that trains multiple single models on
the full dataset (Utama et al., 2020b; Liu et al., 2021; Yaghoobzadeh et al., 2021; Nam et al., 2020;
Creager et al., 2021; Kim et al., 2022).


Figure 5: An example of 5-fold cross-validated ensemble. Each ensemble member received 60% of the data (highlighted in orange), and each
data split receives 3 in-sample fin,k and 2 out-of-sample predictions fout,k .


More specifically, The complexity of the cross-validated ensemble approach (i.e., the cross-validated
self-play) is identical to that of a single model training on full data (in the big O sense). This is because
for cross-validated ensembles, each ensemble member model is trained on different subsets of the
data. Therefore, if the complexity for a single model is T , then the complexity of the cross-validated
ensemble is K ∗ p ∗ T , where p < 1 is the percentage of sub-sampled training examples for each
ensemble member, and K is the ensemble size, notice that K ∗ p ∗ T = O(T ) since p and K are both
constants that don’t scale with data size.
In practice, we find setting p = 1/K (i.e., train K model on K non-overlap data splits) works rather
well and has the benefit of improving the cross-validation error estimate by reducing cross-split
correlation (Blum et al., 1999). This leads the complexity of cross-validated ensembles to be equal to
T , the complexity of training a single model on the full data. Furthermore, since ensemble training
is embarrassingly parallel, the complexity can also be massively reduced by leveraging multi-core
machines to perform parallel training.

C      A DDITIONAL T HEORY D ISCUSSION
C.1     P ROPOSITION 1: WHEN WILL IT BREAK DOWN ?
It is important to consider the situations where the guarantee in Proposition 1 can break down.
First note that since Proposition 1 is a consistency result, it expects reasonable number of training
examples in the neighborhood of x to ensure the convergence of p(x|b) (Equation (5)). In practice, the
convergence is not guaranteed for the tail groups that have extraordinarily low example count in the
dataset, since they can be statistically indistinguishable from the label noise under a finite-size dataset.
To this end, Figure 2 provides us an empirical view of the model’s bias estimation performance for
the low-prevalence groups. As shown, when the tail-group examples are well-separated from the
majority groups (i.e., the bias learning task is easy), a very small amount of examples is sufficient to
lead to reasonable underrepresentation prediction performance (Figure 2h, only 2 examples per tail


                                                                  24
group). This suggests that the actual number of examples required to attain reasonable performance
depends on the difficulty of the bias learning task. For example, for a challenging tail group that
shares much surface-form similarity with the majority groups (e.g., in Proposition 1, the tail examples
are extremely close or even nested within the majority groups), more examples are expected to obtain
a reasonable performance in underrepresentation prediction. Also note that the learning quality of the
model representation h(·) depends on the quality of the underrepresentation label b. In particular, the
noise in the underrepresentation labels can negatively impact introspective training by diminishing
the log likelihood ratio |logp(x|b = 1) − logp(x|b = 0)| in (5), leading the βb> h(x) to converge to a
target of lower magnitude, hampering its ability in bias-awareness. This issue becomes relevant when
the underrepresentation labels need to be estimated from data, where the vulnerability of fairness
procedures to label noise has been well-noted in the literature (e.g., Lahoti et al. (2020)), highlighting
the importance of label noise control when estimating the membership of the underrepresented groups.
For example, we note that some of the now popular method (e.g., JTT (Liu et al., 2021)) estimates
the membership of the underpresented groups using generalization error, which may be susceptible to
label noise (c.f., the noise-bias-variance decomposition in Appendix A.2). We develop bias estimation
procedures that controls for label noise in Section 2.2.

C.2    O N U NDERREPRESENTED GROUP B IN T HEOREM 1
In the main paper (section 3), we characterized the optimal allocation under assumptions on decay
rates of group-specific risk. We give some further analysis and interpretation of this result here.
To simplify things, we assume that there are only G = 1, 2 groups so that the optimal allocation is
characterized by a single number α ∈ [0, 1] representing the allocation to group 1 (the other group
allocation would be 1 − α). We further assume that γ1 = γ2 = 12 and that c2 = tc1 for some t > 0,
From the proof of theorem Theorem 1 from section I, we know that
                                    γ1 θ1 + γ2 θ2 = 1 =⇒ θ2 = 2 − θ1
so that we can set θ1 = θ , θ2 = 2 − θ . Then, we have that
                                                                 1
                                                           (θ ) p+1
                                      α∗ =             1                      1
                                                (θ ) p+1 + (t(2 − θ )) p+1

Further, from the proof of the theorem, we can infer that the optimal θ is
                                      
                                       ω        if ω < 2 1
                                                         1+t p
                                      
                                      
                                      
                                        2 − ω if ω > 2 1
                                                        1+t p
                                       2        if ω = 2
                                      
                                      
                                                   1                      1
                                             1+t p                    1+t p

so that the optimal allocation is
                                       1                          2
                           
                                           1          if ω <         1   (B = {2})
                                     2−ω                        1+t p
                                (  (  ω ))
                                          p+1
                           
                           
                            1+  t
                                      1                           2
                                            1          if ω >         1   (B = {1})
                            
                             1+(t ( 2−ω
                                      ω
                                         )) p+1                 1+t p
                               1                                  2
                                                                          (B = {1, 2})
                            
                            
                             1+t                      if ω =         1
                                                                1+t p

This shows that the optimal allocation to group 1 decays as a function of t, the difficulty of learning
group 2 relative to group 1. Further, it shows that this decay is more stark for smaller values of ω that
weight the fairness risk stronger than the population level risk.
Further, group 1 belongs to the underrepresented group B if ω ≥                     2
                                                                                        1   , showing that the chances
                                                                                  1+t p
that group 1 belongs to the underrepresented group increase as ω increases (there is greater emphasis
on the fairness risk) or as t decreases (group 1 becomes harder to learn relative to group 2).


                                                           25
D     R ELATED W ORK
D.1    S UPERVISED AND SEMI - SUPERVISED LEARNING UNDER DATASET BIAS
In recent years, there has been significant interest in studying robust generalization for long-tail popu-
lation subgroups under dataset bias. The literature is vast and encompasses topics including fairness,
debiasing, long-tail recognition, spurious correlation, distributional (i.e., domain or subpopulation)
shift, etc. In the following, we focus on notable and recent work that is highly relevant to the I SP
approach, and refer to works such as Caton & Haas (2020); Mehrabi et al. (2021); Hort et al. (2022)
for an exhaustive survey.
Majority of the fairness and debiasing work focuses on the supervised learning setting, where the
model only have access to a fixed and imbalanced dataset. Among them, the earlier work operated
under the assumption that the source of dataset bias is completely known, and the group annotation is
available for every training example. Then these group information is use to train a robust model
by modify components of the training pipeline (e.g., training objective, regularization method,
or composition of training data). For example, Levy et al. (2020); Sagawa et al. (2019); Zhang
et al. (2020) proposes minimizing the worst-group loss via Distributionally Robust Optimization
(DRO), which is shown to be equivalent to ERM training on a well-curated training set in some
settings (Słowik & Bottou, 2022); IRM (Arjovsky et al., 2019) proposes learning a classifier that
is simultaneously optimal for all groups by learning a invariant representation. Teney et al. (2021);
Idrissi et al. (2022); Byrd & Lipton (2019); Xu et al. (2020) studies the effect of group-weighted loss
in model’s fairness-accuracy performance, and REx (Krueger et al., 2021) minimizes a combination
of group-balanced and worst-case loss. Further, the recent literature has also seen sophisticated
neural-network loss that modifies gradient for the tail-group examples. For example, LDAM (Cao
et al., 2019) proposes to modify group-specific logits by an offset factor that is associated with
group size, and equalization loss (Tan et al., 2020) uses a instance-specific mask to suppress the
“discouraging gradients” from majority groups to the rare groups. On the regularization front, the
examples include IRM v1 (Arjovsky et al., 2019) that proposed to approximate the original IRM
objective through gradient penalty. Heteroskedastic Adaptive Regularization (HAR) (Cao et al.,
2020) imposes Lipschitz regularization in the neighborhood of tail-group examples. There also exists
a large collection of work imposing other types of fairness constraints. Finally, the third class of
methods modifies the composition of the training data by enriching the number of obsevations in the
tail groups, this includes Sagawa et al. (2020); Idrissi et al. (2022) that study the impact of resampling
to the worst-group performance, and Goel et al. (2020) that generates synthetic examples for the
minority groups. In the setting where the group information is available, our work proposes a novel
approach (introspective training) that has both a theoretical guarantee and is empirically competitive
than reweighted training.
On the other hand, there exist a separate stream of work that allows for partial group annotation,
i.e., the types of bias underlying a dataset is still completely known, but the group annotation is
only available for a subset of the data. Most work along this direction employs semi-supervised
learning techniques (e.g, confidence-threshold-based pseudo labeling), with examples include Spread
Spurious Attribute (SSA) (Nam et al., 2020), BARACK (Sohoni et al., 2021) and Fair-PG (Jung et al.,
2022). This setting can be considered as a special case of I SP where we use group information as the
underrepresentation label to train the p(b|x) predictor. However, our goal is distinct that we study the
efficacy of this signal as an active learning policy, and also investigate its extension in the case where
the label information is completely unobserved in the experiments Section 4.2.

D.2    E STIMATING DATASET BIAS FOR MODEL DEBIASING
In the situation where the source of dataset bias is not known and the group annotation is unavailable,
several techniques has been proposed to estimate proxy bias labels for the downstream debiasing
procedures. These methods roughly fall into three camps: clustering, adversarial search, and using
the generalization error from a biased model.
For clustering, GEORGE (Sohoni et al., 2020) and CNC (Zhang et al., 2021) proposed estimating
group memberships of examples based on clustering the last hidden-layer output. For adversarial
search, REPAIR (Li & Vasconcelos, 2019), ARL (Lahoti et al., 2020), EIIL (Creager et al., 2021),
BPF (Martinez et al., 2021), FAIR (Petrović et al., 2022), Prepend (Tosh & Hsu, 2022) infers the
group assignments by finding the worst-case group assignments that maximize certain objective


                                                   26
function. For example, Environment Inference for Invariant Learning (EIIL) (Creager et al., 2021)
infer the group membership by maximizing the gradient-based regularizer from IRM v1.
Estimating bias label using the error from a biased model is by far the most popular technique. These
include forgettable examples (Yaghoobzadeh et al., 2021), Product of Experts (PoE) (Clark et al.,
2019; Sanh et al., 2020), DRiFt (He et al., 2019) and Confidence Regularization (CR) (Utama et al.,
2020b;a) that uses errors from a separate class of weak models that is different from the main model;
Neutralization for Fairness (RNF) (Du et al., 2021) and Learning from Failure (LfF) that trains a
bias-amplified model of the same architecture using generalized cross entropy (GCE); and Just Train
Twice (JTT) that directly uses the error from a standard model trained from cross entropy loss.
Notably, there also exists several work that estimates bias label using ensemble techniques, this in-
cludes Gradient Alignment (GA) (Zhao et al., 2021) that identifies the tail-group (i.e., bias-conflicting)
examples based on the agreement between two sets of epoch ensembles, Bias-conflicting Detection
(BCD) (Lee et al., 2022) that uses the testing error of a biased deep ensemble trained with GCE, and
Learning with Biased Committee (LWBC) uses the testing error of a bootstrap ensemble.
To this end, our work proposes a novel self-play estimator (Equation (8)) that uses bootstrap ensembles
to estimate the generalization gap due to dataset bias. self-play estimator has the appealing property
of better controlling for label noise while more stably estimating model variance, addressing two
weaknesses of the naive predictive error estimator used in the previous works.

D.3    R EPRESENTATION LEARNING UNDER DATASET BIAS
Originated from the fairness literature, the earlier work in debiased representation learning has
focused on identifying a representation that improves a model’s fairness properties, as measured
by notions such as demographic parity (DP), equalized odds (EO), or sufficiency (Arjovsky et al.,
2019; Arjovsky, 2020; Creager et al., 2021; Shui et al., 2022). This is commonly achieved by striving
to learn a representation that is invariant with respect to the group information. Such methods are
commonly characterized as in-processing methods in the existing survey of the fairness literature
(Caton & Haas, 2020; Hort et al., 2022), and was categorized into classes of approaches including
adversarial training (Beutel et al., 2017; Kim et al., 2019; Ragonesi et al., 2021; Zhu et al., 2021;
Madras et al., 2018), regularization (Bahng et al., 2020; Tartaglione et al., 2021; Arjovsky et al.,
2019), contrastive learning (Shen et al., 2021; Park et al., 2022; Cheng et al., 2020) and its conditional
variants (Gupta et al., 2021; Tsai et al., 2021a;b; Chi et al., 2022), or explicit solutions to a bi-level
optimization problem (Shui et al., 2022). (Please see Caton & Haas (2020); Hort et al. (2022)
for a complete survey). However, some later works questions the necessity and the sufficiency of
such approaches. For example, some work shows that careful training of the output head along is
sufficient to yield improved performance in fairness and bias mitigation (Kang et al., 2019; Du et al.,
2021; Kirichenko et al., 2022), and Cherepanova et al. (2021) shows that models with fair feature
representations do not necessarily yield fair model behavior.
At the meantime, a separate stream of work explores the opposite direction of encouraging the model
to learn diverse hidden features. For example, Locatello et al. (2019b;a) establish a connection
between the notion of feature disentanglement and fairness criteria, showing that feature disentan-
glement techniques may be a useful property to encourage model fairness when sensitive variables
are not observed. However, such techniques often involves specialized models (e.g., VAE) which
restricts the broad applicability of such approaches. Some other work explores feature augmentation
techniques to learn both invariant and spurious attributes, and use them to debias the output head
(Lee et al., 2021). Finally, a promising line of research has been focusing on using self-supervised
learning to help the model avoid using spurious features in model predictions (Chen et al., 2020b;
Xie et al., 2020; Cai et al., 2021; Hamidieh et al., 2022). Our work follows this latter line of work by
proposing novel techniques to encourage model to learn diverse features that is bias-aware, but with
a distinct purpose of better uncertainty quantification.

D.4    ACTIVE LEARNING UNDER DATASET BIAS
In recent years, the role of training data in ensuring the model’s fairness and bias-mitigation per-
formance has been increasing noticed. Notably, (Chen et al., 2018) presented some of the earlier
theoretical and empirical evidence that increasing training set size along is already effective in
mitigating model unfairness. Correspondingly, under the assumption that the group information in the
unlabelled set is fully known, there has been several works that studies group-based sampling strate-


                                                   27
gies and their impact on model behavior. For example, Rai et al. (2010); Wang et al. (2014) shows
group-based active sampling strategy improves model performance under domain and distributional
shifts, and Abernethy et al. (2022) proves a guarantee for a worst-group active sampling strategy’s
ability in helping the SGD-trained model to convergence to a solution that attains min-max fairness.
A second line of research focuses on designing better active learning objectives that incorporates
fairness constraints, e.g., Fair Active Learning (FAL) (Anahideh et al., 2022) and PANDA (Sharaf
et al., 2022). Agarwal et al. (2022) introduce a data repair algorithm using the coefficient of variation
to curate fair and contextually balanced data for a protected class(es). Furthermore, there exists
few active learning works formulating the objective of their method as optimizing a fairness-aware
objective. For example, Slice Tuner (Tae & Whang, 2021) proposes adaptive sampling strategy
based on per-group learning curve to minimize fairness tradeoff, performs numeric optimization. Cai
et al. (2022) which formalized the fairness learning problem as an min-max optimization objective,
however their did not conduct further theoretical analysis of their objective, but instead proposed a
per-group sampling algorithm based predicted model error using linear regression. Finally, a recent
line of active learning work has been well-developed to formulate active learning from the perspective
of distributional matching between labeled and unlabeled datasets. (Shui et al., 2020; de Mathelin
et al., 2021; Mahmood et al., 2021; Xie et al., 2022). These approaches are well-equipped to hand
distributional shift, but often comes with the cost of assuming knowledge of the test feature distribu-
tion at the training time (Shui et al., 2020; de Mathelin et al., 2021; Mahmood et al., 2021; Xie et al.,
2022). In comparison, our work conducts theoretical analysis of the optimization problem Section 3,
and our proposed method (I SP) does not require a priori knowledge (e.g., group information) from
the unlabelled set.
On the other hand, there exists active re-sampling methods that do not require the knowledge of
group information in the unlabelled set. For example, Amini et al. (2019) learns the data distribution
using a VAE model under additional supervision of class / attribute labels, and then perform IPW
sampling with respect to learned model. REPAIR (Li & Vasconcelos, 2019) that estimates dataset
bias using prediction error of a weak model, and then re-train model via e.g., sample re-weighting
based on the estimated bias. The bias estimation method used in this work is analogous to that of
the JTT, which we compare with in our work. A work close to our direction is Branchaud-Charron
et al. (2021), which shows DNN uncertainty (i.e., BatchBALD with Monte Carlo Dropout (Kirsch
et al., 2019)) helps the model to achieve fairness objectives in active learning on a synthetic vision
problem. Our empirical result confirms the finding of Branchaud-Charron et al. (2021) on realistic
datasets, and we further propose techniques to improve the vanilla DNN uncertainty estimators for
more effective active learning under dataset bias.
As an aside, a recent work Farquhar et al. (2020) studies the statistical bias in the estimation of active
learning objectives due to the non-i.i.d. nature of active sampling. This is separate from the issue of
dataset bias (i.e., imbalance in data group distribution) which we focus on in this work.

D.5    U NCERTAINTY ESTIMATION WITH DNN S
In recent years, the probabilistic machine learning (ML) literature has seen a plethora of work that
study enabling calibrated predictive uncertainty in DNNss. Given a model f , the probabilistic DNN
model aims to learn a predictive distribution for the model function f , such that given training
data D = {(yi , xi )}ni=1 and a testing point xtest , the model outputs a predictive distribution f (xtest ) ∼
P( f |xtest , D) rather than a simple point prediction. To this end, the key challenge is to learn a
predictive distribution (implicitly or explicitly) during the SGD-based training process of DNN,
generating calibrated predictive uncertainty without significantly impacting the accuracy or latency
when compared to a deterministic DNN.
To this end, the classic works focus on the study of Bayesian neural networks (BNNs) (Neal, 2012),
which took a full Bayesian approach by explicitly placing priors to the hidden weights of the neural
network, and performance MCMC or variance inference during learning. Although theoretically
sound, BNN are delicate to apply in practice, with its performance highly dependent on prior
choice and inference algorithm, and are observed to lead to suboptimal predictive accuracy or even
poor uncertainty performance (e.g., under distributional distribution shift) (Wenzel et al., 2020a;
Izmailov et al., 2021). Although there exists ongoing works that actively advancing the BNN practice
(e.g., Dusenberry et al. (2020)). On the other hand, some recent work studies computationally more
approaches that implicitly learn a predictive distribution as part of deterministic SGD training. Notable
examples include Monte Carlo Dropout (Gal & Ghahramani, 2016) which generates predictive


                                                     28
distribution by enabling the random Dropout mask during inference, and ensemble approaches such
as Deep Ensemble (Lakshminarayanan et al., 2017) and their later variants (Maddox et al., 2019;
Wenzel et al., 2020b; Havasi et al., 2020) that trains multiple randomly-initialized networks to learn
the modes of the posterior distribution of the neural network weights (Wilson & Izmailov, 2020).
Although generally regarded as the state-of-the-art in deep uncertainty quantification, these methods
are still computationally expensive, requiring multiple DNN forward passes at the inference time.
At the meantime, a more recent line of research avoids probabilistic inference for the hidden weights
altogether, focusing on learning a scalable probabilistic model (e.g., Gaussian process) to replace
the last dense layer of the neural network (Van Amersfoort et al., 2020; van Amersfoort et al.,
2021; Liu et al., 2022; Collier et al., 2021). A key important observation in this line of work is
the role of hidden representation quality in a model’s ability in obtaining high-quality predictive
uncertainty. In particular, Liu et al. (2022); Van Amersfoort et al. (2020) suggests that this failure
mode in DNN uncertainty can be caused by an issue in representation learning known as feature
collapse, where the DNN over-focuses on correlational features that help to distinguish between
output classes on the training data, but ignore the non-predictive but semantically meaningful input
features that are important for uncertainty quantification. (Ming et al., 2022) also observed that DNN
exhibits particular modes of failure in out-of-domain (OOD) detection in the presence of dataset bias.
Later, Tran et al. (2022); Minderer et al. (2021) suggests that this issue can be partially mitigated by
large-scale pre-traininig with large DNNs, where larger pre-trained DNN’s tend to exhibit stronger
uncertainty performance even under spurious correlation and subpopulational shift. In this work, we
confirm this observation in the setting of dataset bias in Figure 2), and propose simple procedures to
mitigate this failure mode in representation learning without needing any change to the DNN model,
and illustrates improvement even on top of large-scale pre-trained DNNs (BERT).
Deep uncertainty methods in active learning. Active learning with DNNs is an active field with
numerous theoretical and applied works, we refer to Matsushita et al. (2018); Ren et al. (2021) for
comprehensive survey, and only mention here few notable methods that involves DNN uncertainty
estimation techniques. Under a classification model, the most classic approach to uncertainty-based
active learning is to use the predictive distribution’s entropy, confidence or margin as the acquisition
policy (Settles, 1994). Notice that in the binary classification setting, these three acquisition policy
are rank-equivalent since they are monotonic to the distance between max[p(x), 1 − p(x)] and the null
probability value of 0.5. On the other hand, Batch Active learning by Diverse Gradient Embeddings
(BADGE) (Ash et al., 2019) proposes to blend diversity-based acquisition policy into uncertainty-
based active learning, by applying k-means++ algorithm to the gradient embedding of the class-
specific logits (which quantifies uncertainty). As a result, BADGE may also suffer from the pathology
in model representation under dataset bias, which this work is attempt to address.
Finally, Houlsby et al. (2011) has proposed a information-theoretic policy Bayesian active learning
by disagreement (BALD), which measures the mutual information between data points and model
parameters and is adopted in the deep uncertainty literature (Gal et al., 2017; Kirsch et al., 2019;
Kothawade et al., 2022). However, stable estimation of mutual information can be delicate in practice,
and we leave the investigation of these advanced acquisition policies under dataset bias for future
work.

E     E XPERIMENT D ETAILS AND FURTHER DISCUSSION
E.1   2D C LASSIFICATION
We train a 10-member neural Gaussian process ensemble (as introduced in Appendix A.4), where
each ensemble member is based on a 6-layer Dense residual network with 512 hidden units and
pre-activation dropout mask (rate = 0.1). The model is trained using Adam optimizer ( learning
rate = 0.1) under cross entropy loss, and with a batch size 512 for 100 epochs. After training,
each ensemble member returns a tuple of predicted label probability, predicted under-representation
probability and predictive uncertainty {(pk (y|x), pk (b|x), vk (x))}10
                                                                     k=1 , and we compute the ensemble’s
predicted probability surface as Ek [p(y|x)], predicted underrepresentation surface as Ek [pk (b|x)], and
the predictive uncertainty surface as Ek [vk (y|x)], where Ek is the empirical average over the ensemble
member predictions. The predictive uncertainty surface of individual members is shown in Figures
6-7.


                                                   29
        GP Uncertainty, Data Space (Model 0)                 GP Uncertainty, Data Space (Model 1)               GP Uncertainty, Data Space (Model 2)               GP Uncertainty, Data Space (Model 3)               GP Uncertainty, Data Space (Model 4)
4                                                   4                                                   4                                                  4                                                  4

3                                                   3                                                   3                                                  3                                                  3

2                                                   2                                                   2                                                  2                                                  2

1                                                   1                                                   1                                                  1                                                  1

0                                                   0                                                   0                                                  0                                                  0

1                                                   1                                                   1                                                  1                                                  1

2                                                   2                                                   2                                                  2                                                  2

3                                                   3                                                   3                                                  3                                                  3

4                                                   4                                                   4                                                  4                                                  4
    4   3     2     1    0     1     2     3   4        4    3     2     1    0     1     2     3   4       4   3     2     1    0     1     2     3   4       4   3     2     1    0     1     2     3   4       4   3     2     1    0     1     2     3   4

        GP Uncertainty, Data Space (Model 5)                 GP Uncertainty, Data Space (Model 6)               GP Uncertainty, Data Space (Model 7)               GP Uncertainty, Data Space (Model 8)               GP Uncertainty, Data Space (Model 9)
4                                                   4                                                   4                                                  4                                                  4

3                                                   3                                                   3                                                  3                                                  3

2                                                   2                                                   2                                                  2                                                  2

1                                                   1                                                   1                                                  1                                                  1

0                                                   0                                                   0                                                  0                                                  0

1                                                   1                                                   1                                                  1                                                  1

2                                                   2                                                   2                                                  2                                                  2

3                                                   3                                                   3                                                  3                                                  3

4                                                   4                                                   4                                                  4                                                  4
    4   3     2     1    0     1     2     3   4        4    3     2     1    0     1     2     3   4       4   3     2     1    0     1     2     3   4       4   3     2     1    0     1     2     3   4       4   3     2     1    0     1     2     3   4



                                                            Figure 6: Uncertainty surface of individual ensemble members, ERM training

        GP Uncertainty, Data Space (Model 0)                 GP Uncertainty, Data Space (Model 1)               GP Uncertainty, Data Space (Model 2)               GP Uncertainty, Data Space (Model 3)               GP Uncertainty, Data Space (Model 4)
4                                                   4                                                   4                                                  4                                                  4

3                                                   3                                                   3                                                  3                                                  3

2                                                   2                                                   2                                                  2                                                  2

1                                                   1                                                   1                                                  1                                                  1

0                                                   0                                                   0                                                  0                                                  0

1                                                   1                                                   1                                                  1                                                  1

2                                                   2                                                   2                                                  2                                                  2

3                                                   3                                                   3                                                  3                                                  3

4                                                   4                                                   4                                                  4                                                  4
    4   3     2     1    0     1     2     3   4        4    3     2     1    0     1     2     3   4       4   3     2     1    0     1     2     3   4       4   3     2     1    0     1     2     3   4       4   3     2     1    0     1     2     3   4

        GP Uncertainty, Data Space (Model 5)                 GP Uncertainty, Data Space (Model 6)               GP Uncertainty, Data Space (Model 7)               GP Uncertainty, Data Space (Model 8)               GP Uncertainty, Data Space (Model 9)
4                                                   4                                                   4                                                  4                                                  4

3                                                   3                                                   3                                                  3                                                  3

2                                                   2                                                   2                                                  2                                                  2

1                                                   1                                                   1                                                  1                                                  1

0                                                   0                                                   0                                                  0                                                  0

1                                                   1                                                   1                                                  1                                                  1

2                                                   2                                                   2                                                  2                                                  2

3                                                   3                                                   3                                                  3                                                  3

4                                                   4                                                   4                                                  4                                                  4
    4   3     2     1    0     1     2     3   4        4    3     2     1    0     1     2     3   4       4   3     2     1    0     1     2     3   4       4   3     2     1    0     1     2     3   4       4   3     2     1    0     1     2     3   4



                                                   Figure 7: Uncertainty surface of individual ensemble members, introspective training.


As shown, compared to the ERM-trained model, the introspective-trained model generates similar
label prediction decision I(p(y|x) > 0.5) (Figures 2a v.s. 2e), but with much improved uncertainty sur-
face (Figures 2b v.s. 2f). Specifically, we compute predictive variance using the standard Gaussian pro-
cess variance formula v(xtest ) = k(xtest )> Vk(xtest ), where k(xtest ) = [k(xtest , x1 ), . . . , k(xtest , xn )]n×1
is a vector of kernel distances based on the embedding distances ||h(xtest ) − h(xi )||2 from the training
data (Appendix A.4). As shown, the model uncertainty under ERM model are not sufficiently sensi-
tive to directions in the data space that are irrelevant for making prediction decisions on the training
data (i.e., the directions that are parallel to the decision boundary) (Figure 2f). As a result, it did not
learn sufficiently diverse hidden features, leading to a significantly warped representation space that
is extremely stretched out in the direction that is orthogonal to the decision boundary, and extremely
compressed otherwise (Figure 2g). Consequently, the model cannot strongly distinguish the minority
examples from the majority examples in the representation space, and can become overconfident even
in unseen regions that was never covered by training data. This can be undesirable for uncertainty
quantification under data bias, especially for the purpose of identifying underrepresented minority
examples, where the distinguishing features between the minority and the majority examples are not
predictive for the target label (e.g., the image background). This issue is further exacerbated in the
single models (see Figure 6). In comparison, the uncertainty surface from an introspective-trained
model does not suffer from this failure case. As shown in Figure 2b, the model is less inclined to
become overconfident in unseen regions, especially in the neighborhood of the minority examples.
Correspondingly in the representation space, the model learned more diverse features and is able to
better distinguish the minority examples from the majority examples (Figure 2b). To understand how
introspective training induces such improvement in model behavior, Figures (2g) and (2h) visualize
the model’s underrepresentation prediction p(b|x) in the representation space and the data space,
respectively. As shown, due to the need of predicting the underrepresented examples (i.e., “introspec-
tion”) during training, the model has to learn hidden features that distinguishes the minority examples


                                                                                                                            30
from the majority examples in its representation space, to a degree that they can be separated by a
linear decision boundary in the last layer (Figure 2h). Consequently, the model naturally learns a more
disentangled representation space through simple multi-task training, and is able to provide predicted
bias probabilities p(b|x) (Figure 2h) in addition to high-quality predictive uncertainty (Figure 2b) for
the downstream active learning applications.

E.2     TABULAR AND L ANGUAGE E XPERIMENTS
Data. For tabular data, we use the U.S. Census Income data adult from the official UCI reposi-
tory4 . For the language task, we use the CivilCommentsIdentity from the TensorFlow Dataset
repository5 . For Census Income, we define the underrepresented groups as the union of (Female,
High Income) and (Black, High Income); for Toxicity Detection, we define the underrepresented
groups as the identity × label combination (male, female, white, black, LGBTQ, christian, muslim,
other religion) × (toxic, non-toxic) (16 groups in total) as in (Koh et al., 2021). For CivilComments,
the identity annotation is a value between (0, 1) (it is the average rating among multiple raters), and
we include an example into the underrepresented group only if the rating > 0.99 (i.e. all raters agree
about the identity) following (Koh et al., 2021). However, we do note that this leads to a under
coverage of the group membership, as many comments with plausible identity mentions are not
included into the group identity labels.

Model. For tabular experiments, we use a 2-layer Dense ResNet model with 128 hidden units and
pre-activation dropout rate = 0.1, using a random-feature Gaussian process with hidden dimension
256 as the output layer (Liu et al., 2022) (In the preliminary experiments, we tried larger models with
update to 6-layers and 1024 hidden units, and did not observe significant improvement). For language
experiments, we used BERTsmall mode initialized from the official pre-trained checkpoint released
at BERT GitHub page(Turc et al., 2019)6 . In each active learning round, we train the Dense ResNet
model with Adam optimizer with learning rate 0.1, batch size 256 and maximum epoch 200; and
train the BERT model with AdamW optimizer (learning rate 1e-5) for 6 epochs with batch size 16.


Figure 8: Experiment Protocol. Boxes with thick outlines (Underrepresentation Label, Introspective Training Method, Sampling Signal)
indicates the experiment components where the methods differ.



Active Learning Protocol. Figure 8 visualizes the experiment protocol. As shown, in each stage,
we first (optionally) trains a cross validated ensemble to estimate the under-representation labels,
where we split the data into 10 cross-validation splits, and train ensemble members on 1 split and
predict the rest of the 9 splits. We then use the ensemble’s in-sample and out-of-sample predictions to
compute the underrepresentation label b̂i (Equation (8)), and conduct introspective training (eq. (4))
to generate the final active sampling signals for 8 rounds to generate the final sampled data (red box).
At the end of round 8, we estimate the underrepresentation label for the final sampled data, and send it
to the final model for reweighted training to generate the full accuracy-fairness frontier. The sampling
model is always a 10-member ensemble of neural Gaussian process (introduced in Appendix A.4),
4
  https://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/datasets/adult
5
  https://www.tensorflow.org/datasets/catalog/civil comments
6
  https://github.com/google-research/bert



                                                                31
and the final model is always a single DNN with architecture identical to the sampling model (i.e.,
2-layer Dense ResNet for census income and BERTsmall for toxicity detection).
For both tasks, we randomly sample as small subset as the initial labelled dataset (2,500 out of 32,561
total training examples for census income, and 50,000 out of total 405,130 examples for toxicity
detection), and use the rest of the training set as the unlabelled set for active learning. For each
sampling round, the AL model acquires 1,500 examples for census income, and 15,000 examples for
the toxicity detection, so the total sample reaches roughly half of the total training set size after 8
rounds.
In the final model training, we use the standard re-weighting objective (Liu et al., 2021):

                                  ∑ Lce (y, f (x)) + λ ∑ Lce (y, f (x))
                                (x,y)6∈B̂                     (x,y)∈B̂

where B̂ is the set of underrepresented examples identified by the underrepresentation label, i.e.,
(xi , yi ) ∈ B̂ if b̂i > t. We vary the thresholds t and the up-weight coefficient λ over a 2D grid (t ∈
{0.05, 0.1, 0.15, ..., 1.0} and log(λ ) ∈ {0., 0.5, 1, 1.5, . . . , 10.}) to get a collection of model accuracy-
fairness performances (i.e., accuracy v.s. worst-group accuracy), and use them to identify the Pareto
frontier defined by this combination of data and reweighting signal.

Active Learning Signals. In this work, we consider four types of active sampling signals. Recall
that the sampling model (neural Gaussian process ensemble) is a K-member ensemble that generates
three predictive quantities: (1) label probability {pk (y|x)}10
                                                             k=1 , (2) underrepresentation probability
{pk (b|x)}10
           k=1 and (3) predictive variance {v(x)} 10 (recall that E and Var are the empirical mean
                                                  k=1                k        k
and variance).
       • Margin: The gap between the highest class probability and the second highest class probabil-
         ity for the output label. In the binary prediction context, this is equivalent to 2∗|p(y|x)−0.5|,
         i.e., the gap between the mean predicted probability and the null value of 0.5. We use the
         mean predictive label probability of the ensemble, which leads to:
                                            Margin(x) = 2 ∗ |Ek (pk (y|x)) − 0.5|.
       • Predicted Underrepresentation: The mean predictive underrepresentation probability of
         the ensemble, which leads to:
                                               Underrep(x) = Ek (pk (b|x)).
       • Diversity: i.e., Ensemble Diversity (introduced in Appendix A.4). The variance of label
         predictions:
                                      Diversity(x) = Vark (pk (y|x)).
       • Variance: i.e., Predictive Variance (introduced in Appendix A.4). The mean of predictive
         variances:
                                          Variance(x) = Ek (vk (x)).

F     N OISE - BIAS - VARIANCE DECOMPOSITION IN R IDGE R EGRESSION
Consider fitting a ridge regression model f (xi ) = β > xi to the Gaussian observation data yi = θ > xi +
ε, ε ∼ N(0, σ 2 ) under an imbalanced experiment design, where we have |G | treatment groups and
ng observations in each group. . Here, xi = [1gi =1 , ..., 1gi =|G | ] is a |G | × 1 one-hot indicator of
the membership of gi for each group in G , and θ = [θ1 , . . . , θ|G | ] is the true effect for each group.
Then, under ridge regression, the noise-bias-variance decomposition for group g is ED (L(y, fD )) =
       (λ θ )2     σ 2n
σ 2 + (n +λ
          g
            )2
               + (n +λg)2 , where the regularization parameter λ modulates a trade-off between the bias
        g          g
                                                                                               indep
and variance terms. In Appendix F.3, we also treat the case of group-specific noise εi ∼ N(0, σg2 ) .

F.1   E RROR D ECOMPOSITION IN A G ENERAL S ETTING
We first derive the decomposition in a general setting with data {yi , φi }ni=1 , where φi is the d × 1
(fixed) features that follows a distribution P(φ ). We consider a well-specified scenario where the data


                                                         32
generation mechanism as:
                                                                         iid
                            yi = ỹi + ε,      where ỹi = θ > φi , ε ∼ N(0, σ 2 ),
and θd×1 = [θ1 , . . . , θ|G | ] is the true coefficient. Under ridge regression, we fit a linear model
f (xi ) = φi> β to the data by minimizing the following squared loss objective:
                                      ||yn×1 − Φn×d βd×1 ||22 + λ ||β ||22 ,
which gives rise to the following solution:
                                          β̂ = (Φ> Φ + λ Id )−1 Φ> y.                                 (13)
                                                                                              iid
notice β̂ is a random variable that depends on the data Φn×d = [φ1> , . . . , φn> ] ∼ P(φ ). Notice that
under squared loss, the ensemble predictors f¯ = argmin f EΦ [( f − β̂ > xi )2 ] is simply the mean of
individual predictors, i.e, f¯ = EΦ (β̂ > xi ) = β̄ > xi , where β̄ = EΦ (β̂ ).
Consequently, given a new observation {y, φ }, the noise-bias-variance decomposition of β̂ under
squared loss is:
                   E[(y − Φβ̂ )2 ] = Ey [(y − ỹ)2 ] + (ỹ − β̄ > φi )2 + EΦ [β̄ > φi − β̂ > φi ]2
                                    = σ 2 + φi> [θ − β̄ ][θ − β̄ ]> φi + φi>Var(β̂ )φi .              (14)
                                     |{z} |            {z            } |     {z      }
                                       Noise               Bias                  variance

As shown, to obtain a closed-form expression of the decomposition, we need to first derive the
expressions of Bias(β̂ ) = [θ − β̄ ] and Var(β̂ ). Under the expression of the ridge predictor (13), we
have:
                                Bias(β̂ ) = [θ − β̄ ]
                                            = θ − E[(Φ> Φ + λ Id )−1 Φ> Φθ ]
                                            = E[I − (Φ> Φ + λ Id )−1 Φ> Φ]θ
                                            = λ ∗ E[(Φ> Φ + λ Id )−1 ]θ ;
                                 Var(β̂ ) = E(Var(β̂ |Φ)) +Var(E(β̂ |Φ)),
with
                  E(Var(β̂ |Φ)) = E[(Φ> Φ + λ Id )−1 Φ>Var(y)Φ(Φ> Φ + λ Id )−1 ]
                                    = σ 2 E[(Φ> Φ + λ Id )−1 Φ> Φ(Φ> Φ + λ Id )−1 ]
                                    = σ 2 ∗ E[(Φ> Φ + λ Id )−1 − λ (Φ> Φ + λ Id )−2 ].
                  Var(E(β̂ |Φ)) = E[Sθ θ > S> ] − E[S]θ θ > E[S> ]

where S = (Φ> Φ + λ Id )−1 Φ> Φ.
As shown, the above expression depends on the random-matrix moments E[(Φ> Φ + λ Id )−1 ],
E[(Φ> Φ + λ Id )−2 ], E[(Φ> Φ + λ Id )−1 Φ> Φ] and E[Sθ θ > S> ].

F.2    E RROR D ECOMPOSITION UNDER O RTHOGONAL D ESIGN
The above moments are in general difficult to solve due to the involvement of matrix inverse and
product within the expectation. However, a closed-form expression is possible under an orthogonal
design where φi = [1gi =1 , . . . , 1gi =|G | ] is the one-hot vector of treatment group memberships. Then,
denote Diag[zg ] the diagonal matrix with diagonal elements zg and [zgg0 ]gg0 the full matrix whose


                                                         33
(g, g0 ) element is zgg0 , we have:

                                                   Φ> Φ = diag[ng ]
                                                                    1
                                    E[(Φ> Φ + λ Id )−1 ] = diag[        ],
                                                                 ng + λ
                                                                      1
                                    E[(Φ> Φ + λ Id )−2 ] = diag[            ],
                                                                 (ng + λ )2
                                                                   ng
                                E[(Φ> Φ + λ Id )−1 Φ> Φ] = diag[        ],
                                                                 ng + λ
and
                                                                                   ng n0g
          E[(Φ> Φ + λ Id )−1 Φ> Φθ θ > Φ> Φ(Φ> Φ + λ Id )−1 ] = [                                θg θg0 ]gg0 .
                                                                             (ng + λ )(n0g + λ )
We are now ready to derive the full decomposition (15), without loss of generality, we assume φi
belongs to group g. Then:
                                                                               λ
                    φi> Bias(β̂ ) = λ ∗ φi> E[(Φ> Φ + λ Id )−1 ]θ =                θg ;
                                                                            ng + λ
                   φi>Var(β̂ )φi = σ 2 ∗ φi> E[(Φ> Φ + λ Id )−1 − λ (Φ> Φ + λ Id )−2 ]φi ;
                                         σ2     λσ2          σ 2 ng
                                   =         −           =            .
                                       ng + λ (ng + λ )2   (ng + λ )2
Consequently, we have the noise-bias-variance decomposition in (15) as:
                                        Noise: σ 2 ;
                                                                           (λ θg )2
                                         Bias: ||φi> Bias(β̂ )||22 =                 ;
                                                                          (ng + λ )2
                                                                            σ 2 ng
                                Uncertainty: φi>Var(β̂ )φi            =              .
                                                                          (ng + λ )2

F.3   E RROR D ECOMPOSITION UNDER O RTHOGONAL D ESIGN AND H ETEROGENEOUS N OISE
We now consider the case where yi ∼ N(θ > φi , σg2 ) follows a normal distribution with group-specific
noise. Using the same decomposition as in F.1, we see that:
                    E[(y − Φβ̂ )2 ] = Ey [(y − ỹ)2 ] + (ỹ − β̄ > φi )2 + EΦ [β̄ > φi − β̂ > φi ]2
                                      = σg2 + φi> [θ − β̄ ][θ − β̄ ]> φi + φi>Var(β̂ )φi .                       (15)
                                       |{z} |            {z            } |     {z      }
                                        Noise               Bias                  variance

As shown, the nature of the bias and variance decomposition in fact does not change, and the noise
component is now the group-specific variance σg2 . Therefore, by following the same derivation as in
Appendix F.2, we have:
                                        Noise: σg2 ;
                                                                           (λ θg )2
                                         Bias: ||φi> Bias(β̂ )||22 =                 ;
                                                                          (ng + λ )2
                                                                            σ 2 ng
                                Uncertainty: φi>Var(β̂ )φi            =              .
                                                                          (ng + λ )2


                                                          34
G       P ROOF OF P ROPOSITION 1
Through introspective training, there is a guarantee on a model’s bias-awareness based on its hidden
representation and uncertainty estimates. At convergence, a well-trained model f = ( fy , fb ) should
satisfy the property that p(b = 1|x) = σ ( fb (x)).
(I) (Bias-aware Hidden Representation) We denote the odds for x belonging to the underrepresented
group B as ob (x) = p(x|b = 1)/p(x|b = 0). Using Bayes’ theorem, we derive the following:


                                   p(b|x) = σ (β T h(x) + β0 )
                               p(b = 1|x)
                           log            = β T h(x) + β0
                               p(b = 0|x)
                      p(x|b = 1)p(b = 1)
                  log                     = β T h(x) + β0
                      p(x|b = 0)p(b = 0)
                                                                                              p(b = 1)
                             β T h(x) + β0 = log P(x|b = 1) − logP(x|b = 0) + log
                                                                                              p(b = 0)
                                                                   p(b = 1)
                             β T h(x) + β0 = log ob (x) + log                                            (16)
                                                                   p(b = 0)

Hence, the hidden representation is aware of the likelihood ratio of whether an example x belongs to
the underrepresented group, and the last-layer bias β0 corresponds to the marginal likelihood ratio of
the prevalence of the underrepresented groups p(b = 1)/p(b = 0) .
(II) (Bias-aware Embedding Distance) Next, we examine the embedding distance between two
examples (x1 , x2 ), i.e., ||h(x1 ) − h(x2 )||2 .
The Cauchy-Schwarz inequality states that for two vectors u and v of the Euclidean space, |hu, vi| ≤
||u|| ||v||. Hence, the distance between two embeddings can be expressed as β T [h(x1 ) − h(x2 )] ≤
||β ||2 ||h(x1 ) − h(x2 )||2 . Using this property and Equation (16), we derive the following:
                                       β T h(x1 ) − β T h(x2 ) = log ob (x1 ) − log ob (x2 )
                                        β T [h(x1 ) − h(x2 )] = log ob (x1 ) − log ob (x2 )
                                   log ob (x1 ) − log ob (x2 ) ≤ ||β ||2 ||h(x1 ) − h(x2 )||2
                              1
                                   [log ob (x1 ) − log ob (x2 )] ≤ ||h(x1 ) − h(x2 )||2
                           ||β ||2
                                               1        ob (x1 )
                                                    log          ≤ ||h(x1 ) − h(x2 )||2                  (17)
                                            ||β ||2     ob (x2 )

Since the above inequality is invariant to the relative position of (x1 , x2 ), we also have:
   1       ob (x2 )
||β || log o (x ) ≤ ||h(x1 ) − h(x2 )||2 , which implies:
    2     b   1

                                                      1              ob (x1 )       ob (x2 )
                          ||h(x1 ) − h(x2 )||2 ≥           ∗ max(log          , log          ).
                                                   ||β ||2           ob (x2 )       ob (x1 )

As shown, the distance between the hidden embeddings h(x1 ), h(x2 ) is lower-bounded by the log-
odds ratio that a given example is in the underrepresented group. With this guarantee on the model’s
learned embedding distance, we expect the hidden features to be more diverse than when trained on
the main task alone, since it needs to sufficient features to distinguish the underrepresented-group
examples from those of the majority in the hidden space.

H       P ERFORMANCE G UARANTEE FOR L OSS - BASED TAIL - GROUP D ETECTION
In this section, we derive a lower bound for the group detection performance based on the self-play
estimator introduced in Section 2.2. We derive the result in a general setting without further assump-
tions on the data distribution. The goal here is to provide a broadly applicable, and mathematically


                                                          35
rigorous account of how various aspects of the data distribution and the model behavior impacts
the performance of the subgroup detection procedure, rather than deriving the tightest possible
performance guarantee for a specific family of model class or data distribution. Our proof technique
develops a novel Cantelli-type lower bound on the tail probabilities of the form P(F(l) > q) (where
F is a cumulative distribution function (CDF) and l a random variable), and also a novel tight upper
bound on Var(F(l)), which may be of independent interest.
Let’s first establish some notations. Recall P(x, y, g) is the data-generating distribution (Appendix A.1).
For the majority group g = 0 and minority-group g = 1, we denote P0 (.) = P(.|g = 0) and P1 (.) =
P(.|g = 1) the data distribution for the majority and minority group, and recall γ0 = P(G = 0) and
γ1 = 1 − γ0 the prevalence of these two groups. Furthermore:
Group-specific error and its distribution. Given a loss function L(., .) of Bergman divergence
family and a fixed, unfair model fy that violates the sufficiency criteria (Arjovsky et al., 2019; Shui
et al., 2022), denote l0 = L(ỹ0 , fy (x0 )) and l1 = L(ỹ1 , fy (x1 )) the cross-validation generalization gaps
for the majority and the minority examples (ỹ0 , x0 ) ∼ P0 and (ỹ1 , x1 ) ∼ P1 , where ỹg represents the true
label without label noise. Notice that (l0 , l1 ) are random variables due to the randomness in (P0 , P1 ).
To this end, also denote (µ0 , µ1 ), (σ02 , σ12 ) the means and variances of the group-specific losses (l0 , l1 ).
Due to the fy ’s violation of the sufficiency criteria (i.e., E0 (y| fy (x) = t) 6= E1 (y| fy (x) = t)), we expect
the model fy ’s cross-validation loss is systematically worse for the minority groups, i.e., there’s
a systematic difference in group-specific loss µ1 − µ0 = d > 0. Finally, denote F(li ) = P(l < li )
the CDF for the distribution of the loss l = L(y, fy (x)), (y, x) ∼ P, and (F0 , F1 ) the CDF for the
distributions of l0 , l1 , respectively.
Rank-based Estimator. We identify the minority group examples using a rank-based estimator.
Specifically, recall F(li ) = P(l < li ) is the CDF of the population loss, then the rank-based estimator
for subgroup detection is:
                                          ˆ i = 1) = I(F(li ) > q).
                                          I(g                                                               (18)
That is, we include a training example xi into the introspective training only if the population quantile
of its generalization error is higher than q, which is a user-specific threshold controlling the precision
and recall of the estimator’s identification performance.
Then, the below theorem describes how the estimator performance P(gi = 1|F(li ) > q) is related to
the user-specified threshold q, and the characteristics of data distribution (i.e., the group prevalence
γ0 , γ1 ) as well as the classifier performance (in terms of the group-specific loss distribution F0 , F1 ).
Theorem H.1 (Tail-group detection performance of rank-based estimator). For (l0 , l1 ) a pair of
random variables for minority- and majority-group examples. Denote d = E(l1 − l0 ) > 0 and
σ 2 = Var(l1 − l0 ) the mean and variance of the between-group generalization gap. Then, given a user-
                                 2
specified threshold q ∈ (0, d 2d+σ 2 ), the performance of the rank-based estimator P(g = 1|F(l) > q) is
bounded by:
                                                    1 − γ0     z2                    E[F0 (l1 )] − q
         P(g = 1|F(l) > q) ≥ (1 − γ0 )2 + γ0 ∗             ∗ 2          where     z= p               .      (19)
                                                    1−q z +1                           Var[F0 (l1 )]
Here, F0 (l1 ) = P(l0 < l1 ) is the majority-group loss CDF F0 evaluated at the minority-group loss
l1 = L(ỹ1 , fy (x1 )) where (ỹ1 , x1 ) ∼ P1 .

Proof is at Appendix J. Notice here due to the randomness in l1 , F0 (l1 ) is a random variable that
follows a continuous distribution and is bounded within F0 ∈ [0, 1]. Therefore F0 (l1 ) has valid
moments E[F0 (l1 )] and Var[F0 (l1 )]. We see that the performance bound (19) is intuitively sensible:
a lower majority group prevalence γ0 , a higher rank threshold q, and a higher likelihood for loss
dominance F0 (l1 ) = P(l0 < l1 ) all contributes a stronger identification performance. Here, we see
         E[F0 (l1 )]−q
that z = √             is a distribution dependent quantity that governs the difficulty of identifying the
            Var[F0 (l1 )]
minority group.
Clearly, a larger magnitude of z leads to a stronger guarantee in detection performance in Theorem
H.1. For the interested readers, the below result provides a lower bound for the magnitude of z in terms
of the characteristics of model performance (i.e., the moments of the group-specific loss distributions


                                                       36
(e.g., d = µ1 − µ2 and (σ12 , σ22 )), which can be used to obtain a more precise understanding of
P(g = 1|F(l) > q) in (Equation (19)) in practice:
Theorem H.2 (Lower bound on the standardized likelihood of loss dominance z.). Consider the
                                              E[F0 (l1 )]−q
standardized likelihood of loss dominance z = √             , where the likelihood of loss dominance
                                                        Var[F0 (l1 )]
F0 (l1 ) = P(l0 < l1 ) is a random variable in terms of l1 = L(ỹ1 , fy (x1 )), (ỹ1 , x1 ) ∼ P1 . We have:
                                d2
            E[F0 (l1 )] ≥              where    d = µ1 − µ0 > 0, σ 2 = Var(l1 − l2 ) ≤ σ02 + σ12 ,
                            σ 2 + d2
                            F0 (µ0 )2    σ2
          Var[F0 (l1 )] ≤             ∗ 2 1 2,                                                                (20)
                                4      σ1 + d
where F0 (µ0 ) = P(l0 ≤ µ0 ) is the probability of the majority-group loss l0 smaller than its mean
µ0 = E(l0 ). Therefore, z can be bounded by:
                                                 s
                     E[F0 (l1 )] − q     2          σ12 + d 2            d2
                 z= p                ≥         ∗              ∗ (                    − q).      (21)
                        Var[F0 (l1 )] F0 (µ0 )         σ12        (σ12 + σ22 ) + d 2


The proof is in Appendix J. It relies on a novel upper bound of CDF variance (i.e., Equation (20)),
which is important for guaranteeing a high magnitude of z and consequently a tighter bound for group
detection performance in Equation (19).
The combination of Theorems H.1-H.2 provides us an opportunity to quantitatively understand of
the group detection performance P(g = 1|F(l) > q) in terms of the estimator configuration (i.e.,
the user-specified threshold q), data distribution (i.e., the majority-group prevalence γ0 ), and the
degree of unfairness of the vanilla model fy (in terms of the distributions of the group-specific
losses). For example, consider a setting with majority-group prevalence γ0 = 0.85, expected between-
group loss gap d = 1, group-specific variances σ1 = σ2 = 0.15 and P(l0 < µ0 ) = 0.5, using a
percentile threshold q = 0.9, the rank-based estimator I(F(l) > q) has group detection performance
P(g = 1|F(l) > q) > 0.9.
It is also worth commenting that, following the previous discussion, we see that the success of group
identification relies on valid estimation of model’s generalization error (with respect to the true label).
To this end, the K-fold cross-validated ensemble procedure we used in this work is known to produce
unbiased and low-variance estimates for the expected generalization loss (Blum et al., 1999; Kumar
et al., 2013).
Finally, we highlight that the above results are broadly applicable and derived under weak, nearly
assumption-free conditions. A even tighter performance bounds can be obtained by making further
assumptions on the family of data distributions or model class, which is outside the scope of the
current work. Another interesting direction is to incorporate the finite-sample estimation error of
K-fold cross validation into the analysis (Blum et al., 1999; Kumar et al., 2013; Bayle et al., 2020),
although this necessitates a careful treatment of model’s generalization behavior (i.e., loss stability)
in the subgroup setting, which we will pursue in the future work.

I   P ROOF OF T HEOREM 1
Proof. Let r (α) = (αn)−p and ragg (n) = τn−q + δ . As discussed in section 3, we assume that the
group-specific risk decays as
                              E[R fˆα,n |G = g ] = cg r (αg ) + ragg (n)


where fˆα,n is the minimizer of the γ-weighted empirical risk on a dataset of size n with allocation α
and the expectation is with respect to the randomness of the dataset used to train fˆ.
Under the above assumption, the optimization problem for α looks like
                                               !

             min ω ∑ γg cg r (αg ) + ragg (n) + (1 − ω) max cg r (αg ) + ragg (n)
              α∈∆|G |       g                                           g



                                                      37
The term ragg (n) is a constant that does not impact the optimal solution. Hence, we drop it and focus
on the problem                                    !
                          min ω
                         α∈∆|G |
                                        ∑ γg (cg r (αg )) + (1 − ω) max
                                                                     g
                                                                        (cg r (αg ))
                                        g
We begin by noting that the objective is strictly convex and the domain of optimization is bounded.
Hence, there exists a unique global optimum.
Turning the constraint ∑g∈G αg = 1 into a Lagrangian, we obtain
                                      !                                                       !
                 min ω
                 α≥0
                         ∑ γg (cg r (αg )) + (1 − ω) max
                                                      g
                                                         (cg r (αg )) + λ ∑ αg − 1
                          g                                                        g∈G

where λ ∈ R is a Lagrange multiplier.
At the optimum, we know that the Lagrangian should have 0 within its subdifferential wrt α (Boyd &
Vandenberghe, 2004). The subdifferential is given by
        (ωγ1 + (1 − ω)µ1 ) c1 r0 (α1 ) + λ
                                                                                                       
                                0
                                                                                                         
 (ωγ2 + (1 − ω)µ2 ) c2 r (α2 ) + λ
                                                                                                         
                                                                                                          
                                                           |G |
                                              
                       .                      where µ ∈ ∆ is such that µg > 0 ⇐⇒ g ∈ arg max cg0 r αg0
                        ..
                                                                                             g0 ∈G
                                                                                                       
                                                                                                         
                                   0
                                                                                                         
      ωγ|G | + (1 − ω)µ|G | c|G | r α|G | + λ
where r0 denotes the derivative of r. Since 0 belongs to the subdifferential at the optimum, there must
exist µ satisfying the constraints above such that

                                   0               λ
                           αg? = rinv  −                             ∀g ∈ G
                                          cg (ωγg + (1 − ω)µg )
       0 is the inverse of r 0 . Since r 0 is a homogeneuous function of its argument, so is its inverse,
where rinv
and λ can be eliminated to enforce the constraint ∑g αg = 1, so that the optimal solution αg? is

                                       0
                                      rinv     − (cg (ωγg + (1 − ω)µg ))−1
                          αg? =              0

                                   ∑g0 ∈G rinv    − cg0 ωγg0 + (1 − ω)µg0
                                                             µ
Let s denote the denominator and θg = ω + (1 − ω) γgg so that

                                          0
                                         rinv  − (cg γg θg )−1
                                   αg? =
                                                   s
and θ must satisfy:

                  ∑ θg γg = 1, θg ≥ ω        ∀g ∈ G , θg > ω ⇐⇒ g ∈ arg max cg0 r αg?0
                 g∈G                                                       g0 ∈G

Using the fact that r (t) = (nt)−p , we have that
                                        −1                   1 −1           1             −1
       arg max cg0 r αg?0 = arg min cg0 p αg?0 = arg min cgp+1
                                                            0
                                                                p
                                                                  (γg θg ) p+1 = arg min cg0 p γg θg
            g0                     g0                   g0                               g0

                                                            −1
If we sort groups in ascending order according to cg p γg to obtain g1 , g2 , . . ., a value of θ satisfying
the conditions above can be computed as follows:
Initialize θg = ω ∀g ∈ G
Set k = 1
Until ∑g θg γg = 1 or k = |G | repeat:


                                                       38
    a)   l = min(k + 1, |G |)
                                                                                                       −1                   −1
    b)    Set θg j = θg j t (for j ≤ k) for the largest t ≥ 1 such that (i) ∑g θg γg = 1 or (ii) cg1 p γg1 θg1 = . . . = cgl p γgl θgl
    c)   k = k+1

It is easy to see that this algorithm must terminate as it can go for at most |G | rounds. Further, by
construction, we have θg ≥ ω∀g ∈ G since we start at these values and only scale up any of the θg .
At the j-th iteration of the loop, we have that
                                            −1                         −1
                                           cg1 p γg1 θg1 = . . . = cg j p γg j θg j
In the j-th iteration, we scale all θg j (m = 1, . . . , j + 1) up by the same factor t by the same amount so
that we achieve the above for all groups upto g j+1 , or we hit the constraint ∑g θg γg = 1. If the former
happens, we begin the next iteration with the same invariant. If the latter happens, we have obtained
                                                                                           −1
a θ that satisfies ∑g θg γg = 1 and θgi > ω for i < k and gi ∈ arg ming0 cg0 p γg θg for i < k.
If we reach the iteration where k = |G |, we can simply scale up all the θg by the same amount until
                                                                  −1
∑g θg γg = 1 is satisfied and we would have that all cg γg θg is equal for all g ∈ G and all θg > ω.
                                                       p


J        P ROOF OF T HEOREMS H.1 AND H.2
J.1      P ROOF FOR T HEOREM H.1
Proof. By Bayes’ rule, we have:
                                                                                       P(g = 1)
                            P(g = 1|F(l) > q) = P(F(l) > q|g = 1) ∗                                              (22)
                                                                                      P(F(l) > q)

Expression for P(g = 1) and P(F(l) > q)
Notice that P(g = 1) = 1 − γ0 , and P(F(l) > q) = P(U > q) = 1 − q for U ∼ Uni f (0, 1). Here we
used the fact that F(l) ∼ Uni f (0, 1) when F is the CDF for the distribution of the random variable l
(Blitzstein & Hwang, 2015).
Expression for P(F(l) > q|g = 1)
Notice P(F(l) > q|g = 1) = P(F(l1 ) > q), where l1 = L(ỹ1 , fy (x1 )), (ỹ1 , x1 ) ∼ P1 is the random
variable for the minority-group loss. Also notice that F(l1 ) = P(l 0 < l1 ) where l 0 = L(y0 , fy (x0 )) for
(y0 , x0 , g0 ) ∼ P is the non-group-specific loss. Then a conditional decomposition of P(F(l1 ) > q)
reveals :
       P(F(l1 ) > q) = P[P(l 0 < l1 ) > q]
                     = P P(l 0 < l1 ) > q|g0 = 0 P(g0 = 0) + P P(l 0 < l1 ) > q|g0 = 1 P(g0 = 1)


                     = P F0 (l1 ) > q γ0 + (1 − q)(1 − γ0 ),
                                             0               0
                                                                                      0
where
                equality follows since P(g = 0) = γ0 , P(g = 1) = 1 − γ0 and P P(l < l1 ) > q =
        the last
P F1 (l1 ) > q = P(U > q) = 1 − q for U ∼ Uni f (0, 1). Here we again used the fact that F1 (l1 ) ∼
Uni f (0, 1) when F1 is the CDF for the distribution of l1 (Blitzstein & Hwang, 2015).

Lower bound for P F0 (l1 ) > q

Lower bound P F0 (l1 ) > q by deriving a Cantelli-type inequality using the second moment method
(Lyons & Peres, 2017). Specifically, for a random variable R with E(R) ≥ 0, we have:
                                                                                          P(R > 0)    E(R)2
          E(R)2 ≤ E(R ∗ 1R>0 )2 ≤ E(R2 )P(R > 0) which implies                                      ≥       .
                                                                                        1 − P(R > 0) Var(R)


                                                             39
Setting R = F0 (l1 ) − q, we have:

         P F0 (l1 ) > q       (E(F0 (l1 )) − q)2                                                        z2
                           ≥                     = z2 ,           which implies P(F0 (l1 ) > q) ≥
       1 − P(F0 (l1 ) > q)      Var(F0 (l1 ))                                                         1 + z2

Derive the final bound
Finally, using the above three facts, we can express Equation (22) as:
                                                            P(g = 1)                          1 − γ0
       P(g = 1|F(l) > q) = P(F(l) > q|g = 1) ∗                          = P(F(l) > q|g = 1) ∗
                                                          P(F(l1 ) > q)                       1−q
which further leads to:
                                                         1 − γ0                       z2          1−γ
                                                                                                      0
P(g = 1|F(l) > q) = (1 − q)(1 − γ0 ) + P F0 (l1 ) > q γ0 ∗     ≥ (1 − q)(1 − γ0 ) +        ∗ γ0  ∗      ,
                                                           1−q                      1 + z2         1−q
                                                                                  2
yielding the final bound P(g = 1|F(l) > q) ≥ (1 − γ0 )2 + γ0 ∗ 1−γ    z
                                                               1−q ∗ 1+z2 as in Equation (19).
                                                                  0


J.2   P ROOF FOR T HEOREM H.2
Proof. For F0 (l1 ), recall F0 is the CDF of l0 = L(ỹ0 , fy (x0 )) where (ỹ0 , x0 ) ∼ P0 and l1 = L(ỹ1 , fy (x1 ))
is the random variable of minority-group loss with (ỹ1 , x1 ) ∼ P1 .
                                 0 (l1 ))−q
To derive lower bound for z = E(F
                              Var(F (l )) , first derive bounds on E(F0 (l1 )) and Var(F0 (l1 )):
                                          0 1

Lower bound for E(F0 (l1 ))
Recall P(F(l)|g = 1) = P(F(l1 )), where l1 = L(ỹ1 , fy (x1 )) is the random variable for minority-group
error with (ỹ1 , fy (x1 )) ∼ P1 . Then:
                        E(F0 (l1 )) = E(F0 (l)|g = 1) = P(l0 ≤ l1 ) = P(l1 − l0 ≥ 0).
By the second moment method inequality (Lyons & Peres, 2017), we have:
                                              E[l1 − l0 ]2         E[l1 − l0 ]2
                        P(l1 − l0 ≥ 0) ≥                   =
                                             E[(l1 − l0 ) ] Var(l1 − l0 ) + E[l1 − l0 ]2
                                                         2

                                                       E[l1 − l0 ]2
                                         ≥
                                             Var(l1 ) +Var(l0 ) + E[l1 − l0 ]2
                                                    d2
                                         =                        .                                            (23)
                                             (σ02 + σ12 ) + d 2

Upper bound for Var(F0 (l1 ))
                         h                 i
Recall that Var(F(l)) = E (F(l) − E(F(l)))2 . Using the iterative expectation formula, we split the
variance computation for F0 (l1 ) into two regions of l1 depending on whether the minority-group loss
of l1 ≥ µ1 − λ σ1 :
                      Var(F0 (l1 )) =Var(F0 (l1 )|l1 ≤ µ1 − λ σ1 )P(l1 ≤ µ1 − λ σ1 )+
                                     Var(F0 (l1 )|l1 > µ1 − λ σ1 )P(l1 > µ1 − λ σ1 ),
which holds for any positive multiplier λ > 0.
Notice that in the above, P(l1 < µ1 − λ σ1 ) in the second line describes the tail probability of the
loss distribution of l1 , for suitably large λ , P(l1 < µ1 − λ σ1 ) should be small. On the other hand,
Var(F0 (l1 )|l1 ≥ µ1 − λ σ1 ) in the second line describes the variance of F0 (l1 ) in the region where l1
is large. When the distribution of l0 and l1 is well separated (i.e., µ1 − µ0 = d > 0), for suitable value
of λ , we expect the value of F0 (l1 = F0 (µ1 − λ σ1 )) to be high and close to 1, and as a result the
Var(F0 (l1 )|l1 ≥ µ1 − λ σ1 ) will be low since F0 (l1 ) is bounded within a small range [F0 (µ1 − λ σ1 ), 1].


                                                         40
Consequently, to obtain a tight upper bound of Var(F(l)), it is sufficient to identify a suitable value
of λ such that both Var(F0 (l1 )|l1 ≥ µ1 − λ σ1 ) and P(l1 < µ1 − λ σ1 ) are low.
To identify a suitable value of λ , first derive an upper bound of Var(F0 (l1 )) in terms of λ . Notice
below two facts:


       • By Cantelli’s inequality:
                                                                     1
                                           P(l1 ≤ µ1 − λ σ1 ) ≤          .
                                                                   λ2 +1
       • By the inequality for variance of the bounded variables:
                                                                1
                                Var(F0 (l1 )|l1 ≤ µ1 − λ σ1 ) ≤ F0 (µ1 − λ σ1 )2 ,
                                                                4
         where the first inequality follows by the fact that for a random variable R bounded between
         [a, b] (in this case between [F(µ1 − λ σ1 ), 1]), its variance is bounded by Var(R) ≤ (b −
         E(R))(E(R) − a) ≤ 14 (b − a)2 .

       • By Markov’s inequality, F0 (l1 ) = P(l1 ≤ l1 ) ≥ µ0 /l1 , which implies:
                                                 1                        1        µ0
                  Var(F0 (l1 )|l1 ≥ µ1 − λ σ1 ) ≤ (1 − F0 (µ1 − λ σ1 ))2 ≤ (1 −           )2 ,
                                                 4                        4     µ1 − λ σ1
         where the first inequality also follows by the variance inequality of the bounded variables.


Using the above two facts, we can bound Var(F0 (l1 )) as:


Var(F0 (l1 )) = Var(F0 (l1 )|l1 ≤ µ1 − λ σ1 ) ∗ P(l1 ≤ µ1 − λ σ1 ) +Var(F0 (l1 )|l1 > µ1 − λ σ1 ) ∗ P(l1 ≥ µ1 − λ σ1 )
                                                   1                                         λ2
             ≤ Var(F0 (l1 )|l1 ≤ µ1 − λ σ1 ) ∗           +Var(F0 (l1 )|l1 > µ1 − λ σ1 ) ∗
                                                 λ2 +1                                      λ2 +1
              1                     1  1        µ0          λ2
             ≤ F0 (µ1 − λ σ1 )2 ∗ 2   + (1 −           )2 ∗ 2   .                                     (24)
              4                  λ +1 4      µ1 − λ σ1     λ +1
where the first inequality holds since the first conditional variance term Var(F0 (l1 )|l1 ≤ µ1 − λ σ1 )
(i.e., variance in the majority bulk) is expected to be much larger than the second term Var(F0 (l1 )|l1 >
µ1 − λ σ1 ) (i.e., variance in the far tail), therefore assigning the highest possible probability weight
P(l1 ≤ µ1 − λ σ1 ) to the larger variance term Var(F0 (l1 )|l1 ≤ µ1 − λ σ1 ) leads to an upper bound for
Var(F0 (l1 )).
Further simplifying Equation (24), we arrive at:
                              1                     1      1        µ0            λ2
               Var(F0 (l1 )) ≤ F0 (µ1 − λ σ1 )2 ∗ 2    + (1 −              )2 ∗ 2
                              4                  λ +1 4          µ1 − λ σ1      λ +1
                              1     1                        λ 2         µ
                                                                           0
                             = ∗ 2       ∗ F0 (µ1 − λ σ1 )2 + (1 −               )2
                              4 λ +1                          4      µ1 − λ σ1
                              1     1                        λ 2 d −λσ
                                                                         1 2
                             = ∗ 2       ∗ F0 (µ1 − λ σ1 )2 + (             )
                              4 λ +1                          4 µ1 − λ σ1
where recall d = µ1 − µ0 is the expected error gap between the majority and the minority groups.
Setting λ = σd1 , we have:

                                        1                 1   F0 (µ0 )2    σ2
                      Var(F0 (l1 )) ≤     ∗ F0 (µ0 )2 ∗ 2   =           ∗ 2 1 2.                      (25)
                                        4              λ +1       4      d + σ1

Lower bound for z


                                                       41
Finally, plugging the bounds for E(F0 (l1 )) and Var(F0 (l1 )) from Equation (23) and 25 into z =
 E[F0 (l1 )]−q
√              yields the final lower bound in Equation (21), i.e.,
  Var[F0 (l1 )]
                                                                s
                     E[F0 (l1 )] − q            d2             . F (µ )2
                                                                    0 0           σ12
                  z= p               ≥( 2                  − q)             ∗
                       Var[F0 (l1 )]    (σ1 + σ22 ) + d 2             4       d 2 + σ12
                                                  s
                                          2         σ12 + d 2         d2
                                     =          ∗         2
                                                              ∗( 2                − q).
                                       F0 (µ0 )        σ1       (σ1 + σ22 ) + d 2


                                                   42
