Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


T HE I MPACT OF A PPROXIMATION E RRORS ON WARM -
S TART R EINFORCEMENT L EARNING :
A F INITE - TIME A NALYSIS
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT
         Warm-Start reinforcement learning (RL), aided by a prior policy obtained from
         offline training, is emerging as a promising RL approach for practical applications.
         Recent empirical studies have demonstrated that the performance of Warm-Start RL
         can be improved quickly in some cases but become stagnant in other cases, calling
         for a fundamental understanding, especially when the function approximation is
         used. To fill this void, we take a finite time analysis approach to quantify the
         impact of approximation errors on the learning performance of Warm-Start RL.
         Specifically, we consider the widely used Actor-Critic (A-C) method with a prior
         policy. We first quantify the approximation errors in the Actor update and the Critic
         update, respectively. Next, we cast the Warm-Start A-C algorithm as Newton’s
         method with perturbation, and study the impact of the approximation errors on
         the finite-time learning performance with inaccurate Actor/Critic updates. Under
         some general technical conditions, we obtain lower bounds on the sub-optimality
         gap of the Warm-Start A-C algorithm to quantify the impact of the bias and error
         propagation. We also derive the upper bounds, which provide insights on achieving
         the desired finite-learning performance in the Warm-Start A-C algorithm.


1   I NTRODUCTION
Online reinforcement learning (RL) (Kaelbling et al., 1996; Sutton & Barto, 2018) often faces the
formidable challenge of high sample complexity and intensive computational cost (Kumar et al.,
2020; Xie et al., 2021), which hinders its applicability in real-world tasks. Indeed, this is the case
in portfolio management (Choi et al., 2009), vehicles control (Wu et al., 2017; Shalev-Shwartz
et al., 2016) and other time-sensitive settings (Li, 2017; Garcıa & Fernández, 2015). To tackle this
challenge, Warm-Start RL has recently garnered much attention (Nair et al., 2020; Gelly & Silver,
2007; Uchendu et al., 2022), by enabling online policy adaptation from an initial policy pre-trained
using offline data (e.g., via behavior cloning or offline RL). One main insight of Warm-Start RL is
that online learning can be significantly accelerated, thanks to the bootstrapping by an initial policy.
Despite the encouraging empirical successes (Silver et al., 2017; 2018; Uchendu et al., 2022), a
fundamental understanding of the learning performance of Warm-Start RL is lacking, especially in
the practical settings with function approximation by neural networks. In this work, we focus on
the widely used Actor-Critic (A-C) method (Grondman et al., 2012; Peters & Schaal, 2008), which
combines the merits of both policy iteration and value iteration approaches (Sutton & Barto, 2018)
and has great potential for RL applications (Uchendu et al., 2022). Notably, in the framework of
abstract dynamic programming (ADP) (Bertsekas, 2022a), the policy iteration method (Sutton et al.,
1999) has been studied extensively, for warm-start learning under the assumption of accurate updates.
In such a setting, policy iteration can be regarded as a second-order method in convex optimization
(Grand-Clément, 2021) from the perspective of ADP, and can achieve super-linear convergence rate
(Santos & Rust, 2004; Puterman & Brumelle, 1979; Boyd et al., 2004). Nevertheless, when the
A-C method is implemented in practical applications, the approximation errors are inevitable in the
Actor/Critic updates due to many implementation issues, including function approximation using
neural networks, the finite sample size, and the finite number of gradient iterations. Moreover, the
error propagation from iteration to iteration may exacerbate the ‘slowing down’ of the convergence
and have intricate impact therein. Clearly, the (stochastic) accumulated errors may throttle the


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


convergence rate significantly and degrade the learning performance dramatically (Fujimoto et al.,
2018; Uehara et al., 2021; Dalal et al., 2020; Doan et al., 2019). Thus, it is of great importance
to characterize the learning performance of Warm-Start RL in practical scenarios; and the primary
objective of this study is to take steps to build a fundamental understanding of the impact of the
approximation errors on the finite-time sub-optimality gap for the Warm-Start A-C algorithm, i.e.,
Whether and under what conditions online learning (e.g., A-C) can be significantly accelerated by a
                              warm-start policy from offline RL?
To this end, we address the question in two steps: (1) We first focus on the characterization of the
approximation errors via finite time analysis, based on which we quantify its impact on the
sub-optimality gap of the A-C algorithm in Warm-Start RL. In particular, we analyze the A-C
algorithm in a more realistic setting where the samples are Markovian in the rollout trajectories for
the Critic update (different from the widely used i.i.d. assumption). Further, we consider that the
Actor update and the Critic update take place on the single-time scale, indicating that the time-scale
decomposition is not applicable to the finite-time analysis here. We tackle these challenges using
recent advances on Bernstein’s Inequality for Markovian samples (Jiang et al., 2018; Fan et al.,
2021b). By delving into the coupling due to the interleaved updates of the Actor and the Critic, we
provide upper bounds on the approximation errors in the Critic update and the Actor update of online
exploration, respectively, from which we pinpoint the root causes of the approximation errors.
(2) We analyze the impact of the approximation errors on the finite-time learning performance
of Warm-Start A-C. Based on the approximation error characterization, we treat the Warm-Start A-C
algorithm as Newton’s method with perturbation, and study the impact of the approximation errors
on the finite-time learning performance of Warm-Start A-C. For the case when the approximation
errors are biased, we derive lower bounds on the sub-optimality gap, which reveals that even with a
sufficiently good warm-start, the performance gap of online policy adaptation to the optimal policy
is still bounded away from zero when the biases are not negligible. Further, we also derive the
upper bounds, which shed light on designing Warm-Start A-C to achieve desired finite-time learning
performance. We present the experiments results to further elucidate our findings in Appendix K.
Related Work. (Warm-Start RL) AlphaZero (Silver et al., 2017) is one of the most remarkable
successes in Warm-Start RL. In a line of very recent works (Gupta et al., 2020)(Ijspeert et al.,
2002)(Kim et al., 2013) on Warm-Start RL, the policy is initialized via behavior cloning from offline
data and then is fine-tuned with online reinforcement learning. A variant of this scheme is proposed
in Advanced Weighted Actor Critic (Nair et al., 2020) which enables quick learning of skills across a
suite of benchmark tasks. In the same spirit, Offline-Online Ensemble (Lee et al., 2022) leverages
multiple Q-functions trained pessimistically offline as the initial function approximation for online
learning. Jump-start RL (Uchendu et al., 2022) utilizes a guided-policy to initialize online RL in
the early phase with a separate online exploration-policy. The guided-policy will be abandoned as
the online exploration-policy improves. However, a fundamental characterization of the finite-time
performance of Warm-Start RL is still lacking. Recent work (Xie et al., 2021) provides a quantitative
understanding on the policy fine-tuning problem in episodic Markov Decision Processes (MDPs) and
establishes the lower bound for the sample complexity, where no function approximation is used.
Our work aims to take steps to quantify the impact of approximation error on online RL when a
warm-start policy is given.
(Actor-Critic as Newton’s Method) The intrinsic connection between the A-C method and Newton’s
method can be traced back to the convergence analysis of policy iteration in MDPs with continuous
action spaces (Puterman & Brumelle, 1979). The connection is further examined later in a special
MDP with discretized continuous state space (Santos & Rust, 2004). Recent work (Bertsekas, 2022b)
points out that the success of Warm-Start RL, e.g., AlphaZero, can be attributed to the equivalence
between policy iteration and Newton’s method in the ADP framework, which leads to the superlinear
convergence rate for online policy adaptation. Under the generalized differentiable assumption, it
has also been proved theoretically that policy iteration is the instances of semi-smooth Newton-type
methods to solve the Bellman equation (Gargiani et al., 2022). While some prior works (Grand-
Clément, 2021) have provided theoretical investigation of the connections between policy iteration
and Newton’s Method, the studies are carried out in the abstract dynamic programming (ADP)
framework, assuming accurate updates in iterations. Departing from the ADP framework, this work
treats the A-C algorithm as Newton’s method in the presence of approximation errors, and focuses on
the finite-time learning performance of Warm-Start RL.


                                                  2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


(Finite-time analysis for Actor-Critic methods) Among the existing works on the finite time
analysis of A-C methods with function approximation, (Yang et al., 2019) establishes the global
convergence under the linear quadratic regulator. (Wang et al., 2020) proves the convergence behavior
when both Actor and Critic are approximated by overparameterized neural networks. (Kumar et al.,
2019) considers the sample complexity under i.i.d. assumptions where the Actor update and Critic
update can be ‘decoupled’. Khodadadian et al. (2022) considers the two-timescale setting with
Markovian samples. (Fu et al., 2020) focuses on the more general single-time scale setting but
constrains the policy function approximation in the energy based function class.

2     BACKGROUND

Markov Decision Processes. We consider a MDP defined by a tuple (S, A, P, r, γ), where S =
{1, 2, · · · , n}, n < ∞ and A = {1, 2, · · · , A}, A < ∞ represent the finite state space and finite
action space, respectively. P (s′ |s, a) : S × A × S → [0, 1] is the probability of the transition
from state s to state s′ by applying action a and r(s, a) : S × A → R is the corresponding reward.
γ ∈ (0, 1) is the discount factor. At each step t, an agent moves from the current state st to next state
st+1 by taking an action at following the policy π : S → A and receives the reward rt . In the Warm-
Start RL, we assume that the initial policy π0 is given, e.g., in the form of a neural network (Li, 2017),
and obtained by offline training. For brevity, we use bold symbols rπ ∈ Rn : [rπ ]s = r(s, π(s))
and Pπ ∈ Rn×n : [P π ]s,s′ ≜ P (s′ |s, π(s)) to denote the reward vector and the transition matrix
induced by policy π. We further denote by dπ : S → [0, 1] and ρπ : S × A → [0, 1] the stationary
state distribution and state-action transition distribution induced by policy π. We use ρ0 to represent
the initial state distribution. We use ∥ · ∥ or ∥ · ∥2 to represent the 2-norm.
Value Functions. For any            policy π, define the value function v π (s) : S → R as v π (s) =
                                   P∞
Eat ∼π(·|st ),st+1 ∼P (·|st ,at ) [ t=0 γ t rt |s0 = s] to measure the average accumulative reward star-
ing from state P   s by following policy π. We define Q-function Qπ (s, a) : S × A → R as
                     ∞
Q (s, a) = E[ t=0 γ t rt |s0 = s, a0 = a] to represent the expected return when the action a
   π

is chosen at the state s. By using the transition matrix and reward vector defined above, we have the
compact form of the value function v π = (I − γPπ )−1 rπ , where I ∈ Rn×n is the identity matrix
and v π ∈ Rn is the value vector with the component-wise values [v π ]s ≜ v π (s), with
                                          v π (s) ≜ Ea∼π(·|s) [Qπ (s, a)].                          (1)
The main objective is to find an optimal policy π ∗ such that the value function is maximized, i.e.,
                             max Es∼ρ0 [v π (s)] ≜ max Es∼ρ0 ,a∼π(·|s) [Qπ (s, a)].                 (2)
                          π                      π
In what follows, we use both Q-function and value function v(s) for convenience, and the relation
between the two is given in Eqn. (2).
Bellman Operator. For v ∈ Rn , define the Bellman evaluation operator T π : Rn → Rn and the
Bellman operator T : Rn → Rn as
               T π (v) =rπ + γPπ v, T (v) = max{rπ + γPπ v} = max T π (v).
                                                     π                      π
It is well known that the Bellman operator T is a contraction mapping and has order-preserving
property. Note that the Bellman operator T may not be differentiable everywhere due to the max
operator, and the value v ∗ of the optimal policy π ∗ is the only fixed point of the Bellman operator T
(Puterman, 2014). From the definition of the Bellman Evaluation Operator T π , we have v π to be the
fixed point of T π , i.e., v π = T π (v π ).

2.1   P OLICY I TERATION AS N EWTON ’ S M ETHOD IN A BSTRACT DYNAMIC P ROGRAMMING

Policy iteration carries out policy learning by alternating between two steps: policy improvement and
policy evaluation. At time t, the policy evaluation step seeks to learn the value function v πt for the
current policy πt by solving the fixed point equation of the Bellman evaluation operator:
                                              v = T πt (v).                                         (3)
                πt
Denote vt = v for simplicity. Then in the policy improvement step, a new policy πt+1 is obtained
by maximizing the learnt value function vt in the policy evaluation step, in a greedy manner, i.e.,
                                        πt+1 = arg max T π (vt ).                                   (4)
                                                         π



                                                     3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 1: Illustration of error propagation effect in the A-C method: The approximation errors
from Critic update (Ec ) and Actor update (Ea ) are carried forward and may get amplified due to
accumulation. (To distinguish the approximation errors between Critic update and Actor update, we
use tilde symbol ( e ) above variables, such as policy πe and value vector v
                                                                           e, to represent the policy
and the value vector obtained in the presence of Critic update error. We use hat symbol ( ˆ ) above
the variables to represent the results with approximation error in Actor update.)

To introduce the connection between policy iteration and Newton’s Method, we first define operator
F : v → v − T (v) for convenience. As in (Grand-Clément, 2021; Puterman, 2014), F can be treated
as the “gradient” of an unknown function. Under the assumption that F (v) is differentiable at v,
the Jacobian Jv of F at v can be obtained as Jv = I − γPπ(v) , where π(v) ≜ arg maxπ T π (v).
                    P∞
Note that Jv−1 =                   i
                      i=1 (γPπ(v) ) is invertible (Puterman, 2014). Since it can be shown that
v πt+1 = (I − γPπt+1 )−1 rπt+1 = Jv−1πt rπt+1 for the policy evaluation of πt+1 , we have that,

                  v πt+1 = v πt − Jv−1
                                     πt Jv πt v
                                                πt
                                                   + Jv−1
                                                        πt rπt+1 = v
                                                                     πt
                                                                        − Jv−1
                                                                             πt F (v
                                                                                     πt
                                                                                        ),         (5)
which indicates that the analytic representation of policy iteration in the abstract dynamic program-
ming framework reduces to Newton’s Method. It is worth mentioning that the convergence behavior
of policy iteration near the optimal value v ∗ cannot be directly obtained by using the results from
convex optimization (Boyd et al., 2004) since the Bellman operator T may not be differentiable at
any given value vector v. The full proof is included in Appendix A.

2.2   A N I LLUSTRATIVE E XAMPLE OF THE E RROR P ROPAGATION IN ACTOR -C RITIC U PDATES

The A-C method can be viewed as a generalization of policy iteration in ADP, where the Critic
update corresponds to the policy evaluation of the current policy and the Actor update performs the
policy improvement. In practice, function approximation (e.g., via neural networks) is often used
to approximate both the Critic and the Actor, which inevitably incurs approximation errors for the
policy update and evaluation. More importantly, the approximation errors could propagate along with
the iterative updates in the A-C method. We have the illustrative example to get a more concrete
sense of the impact of the approximation errors on the policy update.
As illustrated in Figure 1, for a given policy πt with the underlying true policy value v πt , we denote
eπt as the learnt value estimation of v πt in the Critic step. We further denote πt+1 and π
v                                                                                               et+1 as the
greedy policy obtained in the Actor update Eqn. (4) by using v πt and v     eπt , respectively. Let π̂t+1 be
the policy estimation of πet+1 with function approximation in the Actor step. Intuitively, πt+1 is the
underlying true policy update from πt using one step policy iteration without any error, π       et+1 is the
policy update from πt with approximation errors in the Critic update, and π̂t+1 is the policy update
from πt with approximation errors in both the Critic step and the Actor step. To characterize the
impact of the approximation errors on the policy update, i.e., the difference between v πt+1 and v π̂t+1 ,
we evaluate the Critic error, i.e., the difference between v πt+1 and v πet+1 , and the Actor error, i.e., the
difference between v πet+1 and v π̂t+1 , in a separate manner. More specifically, to quantify the Critic
error, we can first have the following update based on the same reasoning with Eqn. (5):

            v πet+1 = vt − J −1 vt − (rπe + γPπe vt ) ≜ vt − J −1 vt − Te (vt ) ,

                              v
                              et             t+1          t+1               v
                                                                            et

where Te(vt ) = rπet+1 + γPπet+1 vt and Jvet = I − γPπet+1 . Denote the approximation error (random
variable) in the Bellman operator T and the Jacobian Jv by ET,t and EJ,t , i.e.,
                Te(vt ) − T (vt ) =(rπe + γPπe vt ) − (rπ + γPπ vt ) ≜ ET,t ,
                                       t+1         t+1           t+1         t+1

                    Jve−1
                        t
                          − Jv−1
                               t
                                  =(I − γPπet+1 )−1 − (I − γPπt+1 )−1 ≜ EJ,t ,
where it is clear that both error terms stem from the function approximation errors in the Critic update.
To quantify the Actor error, we assume that
                                          v π̂t+1 = v πet+1 + Ea,t ,                                 (6)


                                                      4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


where Ea,t is the error term. Therefore, by casting the A-C method as Newton’s method with
perturbation, we can characterize the approximation errors on the policy update:
                                   v π̂t+1 = v πt+1 + Ec,t + Ea,t ,
where Ec,t ≜ −EJ,t (vt − T (vt )) + (Jv−1
                                        t
                                          + EJ,t )ET,t and Ea,t capture the impact of the approximation
error from Critic update step and Actor update step, respectively. Intuitively, as illustrated in Figure
1, both errors from the previous update in the A-C method may propagate to the next update and thus
affect the convergence behavior of the algorithm substantially, in contrast to idealized policy iteration
without approximation errors. This phenomenon has also been observed in the empirical results
(Fujimoto et al., 2018; Thrun & Schwartz, 1993). In this work, we strive to systematically analyze
the impact of the approximation errors, through (1) a detailed characterization of the approximation
errors in the Critic update and the Actor update in Section 3 and (2) a thorough analysis of the error
propagation effect and biases in Section 4. The illustration of our analysis is available in Appendix A.

3     C HARACTERIZATION OF A PPROXIMATION E RRORS
Actor-Critic Methods with Function Approximation. In what follows, we consider that the policy
is parameterized by θ ∈ Θ, which in general corresponds to a non-linear function class. Following
(Konda & Tsitsiklis, 1999; Peters & Schaal, 2008; Kumar et al., 2019; 2020; Santos & Rust, 2004),
the Q-function is parameterized by a linear function class with base function ϕ(s, a) and parameter
ω ∈ Ω ⊂ Rd , i.e., Qω (s, a) = ω ⊤ ϕ(s, a). We note that the modeling of the Q-function via linear
value function is often used to extract insight in the A-C method. Similar to the policy iteration, the
update in the A-C method alternates between the following two steps 1 .
Critic update: The Critic updates its parameter ω to evaluate the current policy πt , e.g., through
m-step (m ≥ 1) Bellman evaluation operator T π to the current Q-function estimator (namely, m-step
return), which leads to the following update rule at time step t,
                          "         m−1
                                                                                             #
                                     X
                                          i                m
       Qt+1 (s, a) ←Eπt (1 − γ) ·        γ r (si , ai ) + γ · Qωt (sm , am ) | s0 = s, a0 = a , (7)
                                         i=0
                                                                 2
             ωt+1 ←arg minω E(s,a)∼ρπt Qt+1 (s, a) − ω ⊤ ϕ(s, a) .

                                                                                                           (8)
Actor update: The Actor is updated through a greedy step to maximize Q-function Qωt+1 , i.e.,

                            πt+1 ← arg max E(s,a)∼ρπ Qωt+1 (s, a) .                           (9)
                                                π


3.1   A PPROXIMATION E RROR IN THE C RITIC UPDATE

Solving the minimization problem in Eqn. (8) involves the expectation over the stationary state-
action distribution ρπt induced by the current policy πt , which can be approximated by sample
average in practice. Therefore, we consider the Critic update below based on two groups of samples,
{(sl , al )}N      {τl }N
            l=1 and(
                                                              m
                        l=1 where τl = {sl,t , al,t , rl,t }t=0 , which are collected by following πt :
                      P                                    −1
                          N                             ⊤
       ωt+1 = ΓR          l=1 ϕ (sl , al ) ϕ (sl , al )
                                                                                                 )
                        PN               Pm−1       i       m

                    ·    l=1   (1 − γ)    i=0   γ rl,i + γ Qωt (sl,m , al,m ) ϕ (sl,m , al,m ) ,          (10)

where Γ is the projection operator onto the Critic parameter space Ω with radius R in Rd . Since
the samples in each trajectory τl are obtained via rolllouts, in general the samples in each trajectory
follow a Markovian process (Dalal et al., 2018; Kumar et al., 2019). We further assume the samples
are from the stationary distribution induced by the current policy.
In what follows, we use ω and ω  e to distinguish the difference between the sample-based update and
the solution from Eqn. (8), such that the approximation error in the Critic update can be quantified as
|Qωet − Qωt |. We first impose the following standard assumptions on the Bellman evaluation operator
T π , the base function ϕ and the MDP.
   1
     We remark that our analysis framework and theoretical results are able to be applied to off-policy setting
with the extra assumption on the behavior policy. We include the details in Appendix L.


                                                        5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Assumption 1. For given Critic parameter ω and policy parameter θ, the following condition holds:
                         inf Eρπθ [ (T πθ )m Qω − ω̄ ⊤ ϕ (s, a)] = 0,

                                 ω̄∈Ω
where ρπθ is the stationary state-action transition probability induced by policy πθ .
Assumption 1 (Fu et al., 2020) indicates that the solution of the Critic update given in Eqn. (8) lies in
the Critic parameter space Ω. We note that this assumption is used for ease of exposition, and our
results can be modified by incorporating an additional constant term when this assumption does not
hold. The proof sketch in this case can be found in Appendix C.
Assumption 2. The base function ϕ in the Critic satisfies the following two conditions: (1)
∥ϕ(s, a)∥2 ≤ 1, ∀ (s, a) ∈ S × A; and (2) the smallest singular value for Eρ [ϕ(s, a)ϕ(s, a)⊤ ]
is lower bounded by a positive constant σ ∗ for any stationary state-action transition distribution ρ.
Assumption 2 is widely used in the A-C method to guarantee that the minimization in Eqn. (8) can
be attained by a unique minimizer (Fu et al., 2020; Bhandari et al., 2018; Agarwal et al., 2021).
Assumption 3. The reward r(s, a) satisfies the following two conditions: (1) The reward is upper
bounded by a positive constant rmax for all (s, a) ∈ S × A; and (2) the stationary state-action
transition matrix P π has non-zero spectral gap 1 − λπ > 0 for all π.
The first condition in Assumption 3 is often used for discounted MDPs to ensure a finite value
function (Thrun & Schwartz, 1993; Fujimoto et al., 2018; Fu et al., 2020). Moreover, since the
samples in the same trajectories are generally correlated, the second condition is adopted to guarantee
the concentration properties of the Markov chain, which is generally true for the stationary Markov
chain (Jiang et al., 2018; Ortner, 2020; Amit et al., 2020).
For any λ ∈ [0, 1), let α1 (λ) = (1 + λ)/(1 − λ), α2 (λ) = 5/(1 − λ) where α2 (0) = 1/3. Define
                q
                                        2
                    α22 rmax
                         2
                             (max{λπt ,0}) ln2 p−2mα1 (max{λπt ,0}) ln p−α2 (max{λπt ,0}) ln p
        r̃m =                                          m                                       + rmax .
Then we can have the following main result on the approximation error in the Critic update step.
Proposition 1 (Approximation Error in Critic Update). Under Assumptions 1, 2, 3, the following
inequality holds with probability at least 1 − p, for any t > 0, (s, a) ∈ S × A:
                                                                      q
                                   4((1−γ)r̃m +γ m R)     2      p        4    2 p   2     p
   E[|Qωt (s, a) − Qωet (s, a)|] ≤     √
                                         N (σ ∗ )2
                                                       − 3N log 4d + 9N 2 log 4d − N log 4d ,
where d is the dimension of the Critic parameter ω and R is the radius of Critic parameter space Ω as
defined in Eqn. (10).
Proposition 1 establishes the upper bound for the approximation error in the Critic update, which
encapsulates the impact of the finite sample size and the finite-step rollout with Bellman evaluation
operator T π . It can be seen from Proposition 1 that in order to obtain an accurate evaluation of the
policy, we can increase the sample size N in the update Eqn. (10) and have more steps of rollout
with Bellman evaluation operator T π . We remark that Proposition 1 considers the correlation across
samples, and we appeal to the recent advances in Bernstein’s Inequality for Markovian samples (Jiang
et al., 2018)(Fan et al., 2021b) to tackle this challenge. The proof of Proposition 1 can be found in
Appendix B and Appendix C.

3.2    A PPROXIMATION E RROR IN THE ACTOR U PDATE

In practice, the greedy search step for solving Eqn. (9) is generally approximated by multiple (e.g.,
Na ) steps of policy gradient. Based on the policy gradient theorem (Silver et al., 2014; Sutton et al.,
1999), we can have the following update at gradient step k ∈ [1, Na ] in the t-th Actor update:
                                      θt,1 = θt , θt,Na = θt+1 ,
                         θt,k+1 = θt,k + αE(s,a)∼ρπθt,k [Qωt+1 (s, a)∇θ πθt,k (a|s)],                        (11)
where α is the learning rate. For simplicity, we drop the subscript t in θt,k when no confusion
will arise and denote ρk := ρπθk . As in the Critic update, we sample a trajectory with length l by
following the current policy πθk , i.e., {s1 , a1 , s2 , a2 , · · · , sl , al }, to approximate the expectation in
Eqn. (11). Then we can have that
                    Pl
    θk+1 =θk + α 1l i=1 [Qωt+1 (si , ai )∇θ πθk (ai |si )] := θk + α(Ck,t,1 + Ck,t,2 ) + αfk,t , (12)


                                                        6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


where Ck,t,1 , Ck,t,2 and fk,t are defined as follows
                        Pl
           Ck,t,1 :=1/l i=1 (Qωt+1 (si , ai )∇θ πθk (ai |si ) − Qωet+1 (si , ai )∇θ πθk (ai |si )),
                        Pl
           Ck,t,2 :=1/l i=1 (Qωet+1 (si , ai )∇θ πθk (ai |si ) − Qπθt (si , ai )∇θ πθk (ai |si )),
                        Pl
             fk,t :=1/l i=1 Qπθt (si , ai )∇θ πθk (ai |si ).
Here Ck,t,1 captures the error resulted from using samples to estimate expectation in the Critic update.
Based on our result in Proposition 1, with high probability, this term will go to 0 when we have
infinite samples or infinite rollout length m. Note that (T πθt )m Qωt = Qωet+1 (Critic update) and
limm→∞ (T πθt )m Qωt = Qπθt . And Ck,t,2 implies the approximation error when applying the Bell-
man operator limited (m) times. This term will go to 0 when m → ∞. fk,t is an unbiased estimation
of the gradient of E(s,a)∼ρk [Qπθt (s, a)], i.e., E[fk,t ] = E(s,a)∼ρk [Qπθt (s, a)∇θ πθk (a|s)].
Based on Eqn. (12), it is clear that the Actor update with the approximation error resulted from
the Critic update can be viewed as a stochastic gradient update with some perturbation Ck,t =
                          ∗
Ck,t,1 + Ck,t,2 . Denote θt+1 as the solution of the Eqn. (9). For ease of exposition, we use h(ω, θ)
to denote the objective function in the Actor update:
                        h(ω, θ) = E(s,a)∼ρπθ [Qω (s, a)] = Es∼dπθ [v πω (s)].                   (13)
Note that h is a function of Actor parameter θ for a given Critic parameter ω. Next, we quantify the
                                                                       ∗
approximation error in the Actor update in terms of the gap h(ωt+1 , θt+1 ) − h(ωt+1 , θt+1 ).
Recall that Proposition 1 gives upper bound for the approximation error Eω [|Qωt − Qωet |] in the Critic
update, which has direct impact on Ck,t . Based on Proposition 1, we have the following two lemmas
for the upper bounds on the bias term b = E[Ck,t ] and the error term β = fk,t + Ck,t − E[Ck,t ] in
the stochastic gradient update Eqn. (12), respectively. The proof of Lemmas 1 and 2 can be found in
Appendix D and E, respectively.
Lemma 1 (σ 2 -bounded noise). Suppose Assumptions 1, 2, 3 hold. Then with probability at least
1 − p, E[∥β∥2 ] ≤ ∥∇θ h(ω, θ) + b∥2 + σ 2 , ∀θ, where σ 2 ≥ 0 is a constant and depends on p.
Lemma 2 (ζ 2 -bounded bias). Suppose Assumptions 1, 2, 3 hold. Then with probability at least 1 − p,
∥b∥2 ≤ ζ 2 , ∀θ, where ζ 2 ≥ 0 is a constant and depends on p.
Denote the score function ψθ (a|s) := ∇θ πθ (a|s) and we impose the following standard assumptions.
Assumption 4. For any θ, θ′ ∈ Rd and state-action pair (s, a) ∈ S ×A, there exist positive constants
Lψ , Cψ and Cπ such that the following holds: (1) ∥ψθ − ψθ′ ∥ ≤ Lψ ∥θ − θ′ ∥; (2) ∥ψθ ∥ ≤ Cψ and
(3) ∥πθ (·|s) − πθ′ (·|s)∥TV ≤ Cπ ∥θ − θ′ ∥, where ∥ · ∥T V is the total-variation distance.
We remark that the smoothness and bounded property of the score function as stated in the (1) and (2)
in Assumption 4 are widely adopted in the literature (Xu et al., 2020a;b; Zou et al., 2019; Agarwal
et al., 2020; Kumar et al., 2019), and it has been shown (Xu et al., 2020a) that (3) in Assumption 4
can be satisfied for any smooth policy with bounded action space.
For the sake of tractability, we next give the following two lemmas about the smoothness and Polyak-
Lojasiewicz Condition on the objective function h(·, θ). The proof can be found in Appendix F.
Lemma 3 (L-smoothness). Suppose Assumption 4 hold. Then function h(·, θ) is bounded from
below by an infimum hinf ∈ R, differentiable and ∇h is L-Lipschitz, i.e., ∥∇h(ω, θ) − ∇h(ω, θ′ )∥ ≤
L∥θ − θ′ ∥, ∀ ω, θ, θ′ .
Lemma 4 (µ-PL). If ∇h(ω, θ) ̸= 0, then we have 12 ∥∇h(ω, θ)∥ ≥ µ(h(ω, θ∗ )−h(ω, θ)) ≥ 0, ∀ θ, ω.
           1
Let α ≤ 2L    . Next we present the upper bound of the approximation error in the Actor update.
Proposition 2 (Approximation Error in Actor Update). Given the updated Actor parameter θt−1 , the
following inequality holds with probability at least 1 − p:
                                                                                 ζ 2 + 2αLσ 2
        Eθ [∥h(ω, θt∗ ) − h(ω, θt )∥] ≤ (1 − αµ)Na (h(ω, θt∗ ) − h(ω, θt−1 )) +               ,
                                                                                      2µ
where σ 2 , ζ 2 , L and µ are defined in Lemma 1, Lemma 2, Lemma 3 and Lemma 4, respectively.
Proposition 2 reveals that due to the bias and noise induced by the Critic approximation error, running
more gradient iterations do not necessarily guarantee the convergence to the optimal policy πθt∗ . Note
that Lemmas 1 and 2 in (Ajalloeian & Stich, 2020) are given in the form of assumptions, whereas in
this work, we justify that both assumptions hold with high probability and prove Proposition 2, and
the proof can be found in Appendix G.


                                                   7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


4     I MPACT OF A PPROXIMATION E RRORS AND WARM -S TART P OLICY ON
      F INITE - TIME L EARNING P ERFORMANCE

We next quantify the impact of the approximations errors on the sub-optimality gap of the Warm-
Start A-C method with inaccurate Actor/Critic updates. We first cast the A-C method as Newton’s
Method with perturbation, and then present both the finite-time upper bound and lower bound on the
finite-time learning performance in Section 4.1.
Actor-Critic Method as Newton’s Method with Perturbation. As mentioned earlier, the Critic
update follows Eqn. (10) with finite samples and finite step rollout with Bellman evaluation operator
T π and the Actor update follows Eqn. (12). Given the policy πt at time t, we denote the resulting
policy of one A-C update as π̂t+1 . Recall that we use π  et+1 to denote the policy attained the max
in T (v πt ) as illustrated in Figure 1. Furthermore, we define the following notations for ease of our
discussion: (1) Denote Ev,t = v π̂t+1 − v πet+1 as the approximation error in the Actor update; (2)
Denote Er,t = rπet+1 − rπ̂t+1 as the error in the reward vector, which is induced by the approximation
error in the Actor update step; (3) Denote EP,t = Pπet+1 − Pπ̂t+1 as the error in the transition matrix
                            −1      −1
P ; (4) Denote EJ,t ˆ = Jv  et − Jv̂t where Jv̂t = I − γPπ̂t+1 and Jv  et = I − γPπ et+1 .

Following the same line as in Section 2.2, we treat the A-C algorithm as Newton’s method with
perturbation Et , i.e.,
                       v π̂t+1 = v π̂t − (Jv̂−1
                                              t
                                                (v π̂t − T (v π̂t )) − Et ) := v π̂t − L̂(t),              (14)
                                                                               −1      π̂t    π̂t

where L̂(t) is the stochastic estimator of Newton’s update L(t) = Jv̂πt v − T v                      , and
          Et = Ev,t + EJ,t
                         ˆ (v
                              π̂t+1
                                    − (rπet+1 + γPπet+1 v π̂t+1 )) − Jv̂−1
                                                                         t
                                                                           (Er,t + γEP,t v π̂t ),
which can be further decomposed into bias and Martingale difference noise as follows:
                                B(t) ≜E[L̂(t)] − L(t) = E[Et ],
                                  N (t) ≜L̂(t) − E[L̂(t)] = Et − E[Et ].
We have a few observations in order. It can be seen that the perturbation Et results from both Actor
approximation error (e.g., Er,t , EP,t ) and Critic approximation error (e.g., Ev,t ). More importantly,
the learnt Q function in the Critic update Eqn. (10) is biased in general due to finite rollout steps m,
which further leads to the biased gradients in the Actor update Eqn. (11) (Kumar et al., 2019). Clearly,
the estimation bias plays an important role in affecting the learning performance, especially when
deep neural networks are used as function approximations, which has been extensively investigated
using empirical studies (Fujimoto et al., 2018; Elfwing et al., 2018; Van Hasselt et al., 2016).
Next, we examine the bias B(t) based on the approximation errors in the Actor/Critic updates.
Combining the results in Proposition 1 and 2 on the approximation error in the Critic/Actor updates,
we have the following result on the bias B(t). A full derivation is given in Appendix H.
Proposition 3 (Upper Bound on the Bias). Suppose Assumption 4 holds. Let Sϵ (·) be an open ball
                                                                                   ∗
of radius ϵ. There exist positive constants Lb , and ϵ, such that when θt+1 ∈ Sϵ (θt+1 ), the following
holds for any t > 0,
                                                       ∗
                             ∥B(t)∥ ≤ Lb Eθ [∥h(·, θt+1   ) − h(·, θt+1 )∥].

4.1   F INITE - TIME L EARNING P ERFORMANCE AND E RROR P ROPAGATION E FFECT

Lower Bound on Performance Gap. Aiming to understand “whether online learning can be
accelerated by a warm-start policy”, we first derive a lower bound to quantify the impact of the
bias and the error propagation. By unrolling the recursion of the Newton update (with perturbation)
Eqn. (14), we obtain the following theorem.
Theorem 1. The lower bound of ∥E[v ∗ − v π̂t+1 ]∥ satisfies that
                                                           Pt
          ∥E v ∗ − v π̂t+1 ∥ ≥ ∥γ t+1 P̄t+1 (v ∗ − v π0 ) + i=1 γ i P̄i B(t − i) + B(t)∥,

                                                                                                          (15)
                h Q              i
                    t
where P̄t+1 = E     i=0 Pπt+1−i     and π0 is the warm-start policy.
Error Propagation and Accumulation. It can be seen form Theorem 1 that the bias terms {B(t)}
add up over time, and the propagation effect of the bias terms is encapsulated by the last two terms
on the right side of Eqn. (15). Clearly, the first term on the right side, corresponding to the impact of


                                                      8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


the warm-start policy π0 , diminishes with A-C updates. To get a more concrete sense of Theorem 1,
                                                                       positive,  i.e., B(t) > 0 for all
we consider the following special settings. (1) When the bias is always
t ≥ 0, the lower bound in Theorem 1 is always positive, i.e., ∥E v ∗ − v π̂t+1 ∥ ≥ ∥B(t)∥ > 0. In
this case, the sub-optimal gap remains bounded away from zero. Similar conclusion can be made
when the bias is always negative. (2) When the bias term can be either positive or negative, the
lower bound is shown as Eqn. (15). In this case, the learning performance of the A-C algorithm
largely depends on the behavior of the Bias term. It can be seen from Theorem 1 that even when
the warm-start policy is near-optimal, it is still challenging to guarantee that online fine-tuning can
improve the policy if the approximation error is not handled correctly. We note that this has also been
observed empirically (Nair et al., 2020; Lee et al., 2022).
Upper Bound on Performance Gap. In order to derive the upper bound on the sub-optimality gap,
we first introduce the following standard assumption on the Jacobian Jv as in the analysis of policy
iteration (Puterman & Brumelle, 1979; Grand-Clément, 2021).
Assumption 5. For some q > 0 there exists a constant 0 < LJ < +∞ such that
                           ∥Jvπ − Jv∗ ∥ ≤ LJ ∥v π − v ∗ ∥q ∀ π,
and there is a constant 0 < M < +∞ such that ∥Jv−1
                                                 π ∥ ≤ M, ∀ π.


Denote Ht := ∥Jv̂−1
                  t
                    [Jv̂t − Jv∗ ] ∥. Clearly, we have Ht is upper bounded by Ht ≤ M LJ ∥v π̂t −
 ∗ q
v ∥ from Assumption 5. Next, We present the finite-time upper bound in Theorem 2.
Theorem 2. Suppose Assumption 5 holds. Then we have that for any t > 0,
                                !                               
                          t
                          Y                      Xt    Yi
    ∥E[v π̂t+1 − v ∗ ]∥ ≤   Ht−i ∥v ∗ − v π0 ∥ +          Ht−j  ∥B(t − i)∥ + ∥B(t)∥.
                             i=0                        i=1    j=1

Under what conditions online learning can be accelerated by the warm-start policy? The upper
bound in Theorem 2 sheds light on the impact of warm-start policy π0 (the first term) and the bias
{B(t)} (the last two terms), thereby providing guidance on how to achieve desired finite-time learning
performance. Specifically, consider
                                Q       the case
                                               when the approximation error is unbiased. Clearly,
               π̂t+1     ∗         t             ∗    π0
we have ∥E[v         − v ]∥ ≤      i=0 Ht−i ∥v − v ∥, which decreases quickly if the warm-start
                                           ∗
policy π0 is close to the optimal policy π . This observation corroborates the most recent empirically
finding, where the online RL is able to further improve the warm-start policy by few adaptation
steps (Silver et al., 2017; Bertsekas, 2022a; Kalashnikov et al., 2018). More generally, when the
bias B(t) ̸= 0, the upper bound hinges heavily on the biases in the approximation errors, even when
the warm-start policy π0 is close to the optimal policy. In this case, recall the result on the upper
bound of the bias B(t) in proposition 3, where we establish the connection between the bias and
the approximation error. As expected, in order to reduce the performance gap, it is essential to
decrease the bias in the approximation error, which can be achieved by increasing gradient steps and
sample sizes. The proof of Theorem 1 and 2 are relegated to the Appendix I and J, respectively. The
experiments results and analysis on the Gridworld benchmark can be found in Appendix K.


5    C ONCLUSION

In this work, we take a finite-time analysis approach to quantify the impact of approximation errors
on the learning performance of Warm-Start A-C method with a given prior policy. By delving into the
intricate coupling between the updates of the Actor and the Critic, we first provide upper bounds on
the approximation errors in both the Critic update and Actor update of online adaptation, respectively,
where the recent advances on Bernstein’s Inequality are leveraged to deal with the sample correlation
therein. Based on these results, we next cast the Warm-Start A-C method as Newton’s method with
perturbation, which serves as the foundation for characterizing the impact of the approximation errors
on the finite-time learning performance of Warm-Start A-C. In particular, we derive lower bounds on
the sub-optimality gap under biased approximation errors, indicating that the performance gap can be
bounded away from zero even for Warm-Start A-C with a good prior policy. And we also provide
upper bounds on the sub-optimality gap, which provides guidance on the design of Warm-Start RL
for achieving desired finite-time learning performance.


                                                   9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


R EFERENCES
Alekh Agarwal, Sham M Kakade, Jason D Lee, and Gaurav Mahajan. Optimality and approximation
  with policy gradient methods in markov decision processes. In Conference on Learning Theory,
  pp. 64–66. PMLR, 2020.
Alekh Agarwal, Sham M Kakade, Jason D Lee, and Gaurav Mahajan. On the theory of policy
  gradient methods: Optimality, approximation, and distribution shift. J. Mach. Learn. Res., 22(98):
  1–76, 2021.
Ahmad Ajalloeian and Sebastian U Stich. On the convergence of SGD with biased gradients. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2008.00051, 2020.
Ron Amit, Ron Meir, and Kamil Ciosek. Discount factor as a regularizer in reinforcement learning.
  In International conference on machine learning, pp. 269–278. PMLR, 2020.
Dimitri Bertsekas. Abstract Dynamic Programming. Athena Scientific, 2022a.
Dimitri Bertsekas. Lessons from Alphazero for Optimal, Model Predictive, and Adaptive Control.
  Athena Scientific, 2022b.
Jalaj Bhandari, Daniel Russo, and Raghav Singal. A finite time analysis of temporal difference
   learning with linear function approximation. In Conference on learning theory, pp. 1691–1692.
   PMLR, 2018.
Stephen Boyd, Stephen P Boyd, and Lieven Vandenberghe. Convex Optimization. Cambridge
  university press, 2004.
James J Choi, David Laibson, Brigitte C Madrian, and Andrew Metrick. Reinforcement learning and
  savings behavior. The Journal of finance, 64(6):2515–2534, 2009.
Gal Dalal, Gugan Thoppe, Balázs Szörényi, and Shie Mannor. Finite sample analysis of two-timescale
  stochastic approximation with applications to reinforcement learning. In Conference On Learning
  Theory, pp. 1199–1233. PMLR, 2018.
Gal Dalal, Balazs Szorenyi, and Gugan Thoppe. A tale of two-timescale reinforcement learning with
  the tightest finite-time bound. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence,
  volume 34, pp. 3701–3708, 2020.
Thinh Doan, Siva Maguluri, and Justin Romberg. Finite-time analysis of distributed TD (0) with
  linear function approximation on multi-agent reinforcement learning. In International Conference
  on Machine Learning, pp. 1626–1635. PMLR, 2019.
Stefan Elfwing, Eiji Uchibe, and Kenji Doya. Sigmoid-weighted linear units for neural network
  function approximation in reinforcement learning. Neural Networks, 107:3–11, 2018.
Jianqing Fan, Bai Jiang, and Qiang Sun. Hoeffding’s inequality for general markov chains and its
   applications to statistical learning. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 22(139):1–35, 2021a.
   URL http://jmlr.org/papers/v22/19-479.html.
Jianqing Fan, Bai Jiang, and Qiang Sun. Hoeffding’s inequality for general markov chains and its
   applications to statistical learning. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 22(139):1–35, 2021b.
Zuyue Fu, Zhuoran Yang, and Zhaoran Wang. Single-timescale actor-critic provably finds globally
  optimal policy. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2020.
Scott Fujimoto, Herke Hoof, and David Meger. Addressing function approximation error in actor-
  critic methods. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 1587–1596. PMLR, 2018.
Javier Garcıa and Fernando Fernández. A comprehensive survey on safe reinforcement learning.
  Journal of Machine Learning Research, 16(1):1437–1480, 2015.
Matilde Gargiani, Andrea Zanelli, Dominic Liao-McPherson, TH Summers, and John Lygeros.
 Dynamic programming through the lens of semismooth newton-type methods. IEEE Control
 Systems Letters, 2022.


                                                 10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Sylvain Gelly and David Silver. Combining online and offline knowledge in UCT. In Proceedings of
  the 24th international conference on Machine learning, pp. 273–280, 2007.
Julien Grand-Clément. From convex optimization to MDPs: A review of first-order, second-order
  and quasi-newton methods for MDPs. arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.10677, 2021.
Ivo Grondman, Lucian Busoniu, Gabriel AD Lopes, and Robert Babuska. A survey of actor-critic
  reinforcement learning: Standard and natural policy gradients. IEEE Transactions on Systems,
  Man, and Cybernetics, Part C (Applications and Reviews), 42(6):1291–1307, 2012.
Abhishek Gupta, Vikash Kumar, Corey Lynch, Sergey Levine, and Karol Hausman. Relay policy
  learning: Solving long-horizon tasks via imitation and reinforcement learning. In Conference on
  Robot Learning, pp. 1025–1037. PMLR, 2020.
Auke Ijspeert, Jun Nakanishi, and Stefan Schaal. Learning attractor landscapes for learning motor
  primitives. Advances in neural information processing systems, 15, 2002.
Bai Jiang, Qiang Sun, and Jianqing Fan. Bernstein’s inequality for general markov chains. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1805.10721, 2018.
Leslie Pack Kaelbling, Michael L Littman, and Andrew W Moore. Reinforcement learning: A survey.
  Journal of artificial intelligence research, 4:237–285, 1996.
Dmitry Kalashnikov, Alex Irpan, Peter Pastor, Julian Ibarz, Alexander Herzog, Eric Jang, Deirdre
 Quillen, Ethan Holly, Mrinal Kalakrishnan, Vincent Vanhoucke, et al. Scalable deep reinforcement
 learning for vision-based robotic manipulation. In Conference on Robot Learning, pp. 651–673.
 PMLR, 2018.
Sajad Khodadadian, Thinh T Doan, Justin Romberg, and Siva Theja Maguluri. Finite sample analysis
  of two-time-scale natural actor-critic algorithm. IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control, 2022.
Beomjoon Kim, Amir-massoud Farahmand, Joelle Pineau, and Doina Precup. Learning from limited
  demonstrations. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 26, 2013.
Vijay Konda and John Tsitsiklis. Actor-critic algorithms. Advances in neural information processing
  systems, 12, 1999.
Aviral Kumar, Abhishek Gupta, and Sergey Levine. Discor: Corrective feedback in reinforcement
  learning via distribution correction. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:
  18560–18572, 2020.
Harshat Kumar, Alec Koppel, and Alejandro Ribeiro. On the sample complexity of actor-critic
  method for reinforcement learning with function approximation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.08412,
  2019.
Seunghyun Lee, Younggyo Seo, Kimin Lee, Pieter Abbeel, and Jinwoo Shin. Offline-to-online
  reinforcement learning via balanced replay and pessimistic q-ensemble. In Conference on Robot
  Learning, pp. 1702–1712. PMLR, 2022.
David A Levin and Yuval Peres. Markov Chains and Mixing Times, volume 107. American
  Mathematical Soc., 2017.
Pascal Lezaud. Chernoff-type bound for finite markov chains. Annals of Applied Probability, pp.
  849–867, 1998.
Yuxi Li. Deep reinforcement learning: An overview. arXiv preprint arXiv:1701.07274, 2017.
Ashvin Nair, Murtaza Dalal, Abhishek Gupta, and Sergey Levine. Accelerating online reinforcement
  learning with offline datasets. arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.09359, 2020.
Yurii Nesterov. Introductory Lectures on Convex Optimization: A Basic Course, volume 87. Springer
  Science & Business Media, 2003.
Ronald Ortner. Regret bounds for reinforcement learning via markov chain concentration. Journal of
  Artificial Intelligence Research, 67:115–128, 2020.


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Jan Peters and Stefan Schaal. Natural actor-critic. Neurocomputing, 71(7-9):1180–1190, 2008.
Martin L Puterman. Markov decision processes: discrete stochastic dynamic programming. John
 Wiley & Sons, 2014.
Martin L Puterman and Shelby L Brumelle. On the convergence of policy iteration in stationary
 dynamic programming. Mathematics of Operations Research, 4(1):60–69, 1979.
Manuel S Santos and John Rust. Convergence properties of policy iteration. SIAM Journal on
 Control and Optimization, 42(6):2094–2115, 2004.
Shai Shalev-Shwartz, Shaked Shammah, and Amnon Shashua. Safe, multi-agent, reinforcement
  learning for autonomous driving. arXiv preprint arXiv:1610.03295, 2016.
David Silver, Guy Lever, Nicolas Heess, Thomas Degris, Daan Wierstra, and Martin Riedmiller.
  Deterministic policy gradient algorithms. In International conference on machine learning, pp.
  387–395. PMLR, 2014.
David Silver, Thomas Hubert, Julian Schrittwieser, Ioannis Antonoglou, Matthew Lai, Arthur Guez,
  Marc Lanctot, Laurent Sifre, Dharshan Kumaran, Thore Graepel, et al. Mastering chess and shogi
  by self-play with a general reinforcement learning algorithm. arXiv preprint arXiv:1712.01815,
  2017.
David Silver, Thomas Hubert, Julian Schrittwieser, Ioannis Antonoglou, Matthew Lai, Arthur Guez,
  Marc Lanctot, Laurent Sifre, Dharshan Kumaran, Thore Graepel, et al. A general reinforcement
  learning algorithm that masters chess, shogi, and go through self-play. Science, 362(6419):
 1140–1144, 2018.
Richard S Sutton and Andrew G Barto. Reinforcement learning: An introduction. MIT press, 2018.
Richard S Sutton, David McAllester, Satinder Singh, and Yishay Mansour. Policy gradient methods for
  reinforcement learning with function approximation. Advances in neural information processing
  systems, 12, 1999.
Sebastian Thrun and Anton Schwartz. Issues in using function approximation for reinforcement learn-
  ing. In Proceedings of the 1993 Connectionist Models Summer School Hillsdale, NJ. Lawrence
  Erlbaum, volume 6, 1993.
Ikechukwu Uchendu, Ted Xiao, Yao Lu, Banghua Zhu, Mengyuan Yan, Joséphine Simon, Matthew
  Bennice, Chuyuan Fu, Cong Ma, Jiantao Jiao, et al. Jump-start reinforcement learning. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2204.02372, 2022.
Masatoshi Uehara, Masaaki Imaizumi, Nan Jiang, Nathan Kallus, Wen Sun, and Tengyang Xie. Finite
 sample analysis of minimax offline reinforcement learning: Completeness, fast rates and first-order
 efficiency. arXiv preprint arXiv:2102.02981, 2021.
Hado Van Hasselt, Arthur Guez, and David Silver. Deep reinforcement learning with double q-
  learning. In Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence, volume 30, 2016.
Lingxiao Wang, Qi Cai, Zhuoran Yang, and Zhaoran Wang. Neural policy gradient methods: Global
  optimality and rates of convergence. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2020. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=BJgQfkSYDS.
Cathy Wu, Aboudy Kreidieh, Kanaad Parvate, Eugene Vinitsky, and Alexandre M Bayen. Flow:
  Architecture and benchmarking for reinforcement learning in traffic control. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1710.05465, 10, 2017.
Tengyang Xie, Nan Jiang, Huan Wang, Caiming Xiong, and Yu Bai. Policy finetuning: Bridg-
  ing sample-efficient offline and online reinforcement learning. Advances in neural information
  processing systems, 34, 2021.
Tengyu Xu, Zhe Wang, and Yingbin Liang. Improving sample complexity bounds for actor-critic
  algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.12956, 2020a.


                                                12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Tengyu Xu, Zhe Wang, and Yingbin Liang. Non-asymptotic convergence analysis of two time-scale
  (natural) actor-critic algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.03557, 2020b.
Zhuoran Yang, Yongxin Chen, Mingyi Hong, and Zhaoran Wang. Provably global convergence of
  actor-critic: A case for linear quadratic regulator with ergodic cost. Advances in neural information
  processing systems, 32, 2019.
Shaofeng Zou, Tengyu Xu, and Yingbin Liang. Finite-sample analysis for SARSA with linear
  function approximation. Advances in neural information processing systems, 32, 2019.


                                                  13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Appendix


A    E XAMPLES IN S ECTION 2.2

In this section, we elaborate further on the illustrative example in Section 2.2. We use the notation
defined in Figure 1.
Policy Iteration as Newton’s Method. Based on (Puterman & Brumelle, 1979)(Grand-Clément,
2021), we first build the relation between policy iteration and Newton’s Method in the abstract
dynamic programming (ADP) framework, assuming accurate updates.
From the definition of the value function v, we have that for any policy π,
                                        v π = rπ + γPπ v π .
Recall the definition of Bellman evaluation operator T π (·) and the Bellman operator T (·),
                 T π (v) =rπ + γPπ v, T (v) = max{rπ + γPπ v} = max T π (v).
                                                     π                     π
It follows that
                        v πt+1 = Jv−1
                                    πt rπt+1


                               = v πt − v πt + Jv−1
                                                  πt rπt+1


                               = v πt − Jv−1
                                           πt Jv πt v
                                                      πt
                                                         + Jv−1
                                                              πt rπt+1

                                          −1
                               = v − Jvπt −rπt+1 + Jvπt v πt
                                   πt


                               = v πt − Jv−1  −rπt+1 + I − γPπt+1 v πt

                                           πt


                               = v πt − Jv−1  v πt − rπt+1 − γPπt+1 v πt

                                           πt


                                = v πt − Jv−1πt (v
                                                   πt
                                                      − T (v πt )) ,                              (16)
where Jv = I − γPπ(v) and π(v) attains the max in T (v). Eqn. (16) establishes a connection
between policy iteration under ADP and Newton’s Method. Specifically, if we assume function
F : v → v − T (v) is differentiable at any vector v visited by policy iteration, then we have
vt+1 = vt + Jv−1 t
                   F (vt ), which is exactly the update of the Newton’s Method in convex optimization
(Boyd et al., 2004). Due to the fact that F (·) may not be differentiable at all v in policy iteration,
the assumptions on the Lipschitzness of v → Jv is commonly used to prove the convergence of the
policy iteration (see Assumption 5). Following the same line, next we show the case when function
approximation is used in the A-C algorithm.
A-C Updates with Function Approximation. Consider the illustration example in Section 2.2. Next
we outline the main differences between the A-C update with function approximation and the policy
iteration in the ADP framework, and cast A-C based policy iteration with function approximation as
Newton’s Method with perturbation. Specifically,
                        v πet+1 = Jv−1
                                     e t rπ
                                     π    et+1

                               = v πt − v πt + Jv−1
                                                  e t rπ
                                                  π    et+1

                               = v πt − Jv−1
                                           e t Jv π
                                           π      et v
                                                       πt
                                                          + Jv−1
                                                               e t rπ
                                                               π    et+1
                                          −1
                               = v − Jvπe t −rπet+1 + Jvπe t v πt
                                   πt


                               = v πt − Jv−1   −rπet+1 + I − γPπet+1 v πt

                                           π
                                           et

                               = v πt − Jv−1   v πt − (rπet+1 + γPπet+1 v πt )

                                           π
                                           et

                               ≜ v πt − Jv−1
                                           π
                                           et   v πt − Te (v πt ) ,
where Jvπe t = I − γPπ(vπe t ) and π(v) attains the max in T (v) (not Te(v)), with the following two
operators defined as
                                    T (vt ) ≜rπt+1 + γPπt+1 vt ,
                                    Te(vt ) ≜rπe + γPπe vt .
                                                  t+1         t+1


                                                   14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                Characterization of Approximation Errors                                      Characterization of Approximation Errors
        Assumption 1                                                                                                     In the Actor Update
                                           In the Critic Update
       Projection on the
    Critic parameter space                                     Lemma 1                                             Lemma 3

                                                           σ 2 - bounded Noise                                   L -smoothness        Proposition 2
        Assumption 2                 Proposition 1                                       Assumption 4
       Base function ϕ          Approximation Error                                 Score function in                              Approximation Error
       In Critic update          In the Critic update                               the Actor update                               In the Actor update

                                                               Lemma 2                                              Lemma 4
        Assumption 3                                        ζ 2- bounded Bias                                    μ- PL Condition
      Reward and state
       transition matrix


                                                                         Proposition 3
                                                              Upper bound of the biases {B(t)}

                                                          Theorem 1                          Theorem 2
                                                 The Lower Bound of                      The Upper Bound of
                                                       E[v* − vπt+1
                                                                ̂
                                                                    ]                       E[v* − vπt+1
                                                                                                     ̂
                                                                                                         ]
                                                     Impact of Approximation Errors and Warm-start Policy
                                                             on Finite-time Learning Performance



                                        Figure 2: Illustration of the theoretical analysis.


For convenience, let ET,t and EJ,t denote the approximation errors in the Bellman operator T and the
Jacobian Jv , i.e.,
                Te(vt ) − T (vt ) =(rπet+1 + γPπet+1 vt ) − (rπt+1 + γPπt+1 vt ) ≜ ET,t ,
                             Jve−1
                                 t
                                   − Jv−1
                                        t
                                          =(I − γPπet+1 )−1 − (I − γPπt+1 )−1 ≜ EJ,t ,
and define
                                         v π̂t+1 ≜ v πet+1 + Ea,t ,
where Ea,t capture the error induced by inaccurate policy improvement (the greedy step, e.g., Eqn.
(9)) in the Actor update. Then we have that

              v πet+1 = v πt − J −1
                                  π
                                  e   v πt − Te (v πt )
                                               v t

                              = vt − (Jv−1
                                         t
                                           + EJ,t ) (vt − T (vt ) − ET,t )
                              = vt − Jvt (vt − T (vt )) −EJ,t (vt − T (vt )) + (Jv−1
                                       −1
                                                                                   t
                                                                                     + EJ,t )ET,t
                                 |                   {z                 }|                              {z                           }
                                          Exact Newton Step                                       Perturbation

                              ≜ vt − Jv−1
                                        t
                                          (vt − T (vt )) +Et
                                |          {z          }
                                    Exact Newton Step
                                 πt+1
                              =v      + Et .
In a nutshell, we have that
                                                       v π̂t+1 = v πt+1 + Ec,t + Ea,t ,
where
                                        Ec,t ≜ −EJ,t (vt − T (vt )) + (Jv−1
                                                                          t
                                                                            + EJ,t )ET,t .


B       P ROOF OF B ERNSTEIN ’ S I NEQUALITY WITH G ENERAL M AKOVIAN
        SAMPLES

In this section, we provide the proof of Bernstein’s Inequality with General Makovian samples
following the proof in Theorem 2 (Jiang et al., 2018).
With a bit abuse of notation,let
                    R            π denote the stationary distribution of the Markov chain {Xi }i≥1 .
We define π(h) := h(x)π(dx) to be the integral of function h with respect to π. Let L2 (π) =
{h : π(h2 ) < ∞} be the Hilbert space of square-integrable functions and L02 (π) = {h ∈ L2 (π) :
π(h) = 0} be the subspace of mean zero functions. Let P be the Markov transition matrix of its


                                                                             15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


underlying (state space) graph and P ∗ be its adjoint in the Hilbert space. Let λ(P ) ∈ [0, 1] be the
operator norm of P on L02 (π) and λr (P ) ∈ [−1, 1] be the rightmost spectral value of (P + P ∗ )/2.
Then the right spectral gap of P is defined as 1 − λr (Levin & Peres, 2017) (We remark that in
Assumption 3, we assume the absolute spectral gap is non-zero, which implies the right spectral
gap is also non-zero. This is true since −1 ≤ λr ≤ λ ≤ 1.). Let E h denote the multiplication
                       h        h(x)
                 p e : x 7→ e
operator of function                 . In the Hilbert space L2 (π), we define the norm of a function
h to be ∥h∥π = ⟨h, h⟩π . Furthermore, we introduce the norm of a linear operator T on L2 (π) as
|||T |||π = sup{∥T h∥π : ∥h∥π = 1}.
We first restate Bernstein’s Inequality with General Makovian Samples (Jiang et al., 2018) in the
following theorem. Let α1 (λ) = (1 + λ)/(1 − λ), α2 (λ) = 5/(1 − λ) and α2 (0) = 1/3.
Theorem 3 (Bernstein’s Inequality with General Makovian Samples). Suppose {Xi }i≥1 is a station-
ary Markov chain with invariant distribution π and non-zero right spectral gap 1 − λr > 0, and f :7→
x[−c, c] is a function with π(f ) = 0. Let σ 2 = π(f 2 ). Then, for any 0 ≤ t < (1 − max{λr , 0})/5c
and any ϵ > 0,
               n
                             !
                                                                 nϵ2 /2

           1X
    Pπ            f (Xi ) > ϵ ≤ exp −                                                         .  (17)
           n i=1                           α1 (max {λr , 0}) · σ 2 + α2 (max {λr , 0}) · cϵ

                                               Pn
Proof. Step 1. Establish the upper bound of E et i fi (Xi ) .
Let I : x 7→ 1 be the fucntion mapping x to 1 and let Π be the projection operator onto 1, i.e.,
Π : g 7→ ⟨h, I⟩π I = π(h)I. Define the León-Perron operator to be Pbγ = γI + (1 − γ)Π, γ ∈ [0, 1).
Then we recall the following lemma (Lemma 2, (Jiang et al., 2018)) on the stationary Markov chain
(Fan et al., 2021a).
Lemma 5. Let {Xi } be a stationary Markov chain with invariant measure π and non-zero right
spectral gap 1 − λr > 0. For any bounded function f and any t ∈ R,
                          h Pn          i                              n
                       Eπ et i=1 f (Xi ) ≤ E tf /2 Pbmax{λ ,0} E tf /2 .
                                                                       r
                                                                                         π


                                                                       Pn
Lemma 6 indicates that it is sufficient to prove the upper bound of E et i fi (Xi ) by proving the
                                            n
upper bound of E tf /2 Pbmax{λ ,0} E tf /2 .
                                 r
                                                π

To this end, we first invoke the following lemma (Lemma 6, (Jiang et al., 2018)) to construct fbk ≈ f
such that for any λ ∈ [0, 1), E tf /2 Pbλ E tf /2 = limk→∞ E tfk /2 Pbλ E tfk /2 .
                                                                 b           b
                                                        π                                        π

Lemma 6. For function f : x ∈ X 7→ [−c, c] such that π(f ) = c, π(f 2 ) = σ 2 . Let ⌈·⌉ be the ceiling
                                                  fek −π (fek )
                      l       m
function and fek (x) = f (x)+c × c − c. Let fbk =
                         c/3k        3k                         . Then fek takes at most 6k + 1 possible
                                                              1+1/3k
values and satisfies that for any bounded linear operator T acting on the Hilbert Space L2 (π) and
any t ∈ R,
                            E tf /2 T E tf /2       = lim      E tfk /2 T E tfk /2           .
                                                                  b          b
                                                π       k→∞                              π



Assume that the Markov chain {X   bi }i≥1 , X
                                            bi ∈ X is generated by the León-Perron operator P̂λ . It
follows that {Yi }i≥1 = {fk (Xi )}i≥1 is a Markov chain in the state space Y = fˆk (X ). We recall the
              b          ˆ   b
following lemma (Lemma 7, (Jiang et al., 2018)) on the relation between the two Markov chains.

Lemma 7. Let Pbλ be the León-Perron operator with λ ∈ [0, 1) on state space X . Let f be a function
on X . On the finite state space Y = {y ∈ f (X ) : π({x : f (x) = y}) > 0}, define a transition
       b λ = λI + (1 − λ)Iµ⊤ , with transition vector µ consisting of elements π({x : f (x) = y})
matrix Q
for yinY. Let E tY denote the diagonal matrix with elements ety : y ∈ Y. Then we have,
                             E tf /2 Pbλ E tf /2 = E tY/2 Q
                                                          b λ E tY/2 .
                                                    π                                µ


                                                        16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Next, we bound the term        E tY/2 Q
                                      b λ E tY/2                  by the expansion of the largest eigenvalue of the
                                                              µ
                                tf /2         tf /2
perturbed Markov operator E             PE            as a series in t. Specifically, we recall the following result
(Lezaud, 1998).


Lemma 8. Consider a reversible, irreducible Markov chain on finite state space X . Let D be the
diagonal matrix with {f (x) : x ∈ X } and T (m) = P Dm /m! for any m ≥ 0 with D0 = I. Assume
the invariant distribution of the Markov chain is π and the second largest eigenvalue of the transition
                                                               −1
                                                     −1
matrix P is λr < 1. Let t0 = 2 T (1) π (1 − λr ) + c0             for some c0 such that

                                      T (m)           ≤   T (1)            cm−1
                                                                            0   , ∀m ≥ 1.
                                                π                      π
Denote the largest eigenvalue of P E by β(t) and Z = (I − P + Π)−1 − Π. Let Z 0 = −Π,
                                               tf

Z (j) = Z j , j ≥ 1, β(0) = 1 and β(m), m ≥ 1 be
              m
      (m)
             X   −1                 X
    β     =                                         trace T (v1 ) Z (k1 ) . . . T (vp ) Z (kp ) ,
                  p
             p=1     v1 +···+vp =m,vi ≥1,k1 +···+kp =p−1,kj ≥0
Then we have the following expansion on β(t),
                                        X∞
                                 β(t) =       β (m) tm , |t| < t0 .
                                                      m=0


Follow the same line as in (Lezaud, 1998) (Page 854-856), denote σ 2 = ∥f ∥2π and c = c0 ≥ |||D|||π
(defined in Lemma 8), then we have the following upper bound of β(t).
                                           X
                  β(t) = β (0) + β (1) t +    β (m) tm
                                                      m=2
                                         ∞                 ∞                     m−1
                                           π (f m ) tm         σ 2 λt

                                         X                X                5ct
                          ≤1+0+                                        +
                                     m=2
                                               m!        m=2
                                                                 5c      1 − λr
                                    ∞                   ∞                      m−1 !
                                         π (f m ) tm        σ 2 λt

                                   X                   X                5ct
                       ≤ exp                         +
                                   m=2
                                             m!        m=2
                                                             5c       1 − λr
                                 2                             2    2

                                   σ      tc
                                                             σ λt
                       ≤ exp            e − 1 − tc +
                                   c2                     1 − λr − 5ct
                       := exp(g1 (t) + g2 (t))                                           (18)
                                                          t Pn f (X )
Now we are ready to derive the bound for the term E e i i i . Following the results in Lemma
6, we consider a sequence of fk such that,
                         E tf /2 Pbλ E tf /2    = lim E tfk /2 Pbλ E tfk /2 .
                                                             b            b
                                                      π       k→∞                            π

Next, we construct the finite state space counterpart of each pair of E tfk /2 Pbλ E tfk /2 and π by Lemma
                                                                                        b        b

7, i.e.,
                            E tfk /2 Pbλ E tfk /2 := E tYk /2 Q b λ E tYk /2
                                b           b
                                                          π                                 µk

Let the random
          n      variable in
                           o the state
                                       space
                                             Yk be Yk , then nthe mean and o            Y
                                                                             variance of   k is
P
       π    x : bk (x) = Y
                f             y =  π   bk = 0 and P
                                       f                 π     x : bk (x) = y y 2 = π fb2 .
                                                                   f
  y∈Yk                                             y∈Yk                                  k

For each k, applying Eqn. (18) gives us,
                                                                                     
                                                   π fbk2                 π fbk2 λt2
              E tYk /2 Q
                       b λ E tYk /2                       etc − 1 − tc +

                                           ≤ exp                                     
                                        µk           c2                  1 − λr − 5ct


                                                                  17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Note that as k → ∞, we have π fbk2 → π(f 2 ) = σ 2 . Then we have the upper bound for each
operator   E tfi /2 P E tfi /2   π
                                     , i.e., for any λ ∈ [0, 1),
                                     E tf /2 Pλ E tf /2       ≤ exp(g1 (t) + g2 (t))
                                                          π
where g1 and g2 are defined in Eqn. (18).
                                               Pn                          Pn
Consequently, we obtain the upper bound for E et i fi (Xi ) as follows, E et i fi (Xi ) ,
                                         2
                                                               nσ 2 max{λr , 0}t2

              h Pn
                t i=1 fi (Xi )
                               i        nσ   tc

         Eπ e                    ≤ exp      e − 1 − tc +
                                         c2                  1 − max{λr , 0} − 5ct
Step 2 Use the convex analysis argument to derive the Bernstein’s Inequality.
We first restate the following lemma (Lemma 9, (Jiang et al., 2018)) on the terms g1 and g2 .
                                                    2                                  2   2
                                                                           nσ max{λr ,0}t
Lemma 9. For λ ∈ [0, 1), let g1 (t) = nσ       tc
                                         c2 (e − 1 − tc) and g2 (t) = 1−max{λr ,0}−5ct , then for
any 0 ≤ t < (1 − γ)/5c, the Frechet conjugates (g1 + g2 )∗ satisfy the following inequalities.
                                                                                                −1
                                                                         ϵ2 1 + λ 2

                          ∗                                                                5cϵ
if λ ∈ (0, 1) : (g1 + g2 ) (ϵ) :=      sup      {tϵ − g1 (t) − g2 (t)} ≥           σ +
                                  0≤t<(1−λ)/5c                           2 1−λ            1−λ
                          ∗                ϵ2        cϵ −1

     if λ = 0 : (g1 + g2 ) (ϵ) =g1∗ (ϵ) ≥       σ2 +         .
                                           2          3

By the Chernoff bound, we have,
                              n
                                             !
                           1X
                 − log P         fi (Xi ) > ϵ ≥ n × sup {tϵ − g1 (t) − g2 (t)}
                           n i=1                    t∈R


Notice that g1 (t) = O(t2 ) and g2 (t) = O(t2 ) as t → 0, then for some t > 0, we have tϵ − g1 (t) −
g2 (t) > 0. Meanwhile, when t ≤ 0, we have tϵ − g1 (t) − g2 (t) ≤ 0. Thus, we can obtain that,
                                                                                           ∗
       sup {tϵ − g1 (t) − g2 (t) : t > 0} = sup {tϵ − g1 (t) − g2 (t) : t ∈ R} = (g1 + g2 ) (ϵ).
Letting λ = max{λr , 0}, α1 (λ) = (1 + λ)/(1 − λ), α2 (λ) = 5/(1 − λ) and α2 (0) = 1/3 yields,
             n
                           !
                                                            nϵ2 /2

          1X
    Pπ          f (Xi ) > ϵ ≤ exp −                                                       . (19)
          n i=1                        α1 (max {λr , 0}) · σ 2 + α2 (max {λr , 0}) · cϵ
This concludes the proof.


C    P ROOF OF P ROPOSITION 1

Let ω̄t+1 = ΓR (ω̃t+1 ), and assume ∥ϕ(s, a)∥ ≤ 1 uniformly (see Assumption 1). Based on the
approach in Appendix G.1 (Fu et al., 2020), it suffices to upper bound ∥ωt+1 − ω̃t+1 ∥2 . Observe that
            ∥ωt+1 − ω̄t+1 ∥ ≤ ∥Φbb v − Φv∥2 ≤ ∥Φ∥2 · ∥b
                                 2                          v − v∥2 + ∥Φb − Φ∥2 · ∥b
                                                                                   v ∥2 ,
where Φ and v are given as follows:
                    N
                                                   !−1
                1 X                              ⊤
           Φ
           b=          ϕ (sl , al ) ϕ (sl , al )       ,
                N
                   l=1
                                             −1
           Φ = Eρt+1 ϕ(s, a)ϕ(s, a)⊤

                                                   ,
                   N           m−1
                                                                !
                1 X            X
                                    i        m
           vb =        (1 − γ)     γ rl,i + γ Qωt (sl,m , al,m ) · ϕ (sl,m , al,m ) ,
                N              i=0
                  l=1
                     "       m−1
                                                                                     #
                             X
                                    i        m
           v = Eρt+1 (1 − γ)       γ rl,i + γ Pπθt+1 Qωt (sm , am ) · ϕ(sm , am ) .
                                        i=0



                                                          18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Recall that the following assumptions are in place: (1) Spectral norm ∥ϕ(s, a)∥2 ≤ 1, ϕ(s, a) ∈ Rd ;
(2) |r(s, a)| ≤ rmax and r̄ = Es,a r(s, a); (3) ∥ωt ∥2 ≤ R and (4) the minimum singular value of
the matrix Eρt [ϕ(s, a)ϕ(s, a)⊤ ], t ≥ 1 is uniformly lower bounded by σ ∗ . It can be shown that
∥Φ∥2 ≤ σ1∗ .
Next, we derive the bound by appealing to Bernstein’s Inequality with General Makovian samples.
Following Theorem 2 (Jiang et al., 2018) (The proof of Bernstein’s Inequality can be found in
Appendix B), let πr be the invariant distribution (which is relevant to the current policy πk ) of the
stationary
      R Markov     chain {rt }m
                              t=1 . Suppose that it has non-zero right spectral gap 1 − λr > 0. Let
  2           2
σr = (r − r̄) πr (dr). Then, we have that for any ϵ > 0:
             m
                             !
                                                                  mϵ2 /2

           1 X
    Pπr         (ri − r̄) > ϵ ≤ exp −                                                             ,
          m i=1                            α1 (max {λr , 0}) · σ 2 + α2 (max {λr , 0}) · rmax ϵ
                                  (
                                     1
                1+λ                         if λ = 0
where α1 (λ) = 1−λ  , α2 (λ) = 3 5                        .
                                     1−λ    if λ ∈ (0, 1)
We conclude that with probability at least 1 − p,

             q
m−1                               2
X                α22 (max {λr , 0}) ln p2 − 2mα1 (max {λr , 0}) ln p − α2 (max {λr , 0}) ln p
      ri ≤                                                                                      + r̄ := r̃m .
i=0
                                                         m

It follows that with probability at least 1 − p,
                                      ∥v̂∥2 ≤ (1 − γ)r̃m + γ m R,
Further, note that
                                         ∥v∥2 ≤ (1 − γ)r̄ + γ m R,
                                                                     ∗
Since the minimum singular value of Φ̂−1 is no less than σ2 w.h.p. when N is large enough, we have
that
                                                      2
                                           ∥Φ̂∥2 ≤ ∗ .
                                                     σ
For convenience, define
                            N
                                                         !
                        1 X                          ⊤
                                                             , X ≜ Eρt+1 ϕ(s, a)ϕ(s, a)⊤ ,

                 X̂ ≜       ϕ (sl , al ) ϕ (sl , al )
                        N
                            l=1
and define
                                                               N
                                                               X
                                           Z ≜X̂ − X =               Sk ,                            (20)
                                                               k=1
                                                 1
                                          Sk ≜     (ϕk ϕ⊤
                                                        k − X),                                      (21)
                                                 N
where Sk , k = 1, · · · , N are independent.
Next, we derive the uniform bound on the spectral norm of each summand as follows:
                               1                    1                     2
                     ∥Sk ∥2 = ∥ϕk ϕ⊤  k − X∥ ≤         (∥ϕk ϕ⊤
                                                             k ∥ + ∥X∥) ≤   .
                              N                     N                     N
To this end, we bound the matrix variance statistic V (Z):
                                                         N
                                                         X
                                V (Z) :=∥E[Z 2 ]∥ = ∥        E[Sk2 ]∥.
                                                                k=1


                                                         19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Note that the variance of each summand is given by
                                 1
                      E[Sk2 ] = 2 E[(ϕk ϕ⊤
                                         k − X) ]
                                                  2
                                N
                                 1
                              = 2 E[∥ϕk ∥2 · ϕϕ⊤ − ϕϕ⊤ X − Xϕϕ⊤ + X 2 ]
                                N
                                 1
                              ≼ 2 [E[ϕϕ⊤ ] − X 2 ]
                                N
                                 1
                              ≼ 2 X.
                                N
Combining the above, we conclude that
                                             N
                                             X                 1
                                        0≼         E[Sk2 ] ≼     X.
                                                               N
                                             k=1

Observe that
                         ∥X∥ = ∥E[ϕϕ⊤ ]∥2 ≤ E[∥ϕϕ⊤ ∥] = E∥ϕ∥2 ≤ 1.
Since the spectral norm is the variance statistic given by
                                                     1
                                          V (Z) ≤ ∥X∥,
                                                     N
appealing to Bernstein’s Inequality, we have that
                                                               −t2
                                                                       !
                                                                2
                         P{∥Z∥ ≥ t} ≤2d exp            1        2t         ,
                                                       N ∥X∥ + 3N
                                         r
                                          2                 2
                               E[∥Z∥] ≤     ∥X∥ log(2d) +     log(2d)
                                          N                3N
                                        r
                                          2            2
                                      ≤     log(2d) +     log(2d).
                                          N           3N
This is to say, with probability at least 1 − p/2, the following holds:
                                                     r
                                       2        p         4         p   2     p
                     ∥X − X̂∥ ≤ −          log    +         2
                                                              log2    −   log .
                                      3N       4d       9N         4d N      4d
In a nutshell, we have that
              b − Φ∥2 =∥X̂ −1 − X −1 ∥2
             ∥Φ
                      =∥X̂ −1 (X̂ − X)X −1 ∥2
                      =∥Φ̂(X̂ − X)Φ∥2
                         2
                      ≤ ∗ 2 ∥X̂ − X∥2
                       (σ )
                                                               r                             !
                             4             2      p                 4         p   2      p
                      ≤√          2 ·   −    log    +                 2
                                                                        log2    −   log          .
                           N (σ ∗ )       3N     4d                9N        4d N       4d

Similarly, the following inequality holds with probability at least 1 − p/2:
                                               s
                            δ1         p          δ12          p                  p
             ∥b
              v − v∥2 ≤ − log               +         log2           − 2δ2 log          ,
                            3      2(d + 1)       9        2(d + 1)            2(d + 1)
where d is the dimension of vector φ, δ1 = N1 ((1 − γ)(r̃m + r̄) + 2γ m R) and δ2 = ∥E[v̂ − v]∥2
satisfying
                             1
                       δ2 ≤ [(1 − γ)(|r̃m |(|r̃m − r̄| + γ m R|r̃m − r̄|))]
                            N
                            1−γ
                          ≤       [rmax + γ m R]|r̃m − r̄|.
                              N


                                                     20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Summarizing, we have that
 ∥ωt+1 − ω̄t+1 ∥2 ≤∥Φ∥2 · ∥b
                           v − v∥2 + ∥Φ b − Φ∥2 · ∥b v ∥2
                                          s
                       δ1         p          δ12           p                    p
                  ≤ − ∗ log             +        log2            − 2δ2 log
                      3σ      2(d + 1)       9          2(d + 1)           2(d + 1)
                                                                 r                           !
                      4((1 − γ)r̃m + γ m R)        2        p        4       2 p    2      p
                    +       √                  −       log    +          log      −   log      ,
                              N (σ ∗ )2           3N       4d      9N 2        4d N       4d
which indicates that with probability at least 1 − p,
                                                                            r                             !!
                     4((1 − γ)r̃m + γ m R)                  2      p             4         p   2      p
 |Qωt+1 − Qω̄t+1 | ≤       √                             −    log    +             2
                                                                                     log2    −   log
                             N (σ ∗ )2                     3N     4d            9N        4d N       4d
                     ≜ϵQ .                                                                                (22)
Remark. In the case when Assumption 1 does not hold, i.e., we have
                         inf Eρπθ [ (T πθ )m Qω − ω̄ ⊤ ϕ (s, a)] = c1 ,

                              ω̄∈Ω
where c1 > 0 is a constant. Let ω̄t+1 = ΓR (ω̃t+1 ), recall that ω̃ denotes the solution of Eqn. (8) and
ω denotes the sample-based solution, then we have


                                             |Qω̄t+1 − Qω̃t+1 | = c1
From Eqn. (22), we obtain that,


                                             |Qωt+1 − Qω̄t+1 | ≤ ϵQ
Then the difference between the sample-based solution and the underlying true solution of Eqn. (8)
is,
                                  |Qωt+1 − Qω̃t+1 | ≤ ϵQ + c1 .
Note that when Assumption 1 holds,
                                                 Qω̃t+1 = Qω̄t+1 .



D    P ROOF OF L EMMA 1

Recall β = fk,t + Ck,t − E[Ck,t ] − E[fk,t ]. We also have the following definitions:
                       Xl
           Ck,t,1 ≜1/l    (Qωt+1 (si , ai )∇θ πθk (ai |si ) − Qωet+1 (si , ai )∇θ πθk (ai |si )),
                           i=1
                           l
                           X
            Ck,t,2 ≜1/l          (Qωet+1 (si , ai )∇θ πθk (ai |si ) − Qπθt (si , ai )∇θ πθk (ai |si )),
                           i=1
                           l
                           X
               fk,t ≜1/l         Qπθt (si , ai )∇θ πθk (ai |si ),
                           i=1

            Ck,t ≜Ck,t,1 + Ck,t,2 .
Next we evaluate E[∥fk,t + Ck,t − E[Ck,t ] − E[fk,t ]∥2 ] as follows:
             ∥fk,t + Ck,t − E[Ck,t ] − E[fk,t ]∥2
             =(fk,t + Ck,t )(fk,t + Ck,t )⊤ + (E[Ck,t ] + E[fk,t ])(E[Ck,t ] + E[fk,t ])⊤
                − 2(fk,t + Ck,t )(E[Ck,t ] + E[fk,t ])⊤
             ≤(fk,t + Ck,t )(fk,t + Ck,t )⊤ + (E[Ck,t ] + E[fk,t ])(E[Ck,t ] + E[fk,t ])⊤ .               (23)


                                                         21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Note that Ck,t and fk,t are both bounded above since Q-function is bounded and ∇θ πθ (a|s) is
bounded (see Assumption 4), i.e.,
                              ∥∇π(a|s)∥ ≤Cψ ,
                                             ∞
                                            X              rmax
                                ∥Q(s, a)∥ ≤     γ t rmax =      .
                                            t=1
                                                           1 −γ
Then we have the following bounds for Ck,t and fk,t :
                                                           rmax
                                            ∥Ck,t ∥ ≤ 2Cψ       ,
                                                           1−γ
                                                           rmax
                                              ∥fk,t ∥ ≤ Cψ      .
                                                           1−γ
Taking expectation over both sides of the inequality (23), we have that
             E[∥β∥2 ] ≤ 1 · ∥E[Ck,t ] + E[fk,t ]∥2 + E[(fk,t + Ck,t )(fk,t + Ck,t )⊤ ].
Let Mn = 1 and σ 2 = E[(fk,t + Ck,t )(fk,t + Ck,t )⊤ ]. Then we have that
                                E[∥β∥2 ] ≤ Mn · ∥E[Ck,t ]∥ + σ 2 ,
where σ depends on probability p as indicated in Eqn. (22).

E    P ROOF OF L EMMA 2

Recall that b = E[Ck,t ] and
            Ck,t :=Ck,t,1 + Ck,t,2
                       X l
                  =1/l       Qωt+1 (si , ai )∇θ πθk (ai |si ) − Qωet+1 (si , ai )∇θ πθk (ai |si )+
                         i=1

                     (Qωet+1 (si , ai )∇θ πθk (ai |si ) − Qπθt (si , ai )∇θ πθk (ai |si ) .
Next, we evaluate ∥b∥2 . Observe that (see also Appendix D)
                                                     rmax
                                       ∥Ck,t ∥ ≤ 2Cψ       .
                                                     1−γ
Let ζ = 2∥Cψ r1−γ
               max
                   ∥. Then we have
                                 ∥b∥2 = ∥E[Ck,t ]∥2 ≤ E[∥Ck,t ∥2 ] ≤ ζ 2 .

F    P ROOF OF L EMMA 3 AND L EMMA 4

       • [Lemma 3] Given Critic parameter ω in the objective function, it can be seen that
         ∥∇h(ω, θ) − ∇h(ω, θ′ )∥ ≤ Qmax ∥∇πθ − ∇πθ′ ∥. Since value function is bounded (e.g.,
         Qmax ) and the score function ∇πθ is Lψ -smooth (ref. Assumption 6), the constant in
         Assumption 4 can be easily determined by L = Qmax Lψ .
       • [Lemma 4] Since the objective function is finite, let hmax = maxθ̸=θ∗ h(θ, ω), h∗max =
         maxθ=θ∗ h(θ, ω),. In the case when the gradient is non-zero, let gmin = minθ̸=θ∗ ∇h, then
         we can determine µ = h∗ gmin
                                    −hmax ≥ 0.
                                     max



G     P ROOF OF P ROPOSITION 2

Observe that the Actor updates use the biased stochastic gradient methods (SGD). For simplicity, we
adopt the following notations to study the Actor update:
                              θk+1 = θk + α(∇h(ω, θk ) + b(t) + β(t)).                         (24)
where b(t) = E[Ck,t ] is the bias, α is the step size, and
                                 β = fk,t + Ck,t − E[Ck,t ] − E[fk,t ]
is the zero-mean noise. Note that the objective function h(ω, θk ) is a function of θ. Denote the
optimal value (in this iteration of the Actor update) by h(ω, θ∗ ).


                                                       22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


We prove the following lemma on the modified version of the descent lemma for smooth function (cf.
(Ajalloeian & Stich, 2020; Nesterov, 2003)).
Lemma 10. Suppose Assumption 3 and 4 hold. Then, for any stepsize α ≤ (Mn1+1)L , the following
inequality holds with probability at least 1 − p:
                                                  α    α2 L 2 α
                E[h(ω, θk+1 ) − h(ω, θk )|θk ] ≤ ζ 2 +     σ − ∥∇h(ω, θk )∥2 .
                                                  2     2     2
Observe that under the PL-condition (Assumption 4), we have the following recursion:
                                                                        α      α2 L 2
        E[h(ω, θk+1 ) − h(ω, θ∗ )] ≤ (1 − αµ)E[h(ω, θk ) − h(ω, θ∗ )] + ζ 2 +        σ .           (25)
                                                                        2        2
By applying Eqn. (25) recursively, we obtain the desired results in Proposition 2.


H    P ROOF OF P ROPOSITION 3

We first prove the following lemma on the relation between Actor parameter θ and the objective
function h(ω, θ).
Lemma 11. There exist a contant Lh > 0 and an open ball Sϵ (θt∗ ) such that for any θt ∈ Bϵ (θt∗ )
the following holds for any t > 0.
                          E[∥πθt − π ∗ ∥TV ] ≤ Lh E[h(ω, θt∗ ) − h(ω, θt )].

Proof. By Taylor’s expansion, we have
                     h(ω, θ∗ ) = h(ω, θt ) + ∇h(ω, θt )(θt∗ − θt ) + o(∥θt∗ − θt ∥).
Since h(ω, ·) satisfies Polyak-Lojasiewicz Condition, it follows that
                       ∥∇h(ω, θ)∥ ≥ 2µ(h(ω, θ∗ ) − h(ω, θ)) := Lg for all θ.
Note that Lg > 0 when θ ̸= θ∗ . Then we have that
                    h(ω, θt∗ ) − h(ω, θt ) =|∇h(ω, θt )(θ∗ − θt ) + o(∥θ∗ − θt ∥)|
                                           ≥|∇h(ω, θt )(θt∗ − θt )| − |o(∥θ∗ − θt ∥)|
                                           ≥Lg ∥θt∗ − θt ∥ − Lo ∥θt∗ − θt ∥
                                           =(Lg − Lo )∥θt∗ − θt ∥,
where the last inequality uses the fact that there exists ϵ such that when ∥θt − θt∗ ∥ ≤ ϵ,
                             |o(∥θt∗ − θt ∥)| ≤ Lo ∥θt∗ − θt ∥, Lo < Lg .
Taking expectation over both sides gives
                        E[h(ω, θt∗ ) − h(ω, θt )] =(Lg − Lo )E[∥θt∗ − θt ∥]
                                                  ≥(Lg − Lo )∥E[θt∗ − θt ]∥.
Then we conclude that the parameter of interest Lh ,
                                                Cπ
                                     Lh =            > 0.
                                             Lg − Lo
where Cπ is defined in Assumption 4.

We are ready to present the proof of Proposition 3. Based on the definition of EJ,t
                                                                                ˆ and ET̂ ,t , we derive
the upper bound for each term respectively.
                                        −1
                   EJ,t
                     ˆ =(I − γPπ̂t+1 )      − (I − γPπet+1 )−1
                        =(I − γPπet+1 )−1 γPπet+1 − γPπ̂t+1 (I − γPπ̂t+1 )−1 .


Observe that value function v is smooth and upper bounded. We denote the smoothness parameter by
Lv , the upper bound by ∥v∥ ≤ V max , and the smoothness of the reward function by Lr .
By taking the norm of both sides and applying Assumption 3, 4 and 5, we obtain
                                          2
                              ∥EJ,t
                                 ˆ ∥ ≤ M LJ Lv ∥eπt+1 − π̂t+1 ∥TV .


                                                   23
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Further, observe that
                           ET̂ ,t = rπ̂t+1 + γPπ̂t+1 v π̂t − (rπet+1 + γPπet+1 v π̂t ),
                                = rπ̂t+1 − rπet+1 + γ(Pπ̂t+1 − Pπet+1 )v π̂t .
By taking the norm of both sides and applying Assumption 5, we obtain
                      ∥ET̂ ,t ∥ = ∥rπ̂t+1 − rπet+1 ∥ + ∥γ(Pπ̂t+1 − Pπet+1 )v π̂t ∥
                               ≤(Lr + γV max )∥e
                                               πt+1 − π̂t+1 ∥TV
                                 max
                              :=LT .
Recall the definition of Et is given as

                       Et = − EJ,t ˆ (v
                                        π̂t
                                            − T (v π̂t )) + Jv̂−1
                                                                t
                                                                  ET̂ ,t + E     E
                                                                            T̂ ,t J,t .
                                                                                   ˆ

Taking the norm and expectation on both sides yields that
                                    h                                                       i
             ∥E[Et ]∥ ≤ E[∥Et ∥] =E ∥EJ,t
                                        ˆ (v
                                             π̂t
                                                 − T (v π̂t )) + Jv̂−1
                                                                     t
                                                                       ET̂ ,t + E     E ˆ
                                                                                 T̂ ,t J,t ∥
                                  ≤LE E[∥e
                                         πt+1 − π̂t+1 ∥TV ],
                   max                                                                       ∗
where LE = (2V           K + LT )M Lv LJ + M (Lr + γV max ) > 0 is a constant. Since π
                              max  2
                                                                                     et+1 = πt+1
is the greedy solution, we thereby complete the proof of Proposition 3.


I   P ROOF OF T HEOREM 1


Following the value function update rule, we have
                           v π̂t+1 = v π̂t − Jv̂−1 v π̂t − T (v π̂t ) + Et

                                                 t

                                      = v π̂t − (L(t) + Et )
                                    := v π̂t − L̂(t).
Then, the difference between v π̂t+1 and v ∗ is given by
                       v ∗ − v π̂t+1 =v ∗ − v π̂t + Jv̂−1     v π̂t − T (v π̂t ) + Et .

                                                         t
                                                                                                (26)
Observe the following result holds for any π̂t ,
                        (v π̂t − T (v π̂t )) − (v ∗ − T (v ∗ )) ≥ Jv̂2t (v π̂t − v ∗ ).         (27)
                                               |     {z       }
                                                         =0

Recall our decomposition of the value function update is given as
                  L̂(t) = L(t) +       L̂(t) − E[L̂(t)]     + E[L̂(t)] − L(t) .
                                       |      {z      }        |    {z      }
                                        Martingale Difference Noise: N (t)   Bias: B(t)

Plugging Eqn. (27) into Eqn. (26), we obtain
                     v ∗ − v π̂t+1 =v ∗ − v π̂t + Jv̂−1 v π̂t − T (v π̂t ) + Et

                                                      t

                                       ≥ (I − Jvπ̂t )) (v ∗ − v π̂t ) + B(t) + N (t)
                                  =γPπet+1 (v ∗ − v π̂t ) + B(t) + N (t).
Taking expectation on both sides yields that
                        E[v ∗ − v π̂t+1 |v π̂t ] ≥γPπet+1 (v ∗ − v π̂t ) + B(t).


                                                         24
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Applying the above inequality recursively gives that
                                        " t              !#
                  ∗                         Y
                        π̂t+1     t+1
                                                            (v ∗ − v π0 )

              E v −v            ≥γ E            Pπet+1−i
                                                    i=0
                                                                        
                                           t
                                           X                i−1
                                                            Y
                                      +          γ i E          Pπet+1−j  (B(t − i)) + B(t)
                                           i=1              j=0
                                                                      t
                                                                      X
                                   :=γ t+1 P̄t+1 (v ∗ − v π0 ) +             γ i P̄i B(t − i) + B(t),   (28)
                                                                       i=1
                  h Q                  i
                       t
with P̄t+1 = E         i=0 Pπ
                            et+1−i         . Taking norm on both sides of Eqn. (28) yields the desired
results.


J   P ROOF OF T HEOREM 2

Based on the update rule of the value function, we have
                 v ∗ − v π̂t+1 =Jv̂−1 Jv̂t (v ∗ − v π̂t ) + Jv̂−1 v π̂t − T (v π̂t ) + Et

                                    t                           t

                                  ≤Jv̂−1
                                       t
                                         Jv̂t (v ∗ − v π̂t ) − Jv̂−1
                                                                   t
                                                                     Jv∗ (v ∗ − v π̂t ) − Et
                                  ≤Jv̂−1
                                       t
                                         [Jv̂t − Jv∗ ] (v ∗ − v π̂t ) + Et ,
which implies that
                     E[v ∗ − v π̂t+1 |v π̂t ] ≤ Jv̂−1
                                                    t
                                                      [Jv̂t − Jv∗ ] (v ∗ − v π̂t ) + B(t).
Then, taking norm on both sides of the inequality above gives
                 ∥E[v ∗ − v π̂t+1 |v π̂t ]∥ ≤∥Jv̂−1
                                                  t
                                                    [Jv̂t − Jv∗ ] (v ∗ − v π̂t ) + B(t)∥.               (29)
Let Ht = ∥Jv̂−1
              t
                [Jv̂t − Jv∗ ] ∥. It follows from Assumption 5 that
                                       Ht ≤ M LJ ∥v π̂t − v ∗ ∥q .
where LJ is defined in Assumption 5.
Hence, we have that
                   ∥E[v π̂t+1 − v ∗ ]∥ ≤∥Jv̂−1
                                             t
                                               ∥∥Jv̂t − Jv∗ ∥∥v π̂t − v ∗ ∥ + ∥B(t)∥.          (30)
By applying Eqn. (30) recursively, we conclude that
                                      !                                    
                            Yt                            X t     Yi
   ∥E[v π̂t+1 − v ∗ ]∥ ≤       Ht−i ∥E[v ∗ − v π0 ]∥ +              Ht−j  ∥B(t − i)∥ + ∥B(t)∥.
                            i=0                                     i=1      j=1



K    E XPERIMENTS

A Summary of Theoretical Results. This work aims to provide a comprehensive answer to the
question of “whether and under what conditions online learning (e.g., the general algorithm like AC)
can be significantly accelerated by a warm-start policy from offline RL”. Our key observations are as
follows.

     (1) Our results in Theorem 1 and Theorem 2 point out that the warm-start policy goes hand-
         by-hand with the approximation error to influence the learning performance (see the table
         below for the summary). The intricate relationship between the warm-start policy and the
         approximation error can be identified by studying the structure of the bounds in Theorem
         4 and Theorem 5, where the warm-start policy not only has impact on the first term (e.g.,
         v ∗ − v π0 ) but also the bias propagation through H0 := ∥Jv̂−1
                                                                       0
                                                                         [Jv̂0 − Jv∗ ] ∥. Meanwhile,
         the biases have impact on the effect of the warm-start policy (the first term in the bounds)
         through Ht directly.
     (2) In Theorem 1, we point out that the bias terms have direct impact on “whether the warm-start
         policy is able to facilitate the online learning”. For instance, “even when the warm-start


                                                          25
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


         policy is nearly-optimal”, there is still no guarantee that online fine-tuning can improve
         the policy much if there exist biases in the approximation errors in online Actor and Critic
         updates and these biases are not dealt with properly. To clarify further, consider the case
         when the bias is always positive, i.e., B(t) > 0 for all t ≥ 0, the lower bound is always
         positive and bounded away from zero.
     (3) In Theorem 2, we aim to answer the question: “under what conditions online learning
         can be significantly accelerated by a warm-start policy?”. Consider the case when the
         approximation error is unbiased (such that the A-C can be viewed as the Newton’s Method).
                                                     Qt
         Clearly, we have ∥E[v π̂t+1 − v ∗ ]∥ ≤                      ∗     π0
                                                        i=0 Ht−i ∥v − v ∥, which can decrease
         quickly as long as the warm-start policy π0 is not far away from the optimal policy π ∗ and
         also satisfies Assumption 5. Intuitively, this result shows that “the imperfections of the
         warm-start policy can be ‘washed out’ by the (superlinear) Newton step” and corroborates
         with the observation in the very recent literature (Bertsekas, 2022b.). We remark that this
         phenomenon has not been formalized by previous works on the A-C algorithm.

                            B(t) → 0                          ∥B(t)∥ > 0
  when the distance be-     The warm-start can facilitate the Biases can throttle the convergence
  tween π0 and π ∗ is       online convergence (Theorem 2) significantly due to the accumula-
  small                     (Empirical studies:Silver et al. tion effect (Theorem 1) (Empirical
                            (2017; 2018))                     studies: Uchendu et al. (2022))
  when the distance be-     The imperfections of the warm- The warm-start policy goes hand-by-
  tween π0 and π ∗ is       start can be “washed out” by on- hand with the approximation error to
  relatively large          line learning (Theorem 2, Eqn. influence the learning performance
                            (30)) (Empirical studies: Bert-
                            sekas (2022b))


Empirical Results. We consider experiments over the Gridworld benchmark task. In particular,
we consider the following sizes of the grid to represent different problem complexity, i.e., 10 × 10,
15 × 15 and 20 × 20. The goal of the agent is to find a way (policy) to travel from a specified start
location, e.g., the red square in Fig. 3, to an assigned target location, e.g., the red hexagram in Fig. 3,
such that the (discounted) accumulative reward along the way is maximized. Specifically, the action
space contains 4 discrete actions, namely, up, down, left, right, which are represented as 1,2,3,4 in
the algorithm, respectively. The reward in the goal state is defined as 10 and in the bad state , e.g.,
the black cube in Fig. 3, is -6. The rest of the states result in the reward −1. The discounting factor
is set as γ = 0.9. We consider the grid with 10 rows and 10 columns such that the state space has
100 states. The transition properties of the environment is as follows: the agent will transfer to next
state following the chosen action with probability 0.7; the agent will go left of the desired action
with probability 0.15 and go right with with probability 0.15. For each experiment, the shaded area
represents a standard deviation of the average evaluation over 5 training seeds.
Specifically, we consider the following A-C algorithm to solve the Gridworld benchmark task,
Critic Update: The Critic updates its value by applying the Bellman evaluation operator (T π ) for
m-times (m ≥ 1), i.e., given policy π, at the t-th step A-C update,
                                     v(t + 1) = (T π )m (v(t)).                               (31)
Actor Update: The Actor updates the policy by a greedy step to maximize the learnt v value, i.e.,
                                     π ′ = arg max T π (v(t + 1)).                                    (32)
                                                 π

Impact of the Warm-Start Policy. We first consider the impact of the Warm-Start policy in the
ideal setting, where both the Critic update and Actor update is nearly accurate as in ADP. In this
case, we let m be large enough, e.g., m = 1000, in the Critic update Eqn. (31). As observed in Fig.
4, a ‘good’ Warm-Start policy can efficiently accelerate the learning process, e.g., it only takes two
iterations to convergence with a Warm-Start policy. Meanwhile, in all three cases, the performance
gap ∥v(t) − v ∗ ∥ decays over time which reflects our discovery in Theorem 2. Specifically, when the
Warm-Start policy is not ‘good’ enough (or even no Warm-Start), the A-C algorithm can still be able
to improve the learning performance overtime (see e.g., the first term on the right side of the upper
bound in Theorem 2).


                                                     26
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Impact of the Approximation Error in the Critic Update. We evaluate the impact of the approxi-
mation error in the Critic update on the convergence behavior by two approaches. (1) First, we study
the Critic update with finite time Bellman evaluation, e.g., m = 500, 50, 20, 5. As shown in Fig. 5,
the inaccurate Critic update impacts the convergence behavior as expected. The case when m = 5
shows that the finite time Bellman evaluation may contribute to the slower convergence. (2) Next,
we consider the general case when there is approximation error in the Critic update. In particular,
we add the uniform noise e(t) in the value function with different bias, e.g.,E[e(t)] = 0, 0.5, 1, −1.
Meanwhile, we also consider the case when the bias can be either +0.5 or −0.5 in the learning
process, e.g., E[e(t)] = 0.5 with probability 0.5 and E[e(t)] = −0.5 with probability 0.5. The
resulting convergence behavior is presented in Fig. 6. Notably, it can be clearly seen that both the
positive and negative bias may result in an error floor and ‘prevent’ the algorithm from converging to
the optimal (e.g., the last two terms of the lower bound in Theorem (1)). The experiment results in
Fig. 6 corroborate our theoretical findings in Theorems 1, 2 and 1.
Impact of the Approximation Error in the Actor Update. We investigate the learning performance
of the A-C algorithm under inaccurate Actor update. In particular, we add the perturbation on the
learnt policy in Eqn. (32) as follows,

                                               Policy(s),     p,
                                 Policy(s) =
                                               randi([1, 4]), 1 − p.

where Policy(s) denotes the action should the agent take at the current state s following the learnt
policy and randi([1, 4]) is a random function to choose the action 1, 2, 3, 4 uniformly. Thus, with
probability p, the agent will choose the action follow the current policy while with probability 1 − p,
the agent will choose a random action. By setting different p, we show in Fig. 7 that the approximation
error in the Actor update may significantly degrade the learning performance. Meanwhile, Fig. 7 also
indicates that decreasing bias can be helpful to improve the learning performance (see the red and
green lines in Fig. 7). This observation also verifies our results in Theorem 1.


L        O FF - POLICY A-C A LGORITHEM AS N EWTON ’ S M ETHOD WITH
         P ERTURBATION

We note that the actor and critic updates in Eqn. (9) and Eqn. (8) are a general template that admits
both off- and on-policy method. More specifically, denote the target policy by πtar and the behavior
policy by πbhv . When the off-policy menthod is used, then the updates in Eqn. (9) and Eqn. (8) are
given by

                                                          h                                i2
                              ωt+1 ← arg minω E(s,a)∼ρπbhv Qω,πtar t+1 (s, a) − ω ⊤ ϕ(s, a) ,



     1


     2


     3


     4


     5


     6


     7


     8


     9


    10

         1    2   3   4   5    6   7   8   9   10


             (a) 10 × 10 Gridworld.                 (b) 15 × 15 Gridworld.       (c) 15 × 15 Gridworld.

Figure 3: Gridworld benchmark with different sizes. The colors specify the ‘goodness’ measure of
the state, i.e., the darker color cubes are with lower v(s) value and the agent should avoid those areas.
The horizontal lines and vertical lines in each cube point to the direction the agent should take, i.e.,
policy at every state. Fig. 3(a), Fig. 3(b) and Fig. 3(c) show the learning results after 50 iterations of
A-C update.


                                                               27
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


      (a) 10 × 10 Gridworld.            (b) 15 × 15 Gridworld.            (c) 15 × 15 Gridworld.

Figure 4: The impact of the Warm-Start Policy when no approximation errors in Actor update and
Critic update. The convergence behavior given different initial policy, i.e., a random policy (no
Warm-Start), a Warm-Start policy obtained by running the A-C algorithm for one iteration and two
iterations. The x-axis represents the A-C update step and y-axis is the value of the norm ∥v(t) − v ∗ ∥.


     (a) 10 × 10 Gridworld.             (b) 15 × 15 Gridworld.             (c) 20 × 20 Gridworld.

                         Figure 5: Learning performance vs. rollout length.


     (a) 10 × 10 Gridworld.             (b) 15 × 15 Gridworld.             (c) 20 × 20 Gridworld.

                       Figure 6: Illustration of the lower bound in Theorem 1.


     (a) 10 × 10 Gridworld.             (b) 15 × 15 Gridworld.             (c) 20 × 20 Gridworld.

          Figure 7: Convergence behavior vs. Approximation Error in the Actor Update.


                                                  28
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                         πt+1 ← arg max E(s,a)∼ρπbhv Qωt+1 ,πtar,t (s, a) .
                                         π

This is in contrast to the updates given below when the on-policy method is used:

                                              h                                i2
                  ωt+1 ← arg minω E(s,a)∼ρπtar Qω,πtar t+1 (s, a) − ω ⊤ ϕ(s, a) ,


                          πt+1 ← arg max E(s,a)∼ρπtar Qωt+1 ,πtar,t (s, a) .
                                         π

      • One major challenge of the off-policy analysis lies in the fact that the behavior policy
        can be arbitrary Sutton et al. (1999)Sutton & Barto (2018) and hence it is impossible to
        develop a unifying framework. For example, the behavior policy can be obtained by human
        demonstration (a similar idea is used in an early version of AlphaGo), deriving from the
        target policy as in Q-learning/DQN or from a previous behavior policy. Meanwhile, the
        key drawback of off-policy method is that it does not stably interact with the function
        approximation and is generally of greater variance and slower convergence rate Sutton &
        Barto (2018). In this regard, modern off-policy deep RL requires techniques such as growing
        batch learning, importance sampling or ensemble method to stabilize the algorithm. Thus,
        for ease of exposition, we only include the on-policy analysis in our work.
      • Our framework and theoretical results are able to be applied to off-policy setting with the
        extra assumption on the behavior policy. In particular, we assume the behavior policy is in
        the neighborhood of the target policy, i.e., in each Actor and Critic update step,
                                     ∥Ebhv-tar,t ∥ := ∥πtar , t − πbhv,t ∥ ≤ Cbt ,
        where Ctb ≥ 0 is a constant. In this way, we can write the A-C update in the off-policy
        setting as a Newton Method with perturbation, i.e.,
                            vπtar ,t+1 = vπtar ,t –(Jv−1
                                                       πtar ,t
                                                               (vπtar ,t − T (vπtar ,t )) − Et ),
        where Et is the perturbation which captures the approximation error from Actor update,
        Critic update and the behavior policy. Explicitly, we have the perturbation with the following
        form,

         Et = Ev,t + EJ,t
                      ˆ (v
                           π̂t+1
                                 − (rπet+1 + γPπet+1 v π̂t+1 )) − Jv̂−1
                                                                      t
                                                                        (Er,t + Ebhv−tar,t + γ(EP,t + Ebhv−tar,t )v π̂t ).
        Thus, the off-policy analysis is similar to the on-policy case but with the ‘error’ induced by
        the behavior policy.


M    O NE - PAGE R EVISION ( SEE NEXT PAGE )


                                                   29
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                           Characterization of Approximation Errors                                    Characterization of Approximation Errors
      Assumption 1                                                                                                In the Actor Update
                                      In the Critic Update
     Projection on the
  Critic parameter space                                Lemma 1                                           Lemma 3

                                                    σ 2 - bounded Noise                                L -smoothness         Proposition 2
      Assumption 2            Proposition 1                                       Assumption 4
     Base function ϕ       Approximation Error                               Score function in                            Approximation Error
     In Critic update       In the Critic update                             the Actor update                             In the Actor update

                                                        Lemma 2                                            Lemma 4
      Assumption 3                                   ζ 2- bounded Bias                                  μ- PL Condition
    Reward and state
     transition matrix


                                                                  Proposition 3
                                                       Upper bound of the biases {B(t)}

                                                   Theorem 1                          Theorem 2
                                           The Lower Bound of                     The Upper Bound of
                                                E[v* − vπt+1
                                                         ̂
                                                             ]                       E[v* − vπt+1
                                                                                              ̂
                                                                                                  ]
                                              Impact of Approximation Errors and Warm-start Policy
                                                      on Finite-time Learning Performance



                                 Figure 8: Illustration of the theoretical analysis.


In Section 3. We add the illustration of the theoretical analysis Fig. 8 to make this work more
accessible to a broader audience.
In Section 4. We add Table 1 to summarize the key observations from our main results (Theorem 1
and Theorem 2)

                                  B(t) → 0                          ∥B(t)∥ > 0
  when the distance be-           The warm-start can facilitate the Biases can throttle the convergence
  tween π0 and π ∗ is             online convergence (Theorem 2) significantly due to the accumula-
  small                           (Empirical studies:Silver et al. tion effect (Theorem 1) (Empirical
                                  (2017; 2018))                     studies: Uchendu et al. (2022))
  when the distance be-           The imperfections of the warm- The warm-start policy goes hand-by-
  tween π0 and π ∗ is             start can be “washed out” by on- hand with the approximation error to
  relatively large                line learning (Theorem 2, Eqn. influence the learning performance
                                  (30)) (Empirical studies: Bert-
                                  sekas (2022b))

Table 1: The learning performance given different warm-start policy and biases setting.In Theorem
1, we point out that the bias terms have direct impact on “whether the warm-start policy is able to
facilitate the online learning”. For instance, “even when the warm-start policy is nearly-optimal”,
there is still no guarantee that online fine-tuning can improve the policy much if there exist biases in
the approximation errors in online Actor and Critic updates and these biases are not dealt with properly.
To clarify further, consider the case when the bias is always positive, i.e., B(t) > 0 for all t ≥ 0, the
lower bound is always positive and bounded away from zero. In Theorem 2, we aim to answer the
question: “under what conditions online learning can be significantly accelerated by a warm-start
policy?”. Consider the case when the approximation error is unbiased  (such that the        A-C can be
                                                                              Qt
viewed as the Newton’s Method). Clearly, we have ∥E[v π̂t+1 − v ∗ ]∥ ≤                         ∗
                                                                                 i=0 t−i ∥v − v ∥,
                                                                                      H              π0

which can decrease quickly as long as the warm-start policy π0 is not far away from the optimal
policy π ∗ and also satisfies Assumption 5. Intuitively, this result shows that “the imperfections of the
warm-start policy can be ‘washed out’ by the (superlinear) Newton step” and corroborates with the
observation in the very recent literature (Bertsekas, 2022b.). We remark that this phenomenon has
not been formalized by previous works on the A-C algorithm.


                                                                     30
