Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


N EURAL R ADIANCE F IELD C ODEBOOKS
 Matthew Wallingford1 , Aditya Kusupati1 , Alex Fang1 , Vivek Ramanujan1 ,
 Aniruddha Kembhavi2 , Roozbeh Mottaghi1 , Ali Farhadi1
 1
   University of Washington; 2 PRIOR, Allen Institute for AI



                                             A BSTRACT

         Compositional representations of the world are a promising step towards enabling
         high-level scene understanding and efficient transfer to downstream tasks. Learning
         such representations for complex scenes and tasks remains an open challenge. To-
         wards this goal, we introduce Neural Radiance Field Codebooks (NRC), a scalable
         method for learning object-centric representations through novel view reconstruc-
         tion. NRC learns to reconstruct scenes from novel views using a dictionary of
         object codes which are decoded through a volumetric renderer. This enables the
         discovery of reoccurring visual and geometric patterns across scenes which are
         transferable to downstream tasks. We show that NRC representations transfer well
         to object navigation in THOR, outperforming 2D and 3D representation learning
         methods by 3.1% success rate. We demonstrate that our approach is able to perform
         unsupervised segmentation for more complex synthetic (THOR) and real scenes
         (NYU Depth) better than prior methods (29% relative improvement). Finally, we
         show that NRC improves on the task of depth ordering by 5.5% accuracy in THOR.


1    I NTRODUCTION

Parsing the world at the abstraction of objects is a key characteristic of human perception and
reasoning (Rosch et al., 1976; Johnson et al., 2003). Such object-centric representations enable
us to infer attributes such as geometry, affordances, and physical properties of objects solely from
perception (Spelke, 1990). For example, upon perceiving a cup for the first time one can easily infer
how to grasp it, know that it is designed for holding liquid, and estimate the force needed to lift it.
Learning such models of the world without explicit supervision remains an open challenge.
Unsupervised decomposition of the visual world into objects has been a long-standing challenge (Shi
& Malik, 2000). More recent work focuses on reconstructing images from sparse encodings as an
objective for learning object-centric representations (Burgess et al., 2019; Greff et al., 2019; Locatello
et al., 2020; Lin et al., 2020; Monnier et al., 2021; Smirnov et al., 2021). The intuition is that
object encodings which map closely to the underlying structure of the data should provide the most
accurate reconstruction given a limited encoding size. Such methods have shown to be effective at
decomposing 2D games and simple synthetic scenes into their parts. However, they rely solely on
color cues and do not scale to more complex datasets (Karazija et al., 2021; Papa et al., 2022).
Advances in neural rendering (Mildenhall et al., 2021; Yang et al., 2021) have enabled learning
geometric representations of objects from 2D images. Recent work has leveraged scene reconstruction
from different views as a source of supervision for learning object-centric representations (Stelzner
et al., 2021; Yu et al., 2021b; Sajjadi et al., 2022a; Smith et al., 2022). However, such methods have
a few key limitations. The computational cost of rendering scenes grows linearly with the number
of objects which inhibits scaling to more complex datasets. Additionally, the number of objects per
scene is fixed and fails to consider variable scene complexity. Finally, objects are decomposed on a
per scene basis, therefore semantic and geometric information is not shared across object categories.
With this in consideration we introduce, Neural Radiance Codebooks (NRC). NRC learns a codebook
of object categories which are composed to explain the appearance of 3D scenes from multiple views.
By reconstructing scenes from different views NRC captures reoccurring geometric and visual
patterns to form object categories. This learned representation can be used for segmentation as well
as geometry-based tasks such as object navigation and depth ordering. Furthermore, NRC resolves
the limitations of current 3D object-centric methods. First, NRC’s method for assigning object


                                                    1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


(Couch)
Code 1
Code 2
(Floor)
(Fridge)
Code 3


Figure 1: Visualization of learned codes. The NRC codebook encodes reoccurring geometric and
visual patterns. In the top row, couches of differing appearance are grouped by geometric structure.
In the middle row, different textured floors are categorized based on their shared planar geometry. In
the bottom row, NRC learns correspondences between fridges from different views and scenes.

codes to regions of the image enables constant rendering compute whereas that of other methods
scales with number of objects. Second, we introduce a novel mechanism for differentiably adding
new categories which allows the codebook to scale with the complexity of the data. Last, modeling
intra-category variation in conjunction with the codebook enables sharing of semantic and geometric
object information across scenes.
We evaluate NRC on unsupervised segmentation, object navigation, and depth ordering. For seg-
mentation on indoor scenes from ProcTHOR (Deitke et al., 2022) we show 29.4% relative ARI
improvement compared to current 3D object-centric methods (Stelzner et al., 2021; Yu et al., 2021b).
On real-world images (NYU Depth (Silberman et al., 2012)) we show promising qualitative results
(Figure 3) and 29% relative improvement. For object navigation and depth ordering, where geo-
metric understanding is relevant, we observe 3.1% improvement in navigation success rate 5.5%
improvement in depth ordering accuracy over comparable self-supervised and object-centric methods.
Interestingly, we find qualitative evidence that the learned codes categorize objects by both visual
appearance and geometric structure (Figure 1).


2     R ELATED W ORK

Object-Centric Learning Object-centric learning aims to build compositional models of the world
from building blocks which share meaningful properties and regularities across scenes. Prior works


                                                  2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


such as MONet (Burgess et al., 2019), IODINE (Greff et al., 2019), Slot Attention (Locatello et al.,
2020), and Monnier et al. (2021) have demonstrated the potential for disentangling objects from
images. Other work has shown the ability to decompose videos (Kabra et al., 2021; Kipf et al., 2021).
In particular, Marionette (Smirnov et al., 2021) learns a shared dictionary for decomposing scenes of
2D sprites. We draw inspiration from MarioNette for learning codebooks, but differ in that we model
the image formation process and intra-code variation, and dynamically add codes to our dictionary.

3D Object-Centric Learning Recent work has shown novel view reconstruction to be a promising
approach for disentangling object representations. uORF (Yu et al., 2021b) and ObSuRF (Stelzner
et al., 2021) combine Slot Attention with Neural Radiance Fields (Mildenhall et al., 2021) to
decompose scenes. COLF (Smith et al., 2022) replaces the volumetric renderer with light fields
to improve computational efficiency. NeRF-SOS Fan et al. (2022) uses contrastive loss for both
geometry and appearance to perform object segmentation. SRT (Sajjadi et al., 2022b) encodes scenes
into a set of latent vectors which are used to condition a light field. OSRT (Sajjadi et al., 2022a)
extends SRT by explicitly assigning regions of the image to latent vectors. NeSF Vora et al. (2021)
learns to perform 3D object segmentation using NeRF with 2D supervision. Although great progress
has been made, these methods are limited to synthetic and relatively simple scenes. Our work differs
from previous 3D object-centric works in that we learn reoccurring object codes across scenes and
explicitly localize the learned codes. Additionally, our method can model an unbounded number of
objects per scene compared to prior work which fixes this hyper-parameter a priori. We show that our
approach generalizes to more complex synthetic and real-world scenes.

Neural Rendering Advances in neural rendering, in particular Neural Radiance Fields
(NeRF) (Mildenhall et al., 2021), have enabled a host of new applications (Jang & Agapito, 2021;
Mildenhall et al., 2022; Pumarola et al., 2021; Park et al., 2021; Lazova et al., 2022; Niemeyer &
Geiger, 2021; Zhi et al., 2021). NeRF differentiably renders novel views of a scene by optimizing a
continuous volumetric scene function given a sparse set of input views. Original formulation of NeRF
learned one representation for each scene; other works (Yu et al., 2021a; Jain et al., 2021; Kosiorek
et al., 2021) showed conditioning NeRFs on images enables generation of novel views of new scenes.

Dictionary/Codebook Learning Dictionary (codebook) learning (Olshausen & Field, 1997) in-
volves learning of a specific set of atoms or codes that potentially form a basis and span the input
space through sparse combinations. Codebooks have been widely used for generative and discrimina-
tive tasks across vision (Elad & Aharon, 2006; Mairal et al., 2008), NLP (Mcauliffe & Blei, 2007)
and signal processing (Huang & Aviyente, 2006). Learning sparse representations based on codes
enables large-scale methods which rely on latent representations. More recently, codebooks have
been shown to be crucial in scaling discrete representation learning (Van Den Oord et al., 2017;
Kusupati et al., 2021). Marionette (Smirnov et al., 2021) is an object-centric representation learning
method that relies on codebooks, unlike most other methods that are developed around set latent
representations (Sajjadi et al., 2022a;b; Locatello et al., 2020; Yu et al., 2021b). Object-centric
codebooks help in semantic grounding for transfer between category instances and are important for
large-scale representation learning across diverse scenes and objects.

3    M ETHOD

Our goal is to discover object categories without supervision, learn priors over their geometry and
visual appearance, and model the variation between instances belonging to each group. Given
multiple views of a scene, the objective is to explain all views of the scene given a set of object-codes.
This learned decomposition can be used for segmentation and other downstream tasks that require
semantic and geometric understanding such as depth ordering and object-navigation.
Figure 2 illustrates the training pipeline. We begin by processing the image through a convolutional
network to obtain a spatial feature map. The feature map is then projected to a novel view using
the relative camera matrix. Feature vectors from each respective region of the image are assigned
to categorical latent codes from the finite-size codebook. The object codes and feature vectors are
passed to a convolutional network which transform the categorical codes to fine-grained instance
codes. A volumetric renderer is then conditioned on the instance code, view direction, and positional
encodings to render each region of the scene from the novel view. The rendered image from the


                                                    3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


  Input View (𝐼! )                                                                      Novel View (𝐼! ′)
                           Encoder
                                                                                                                             !
                               𝐹!
                                                                                                                    −        !


                                                                                     Variation Module
                     𝑙! , 𝑙" … , 𝑙#                      𝑓!
                                                           ",$
                                                                                           𝐺!
                                                                                                            MLP

                                              0.5                                            𝜖
                                                                                                            𝐻!
                                       '                         #,% &
                                                       𝑒 ||$!%&" ||                                                 Render
                                      " 𝑙" · Τ                      #,% &       𝒍𝒊                                  (𝑹𝑮𝑩𝝈)
                     Codebook          ")*          ∑'()* 𝑒 ||$'%&" ||                  Positional
                                                                                        Encoding
                                              Code Assignment

Figure 2: An overview of NRC. We learn a set of shared codes for decomposing scenes into objects.
Each point in the scene is assigned one of n latent codes from the codebook. The variation module
models the intra-code variation between objects by perturbing the code in latent space. A conditional
NERF model renders the scene and is compared to the ground truth novel view for supervision.
novel view is compared to the ground truth using L2 pixel loss. The categorical codes, assignment
mechanism, and volumetric renderer are learned jointly in an end-to-end fashion.

Image Encoding and Camera Projection Given an input frame and novel image, Ih , Ih′ ∈
R3×H×W respectively from scene Sh , we first encode Ih into a spatial feature map, fh ∈
Rd×H/k×W/k , using a convolutional network, Fθ . We project each point, (x, y, z), in world co-
ordinates of the novel view to camera coordinates in the input frame, (x, y), using the relative camera
pose. Given (x, y), we select the spatial feature fhx,y ∈ Rd from the patch that contains the projected
coordinates. The spatial features vectors are then passed to the next stage where they are assigned to
categorical object-codes.

Assigning + Learning Codes Our goal is to jointly learn a shared set of object categories and priors
about their appearance and geometry. By mapping the spatial features from a continuous vector space
to a discrete, finite set of codes the model is incentivized to find reoccurring patterns in the images.
Given the features for a point in the novel view, fhx,y , we assign a code, l∗ , chosen from the shared
codebook, L. We do so with an arg max 1-nearest-neighbors during inference:
                                                                                                 x,y
                                                     (STE)     e−∥li −fh ∥2
                                      l∗ (x, y) ← arg max Pk                                                                 (1)
                                                                    −∥lj −fhx,y ∥2
                                                   li ; i∈[k] j=1 e

The nearest-neighbor assignment used during inference is a non-differentiable operation therefore
propagating gradients to the encoder and codebook would not be possible. To enable learning of the
codebook elements we use a softmax relaxation of nearest-neighbors during the backward pass in
conjunction with the straight-through-estimator (STE) Bengio et al. (2013):

                                                                      x,y
                                              ∗               e−∥li −fh ∥2
                                             lback (x, y) ← Pk                                                               (2)
                                                                   −∥lj −fhx,y ∥2
                                                             j=1 e


Adding Categorical Codes The number of codes should depend on the complexity of the scenes
they model. Learning when to add new codes is non-trivial because the number and selection of
codes is discrete and non-differentiable. To circumvent this problem, we use a series of step functions
with a straight-through-estimator (STE) to sequentially add elements to the codebook. Each code
li ∈ L is gated according to the following:

                                          2   1                        1,                                     a>t
                            li ← T σ(s − /λ),
                                        i         · li ; T (a, t) :=                                                         (3)
                                              2                        0,                                     a≤t

                                                                            4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


T (.) is a binarization function in the forward pass and lets the gradients pass through using STE in
the back pass. σ(·) is the sigmoid function, λ is a scaling hyperparameter, and s is a learnable scoring
parameter whose magnitude is correlated with the overall capacity (number of codes) required to
model the scenes accurately. A new code li is added when s exceeds the threshold i2 /λ. New codes
are initialized using a standard normal distribution. Throughout training we keep k + 1 total codes
where k is the current number of learnable codes. The extra code is used by the straight-through-
estimator to optimize for s on the backward pass. This formulation can be viewed as the discrete
                                                                                            2
analog of a gaussian prior over the number of elements, k in the codebook: P (k) = e−k /λ .

Modeling Intra-Code Variation Once a categorical code has been assigned to a region in the novel
frame, the model must account for variation across instances. We model this variation in latent space
using an encoder that takes in both the spatial feature, fhx,y , and the categorical code l∗ (x, y). We
rescale the norm of the variation vector by ϵ, a hyperparameter, to ensure the instance and categorical
codes are close in latent space. The instance code is formulated as the following:
                          ∗                                     Gθ′ ([l∗ (x, y), fhx,y ])
                         linstance (x, y) = l∗ (x, y) + ϵ ·                                  .             (4)
                                                              ||Gθ′ ([l∗ (x, y), fhx,y ])||2

We concatenate fhx,y and l∗ (x, y) as input to the variation module, Gθ′ , which we model as a 3-
layer convolutional network. Gθ′ provides a d dimensional perturbation vector which models the
intra-category variation and transforms the categorical code to an instance level code.

Decoding and Rendering Given the localized instance codes for a scene, we render it in the novel
view and compare with the ground truth using L2 pixel loss. Intuitively, object categories which
encode geometric and visual patterns should render the scene more accurately from novel views. Each
region of the scene is rendered using an MLP conditioned on the instance codes and the volumetric
rendering equation following the convention of NeRF Mildenhall et al. (2021):
                                            ∗
                                      Hθ̂ (linstance (x, y), p, d) = (c, σ),                               (5)

Here p = (x, y, z) is a coordinate in the scene, d ∈ R3 is a view direction, c is the RGB value at p
in the direction of d and σ is the volume density at that point. Recall that (x, y, z) corresponds to
(x, y) in the input frame Ih . We can project (x, y, z) into the camera coordinates of the novel view Ih′
to get (x′ , y ′ ). This pixel (x′ , y ′ ) in the novel view corresponds to (x, y) in the input frame, meaning
they represent the same point in world coordinates. To get an RGB value for (x, y), we use volume
rendering along the ray from camera view Ih into the scene, given by
                                                   Z tf
                                          Ĉ(r) =       T (t) · σ(t) · c(t) · dt,                           (6)
                                                tn
                    R
                      t
 where T (t) = exp − tn σ(s) · ds models absorbance and tn and tf are the near and far field.
Given a target view with pose P, the ray to the target camera is given by r(t) = o + t · d where d is a
unit direction vector which passes through (x, y). The volume rendering for a particular pixel occurs
along this ray. Let d′ be the direction associated with the novel view (x′ , y ′ ) and r′ (t) = o + t · d′ .
The pixel intensity at (x′ , y ′ ) is given by Ĉ′ = Ĉ(r′ ) and our final loss is
                                L(Ih , Ih′ , x, y) = ∥Ĉ′ − Ih′ (x′ , y ′ )∥2 + s,                         (7)

where Ih′ (x′ , y ′ ) is the ground-truth pixel value at (x′ , y ′ ). We penalize the scoring parameter, s,
from section 3 in the loss to encourage learning a minimal number of codes.

NRC for Downstream Tasks Once the encoder, codebook, and MLP have been trained, we
evaluate the learned representation on various downstream tasks. To perform segmentation, we
process each image through the trained encoder, Fθ , to obtain the spatial feature map. Each feature
vector, fx,y in the spatial map is assigned to the nearest categorical code, l⋆ in the learned codebook.
The categorical codes are then designated to the corresponding pixel to obtain a segmentation mask.
Traditionally in object navigation, frames from the embodied agent are processed by a frozen,
pretrained network. The resulting feature vector is then passed to a policy network which chooses an


                                                        5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Input Image


Ground Truth


      NRC



Figure 3: Unsupervised segmentation of real-world images. NRC segments scenes that have
significant object category overlap with ProcTHOR. We show the first results for object-centric
unsupervised segmentation of real-world scenes.

action. To assess the utility of the NRC representation, we replace the pretrained network with the
NRC encoder and codebook. We process each frame to obtain instance codes for each region of the
image which are then fed to the policy network.
Depth ordering task consists of predicting which of two objects is closer to the camera. To perform
depth ordering with NRC we predict a segmentation mask and depth map. To predict the depth map
we condition the trained MLP on the instance codes & predict the density, σ, along a given ray. We
estimate the transmittance to predict the depth following the method of Yu et al. (2021a). Depth map
and segmentation mask are combined to predict the average distance of each object from the camera.


4     E XPERIMENTS

We evaluate our decomposition and representations on several downstream tasks: unsupervised
segmentation (real and synthetic), object navigation, and depth ordering. NRC shows improvement
over baseline methods on all three tasks. Prior works in object-centric learning have focused on
unsupervised segmentation for measuring the quality of their decomposition. We show that NRC
representations are also effective for downstream applications that require geometric and semantic
understanding of scenes such as object navigation and depth ordering.

4.1    DATASETS

ProcTHOR & RoboTHOR THOR (Kolve et al., 2017) consists of interactive home environments
built in the Unity game engine. We benchmark on the task of object navigation in RoboTHOR (Deitke
et al., 2020), a variant of the THOR environment aimed at sim2real benchmarking. Object navigation
consists of an agent moving through different scenes to locate specified objects. RoboTHOR consists
of 89 indoor scenes split between train, validation, and test. ProcTHOR (Deitke et al., 2022) consists
of procedurally generated indoor scenes similar to RoboTHOR. Examples of THOR scenes can be
found in Appendix C.

CLEVR-3D CLEVR-3D (Johnson et al., 2017) is a synthetic dataset consisting of geometric
primitives from multiple views and is used for unsupervised segmentation. Following the convention
of Stelzner et al. (2021), we test on the first 500 scenes of the validation set and report foreground-
adjusted random index (FG-ARI). Adjusted random index (ARI) Yeung & Ruzzo (2001) measures


                                                  6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


the agreement between two clusterings and is a standard metric for unsupervised segmentation. In
our case the two clusterings are the predicted and ground truth segmentations. Foreground adjusted
random index only measures the ARI for pixels belonging to foreground objects. For comparison
to prior works, we consider segmentations at both the class and instance level to be correct for
CLEVR-3D, ProcTHOR, and NYU Depth. Further details can be found in Appendix C.

NYU Depth The NYU Depth Dataset (Silberman et al., 2012) consists of images from real-world
indoor scenes accompanied by depth and segmentation maps. Methods are trained on the ProcThor
dataset then evaluated on NYU Depth for segmentation. We chose NYU Depth because it has object
categories and scene layouts that are similar to THOR. We report the adjusted random index (ARI).
Table 1: Segmentation results (ARI) for NRC and comparable methods. We find that for more
complex datasets, ProcTHOR and NYU Depth, NRC outperforms other methods.
          Method           ProcTHOR (ARI)         NYU Depth (ARI)         CLEVR-3D (FG-ARI)
          MarioNette              .127                    .035                        -
          uORF                    .193                    .115                      .962
          ObSuRF                  .228                    .141                      .978
          NRC                     .295                    .182                      .977

4.2   U NSUPERVISED S EGMENTATION

Experimental Setup We evaluate NRC, ObSuRF, uORF, and MarioNette for unsupervised seg-
mentation on ProcTHOR, CLEVR-3D, and NYU Depth. We compare with MarioNette because it
uses a similar code mechanism for reconstruction. We report FG-ARI on CLEVR-3D for comparison
to prior works and ARI on the other datasets. For NYU Depth evaluation we use the representations
trained on ProcTHOR and only consider classes that are seen in the training dataset.

Results We find that for NYU Depth and ProcTHOR which have more complex layouts and object
diversity, NRC significantly outperforms other methods (Table 1). Figure 1 shows examples of the
object codes learned by ProcTHOR and Figure 3 shows segmentation examples of real-world images.
To our knowledge, this is the first object-centric method which has shown unsupervised segmentation
results for complex real-world images. We find that NRC categorizes similar objects across scenes
based on both geometry and visual appearance. In the top row of Figure 1, we find that couches of
similar shape are assigned to the same code despite differing visual appearance which indicates that
NRC codes capture geometric similarity. In the same figure, we show further examples where floors
of different texture are categorized by the same code. The improved segmentation performance and
geometric categorization of objects indicates that NRC can leverage more than simple color cues
which has been significant limitation for object-centric learning.

4.3   O BJECT NAVIGATION

Experimental Setup We design the object navigation experiments in THOR to understand how
well the learned representations transfer from observational data to embodied navigation (Anderson
et al., 2018; Batra et al., 2020). Object navigation consists of an embodied agent with the goal of
moving through indoor scenes to specified objects. The agent can rotate its camera and move in
discrete directions. At each step, agent is fed with the current RGB frame relayed by the camera.
For the representation learning component of the experiment we collect observational video data
from a heuristic planner (Appendix B), which walks through procedurally generated ProcTHOR
scenes. In total, the dataset consists of 1.5 million video frames from 500 indoor scenes. For further
dataset details and example videos see Appendix C.
After training on ProcThor videos, we freeze the visual representations following standard prac-
tice (Khandelwal et al., 2022). We train a policy using DD-PPO (Wijmans et al., 2019) for 200M
steps on the training set of RoboTHOR then evaluate on the test set. We report success rate (SR)
and success weighted by path length (SPL). Success is defined as the agent signaling the stop action
                                                                             PN           ℓi
within 1 meter of the goal object with it in the view. SPL is defined as N1 i=1 Si max(p     i ,ℓi )
                                                                                                     , where li
is the shortest possible path, pi is the taken path, & Si is the binary indicator of success for episode i.


                                                      7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Table 2: Results for object navigation on RoboTHOR object navigation. Visual representations are
trained on observations from 500 scenes of ProcThor. A policy is learned on top of the frozen visual
representations by training on the object navigation task in RoboTHOR training scenes. The results
are obtained by evaluating on RoboTHOR test scenes.

               Method                                        Success Rate (%)     SPL
               uORF (Yu et al., 2021b)                             31.3           .146
               ImageNet Pretraining                                33.4           .150
               ObSuRF (Stelzner et al., 2021)                      38.9           .167
               Video MoCo (Feichtenhofer et al., 2021)             43.9           .184
               EmbCLIP (Khandelwal et al., 2022)                   47.0           .200
               NRC (Ours)                                          50.1           .239

We compare with the following baselines: ObSuRF, uORF, Video MoCo (Feichtenhofer et al., 2021),
and EmbedCLIP (Khandelwal et al., 2022). ObSuRF and uORF are 3D, object-centric methods, and
Video MoCo is a contrastive video representation learning method. We include Video MoCo for
comparison as it was designed for large-scale, discriminative tasks, while ObSuRF and uORF were
primarily intended for segmentation. See Appendix B for further implementation details of baselines.

Results Table 2 shows the performance of NRC and baselines on RoboTHOR object navigation.
NRC outperforms the best baseline by 3% in success rate (SR) and by a 20% relative improvement
in SPL. These performance gains indicate that the geometrically-aware NRC representation provide
an advantage over traditional representations such as EmbCLIP and Video MoCo. Another key
observation is that NRC has at least 18.8% improvement in SR and relative SPL over the recent
object-centric learning methods, uORF and ObSuRF. In particular, NRC performs better than ObSuRF
and uORF when navigating near furniture and other immovable objects (see supplemental for object
navigation videos). We hypothesize this is due to NRC’s more precise localization of objects.

4.4   D EPTH O RDERING

Experimental Setup We evaluate NRC on the task of ordering objects based on their depth from
the camera. Understanding the relative depth of objects requires both geometric and semantic
understanding of a scene. For this task we evaluate on the ProcTHOR test dataset which provides
dense depth and segmentation maps. Following the convention of Ehsani et al. (2018), we determine
ground truth depth of each object by computing the mean depth of all pixels associated with its
ground truth segmentation mask.
For evaluation, we select pairs of objects in a scene and the goal is to predict which object is closer.
We take the segmentation that has the largest IoU with the ground truth mask as the predicted object
mask. To determine the predicted object depth, we compute the mean predicted depth of each pixel
associated with the predicted object mask. All representations are trained on the ProcTHOR dataset
and evaluated on the ProcTHOR test set. In total we evaluate 2,000 object pairs.

Table 3: We compare depth ordering results on RoboTHOR with other geometrically-aware represen-
tations. Given pairs of objects in the scene, the model must infer which object is closer. We report the
accuracy as the number of correct orderings over the total number of object pairs.
                     Method                              Depth Order Acc. (%)
                     uORF (Yu et al., 2021b)                      13.5
                     ObSuRF (Stelzner et al., 2021)               18.3
                     NRC (Ours)                                   23.8

Results Depth ordering requires accurate segmentation and depth estimation. Due to NRC’s
stronger segmentation performance and better depth estimation, we see 5.5% and 10.3% depth
ordering accuracy compared to ObSuRF and uORF respectively. The fine-grained localization of
categorical latent codes in NRC allows for better depth ordering over existing object-centric methods.
In particular, the other object-centric methods tend to assign object instances to the background which
leads to large errors in estimating the depth of objects (Figure 5).

                                                   8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


4.5   A BLATION S TUDY

Table 4: Ablation study for modeling the intra-code variation and learning the number of codes
evaluated on unsupervised segmentation in ProcTHOR. Default fixed number of codes is set to 25.
               Method + (Ablation)                                   ProcTHOR (ARI)
               NRC                                                          .182
               NRC + Learned # of Codes                                     .197
               NRC + Variation Module                                       .284
               NRC + Variation Module + Learned # of Codes                  .295

We present an ablation study on the ProcTHOR dataset to determine the effect of the variation module
and learnable codebook size on unsupervised segmentation performance. Quantitative results can
be found in Table 4. We observe that performance improves by ∼ 9% when intra-class variation is
explicitly modeled. Intuitively, allowing for small variation between instances of the same category
should lead to better representations and allow for greater expressiveness.
We also find that learning the number of codes moderately improves performance. However, if
number of codes is found via hyper-parameter tuning, performance is matched (Table 8). Nonetheless,
differentiably learning the codebook size avoids computationally expensive hyper-parameter tuning.


5     L IMITATIONS
Novel view reconstruction requires camera pose, which is not available for most images and videos.
Some datasets such as Ego4D (Grauman et al., 2022) provide data from inertial measurement units
that can be used to approximate camera pose, although this approach is prone to drift.
An incorrect assumption that NRC and most object-centric prior works make is that scenes are static.
However, it rarely is the case that scenes are free of movement due to the physical dynamics of our
world. Recently, Kipf et al. (2021); Pumarola et al. (2021) made strides in learning representations
from dynamic scenes.
Although NRC is relatively efficient compared to the other NeRF based methods, the NeRF sampling
procedure is compute and memory intensive. Sajjadi et al. (2022a) and Smith et al. (2022) leverage
object-centric light fields to reduce memory and compute costs. The efficiency improvement from
modeling scenes as light fields is orthogonal to NRC and can be combined.
A final challenge inherent to novel view reconstruction is finding appropriate corresponding frames
of videos. For example, if two subsequent frames differ by a 60° rotation of the camera, then most of
the scene in the subsequent frame will be completely new. Therefore, constructing the content in the
novel view is ill-posed. Pairing frames with overlapping frustums is a potential solution, although the
content of the scene may not be contained in the intersecting volume of the frustums.


6     C ONCLUSION
Compositional, object-centric understanding of the world is a fundamental characteristic of human
vision and such representations have the potential to enable high-level reasoning and efficient transfer
to downstream tasks. Towards this goal, we presented Neural Radiance Field Codebooks (NRC),
a new approach for learning geometry-aware, object-centric representations through novel view
reconstruction. By jointly learning a shared dictionary of object codes through a differentiable renderer
and explicitly localizing object codes within the scene, NRC finds reoccurring geometric and visual
similarities to form objects categories. Through experiments, we show that NRC representations
improve performance on object navigation and depth ordering compared to strong baselines by 3.1%
success rate and 5.5% accuracy respectively. Additionally, we find our method is capable of scaling
to complex scenes with more objects and greater diversity. NRC shows relative ARI improvement
over baselines for unsupervised segmentation by 29.4% on ProcTHOR and 29.0% on NYU Depth.
Qualitatively, NRC representations trained on synthetic data from ProcTHOR show reasonable
transfer to real-world scenes from NYU Depth.


                                                   9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

We thank Kuo-Hao Zeng for technical advice regarding the THOR environment, Reza Salehi and
Vishwas Sathish for helpful discussion, and Koven Yu and Mehdi Sajjadi for prompt correspondence
regarding details of their methods. This work is in part supported by NSF IIS 1652052, IIS 17303166,
DARPA N66001-19-2-4031, DARPA W911NF-15-1-0543 and gifts from Allen Institute for Artificial
Intelligence and Google.

R EFERENCES
Peter Anderson, Angel Chang, Devendra Singh Chaplot, Alexey Dosovitskiy, Saurabh Gupta, Vladlen
  Koltun, Jana Kosecka, Jitendra Malik, Roozbeh Mottaghi, Manolis Savva, et al. On evaluation of
  embodied navigation agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:1807.06757, 2018.
Dhruv Batra, Aaron Gokaslan, Aniruddha Kembhavi, Oleksandr Maksymets, Roozbeh Mottaghi,
  Manolis Savva, Alexander Toshev, and Erik Wijmans. Objectnav revisited: On evaluation of
  embodied agents navigating to objects. arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.13171, 2020.
Yoshua Bengio, Nicholas Léonard, and Aaron Courville. Estimating or propagating gradients through
  stochastic neurons for conditional computation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1308.3432, 2013.
Christopher P Burgess, Loic Matthey, Nicholas Watters, Rishabh Kabra, Irina Higgins, Matt Botvinick,
  and Alexander Lerchner. Monet: Unsupervised scene decomposition and representation. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1901.11390, 2019.
Matt Deitke, Winson Han, Alvaro Herrasti, Aniruddha Kembhavi, Eric Kolve, Roozbeh Mottaghi,
 Jordi Salvador, Dustin Schwenk, Eli VanderBilt, Matthew Wallingford, et al. Robothor: An open
 simulation-to-real embodied ai platform. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer
 vision and pattern recognition, pp. 3164–3174, 2020.
Matt Deitke, Eli VanderBilt, Alvaro Herrasti, Luca Weihs, Jordi Salvador, Kiana Ehsani, Winson Han,
 Eric Kolve, Ali Farhadi, Aniruddha Kembhavi, et al. Procthor: Large-scale embodied ai using
 procedural generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.06994, 2022.
Kiana Ehsani, Roozbeh Mottaghi, and Ali Farhadi. Segan: Segmenting and generating the invisible.
  In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 6144–6153,
  2018.
Michael Elad and Michal Aharon. Image denoising via sparse and redundant representations over
 learned dictionaries. IEEE Transactions on Image processing, 15(12):3736–3745, 2006.
Zhiwen Fan, Peihao Wang, Yifan Jiang, Xinyu Gong, Dejia Xu, and Zhangyang Wang. Nerf-sos: Any-
  view self-supervised object segmentation on complex scenes. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.08776,
  2022.
Christoph Feichtenhofer, Haoqi Fan, Bo Xiong, Ross Girshick, and Kaiming He. A large-scale
  study on unsupervised spatiotemporal representation learning. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
  Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 3299–3309, 2021.
Kristen Grauman, Andrew Westbury, Eugene Byrne, Zachary Chavis, Antonino Furnari, Rohit
  Girdhar, Jackson Hamburger, Hao Jiang, Miao Liu, Xingyu Liu, et al. Ego4d: Around the world in
  3,000 hours of egocentric video. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision
  and Pattern Recognition, pp. 18995–19012, 2022.
Klaus Greff, Raphaël Lopez Kaufman, Rishabh Kabra, Nick Watters, Christopher Burgess, Daniel
  Zoran, Loic Matthey, Matthew Botvinick, and Alexander Lerchner. Multi-object representation
  learning with iterative variational inference. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp.
  2424–2433. PMLR, 2019.
Ke Huang and Selin Aviyente. Sparse representation for signal classification. Advances in neural
  information processing systems, 19, 2006.


                                                10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Ajay Jain, Matthew Tancik, and Pieter Abbeel. Putting nerf on a diet: Semantically consistent
  few-shot view synthesis. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer
  Vision, pp. 5885–5894, 2021.
Wonbong Jang and Lourdes Agapito. Codenerf: Disentangled neural radiance fields for object
 categories. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, pp.
 12949–12958, 2021.
Justin Johnson, Bharath Hariharan, Laurens Van Der Maaten, Li Fei-Fei, C Lawrence Zitnick, and
  Ross Girshick. Clevr: A diagnostic dataset for compositional language and elementary visual
  reasoning. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp.
  2901–2910, 2017.
Scott P Johnson, Dima Amso, and Jonathan A Slemmer. Development of object concepts in infancy:
  Evidence for early learning in an eye-tracking paradigm. Proceedings of the National Academy of
  Sciences, 100(18):10568–10573, 2003.
Rishabh Kabra, Daniel Zoran, Goker Erdogan, Loic Matthey, Antonia Creswell, Matt Botvinick,
  Alexander Lerchner, and Chris Burgess. Simone: View-invariant, temporally-abstracted object
  representations via unsupervised video decomposition. Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 34:20146–20159, 2021.
Laurynas Karazija, Iro Laina, and Christian Rupprecht. Clevrtex: A texture-rich benchmark for
  unsupervised multi-object segmentation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2111.10265, 2021.
Apoorv Khandelwal, Luca Weihs, Roozbeh Mottaghi, and Aniruddha Kembhavi. Simple but effective:
  Clip embeddings for embodied ai. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
 Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 14829–14838, 2022.
Thomas Kipf, Gamaleldin F Elsayed, Aravindh Mahendran, Austin Stone, Sara Sabour, Georg
  Heigold, Rico Jonschkowski, Alexey Dosovitskiy, and Klaus Greff. Conditional object-centric
  learning from video. arXiv preprint arXiv:2111.12594, 2021.
Eric Kolve, Roozbeh Mottaghi, Winson Han, Eli VanderBilt, Luca Weihs, Alvaro Herrasti, Daniel
  Gordon, Yuke Zhu, Abhinav Gupta, and Ali Farhadi. Ai2-thor: An interactive 3d environment for
  visual ai. arXiv preprint arXiv:1712.05474, 2017.
Adam R Kosiorek, Heiko Strathmann, Daniel Zoran, Pol Moreno, Rosalia Schneider, Sona Mokrá,
  and Danilo Jimenez Rezende. Nerf-vae: A geometry aware 3d scene generative model. In
  International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 5742–5752. PMLR, 2021.
Aditya Kusupati, Matthew Wallingford, Vivek Ramanujan, Raghav Somani, Jae Sung Park, Krishna
  Pillutla, Prateek Jain, Sham Kakade, and Ali Farhadi. Llc: Accurate, multi-purpose learnt low-
  dimensional binary codes. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:23900–23913,
  2021.
Verica Lazova, Vladimir Guzov, Kyle Olszewski, Sergey Tulyakov, and Gerard Pons-Moll.
  Control-nerf: Editable feature volumes for scene rendering and manipulation. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2204.10850, 2022.
Zhixuan Lin, Yi-Fu Wu, Skand Vishwanath Peri, Weihao Sun, Gautam Singh, Fei Deng, Jindong
  Jiang, and Sungjin Ahn. Space: Unsupervised object-oriented scene representation via spatial
  attention and decomposition. arXiv preprint arXiv:2001.02407, 2020.
Francesco Locatello, Dirk Weissenborn, Thomas Unterthiner, Aravindh Mahendran, Georg Heigold,
  Jakob Uszkoreit, Alexey Dosovitskiy, and Thomas Kipf. Object-centric learning with slot attention.
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:11525–11538, 2020.
J Mairal, F Bach, J Ponce, G Sapiro, and A Zisserman. Learning discriminative dictionaries for local
  image analysis. In 26th IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 1–8,
  2008.
Jon Mcauliffe and David Blei. Supervised topic models. Advances in neural information processing
  systems, 20, 2007.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Ben Mildenhall, Pratul P Srinivasan, Matthew Tancik, Jonathan T Barron, Ravi Ramamoorthi, and
  Ren Ng. Nerf: Representing scenes as neural radiance fields for view synthesis. Communications
  of the ACM, 65(1):99–106, 2021.

Ben Mildenhall, Peter Hedman, Ricardo Martin-Brualla, Pratul P Srinivasan, and Jonathan T Barron.
  Nerf in the dark: High dynamic range view synthesis from noisy raw images. In Proceedings of
  the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 16190–16199, 2022.

Tom Monnier, Elliot Vincent, Jean Ponce, and Mathieu Aubry. Unsupervised layered image decom-
  position into object prototypes. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on
  Computer Vision, pp. 8640–8650, 2021.

Michael Niemeyer and Andreas Geiger. Giraffe: Representing scenes as compositional generative
 neural feature fields. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
 Recognition, pp. 11453–11464, 2021.

Bruno A Olshausen and David J Field. Sparse coding with an overcomplete basis set: A strategy
  employed by v1? Vision research, 37(23):3311–3325, 1997.

Samuele Papa, Ole Winther, and Andrea Dittadi. Inductive biases for object-centric representations
  in the presence of complex textures. In UAI 2022 Workshop on Causal Representation Learning,
  2022.

Keunhong Park, Utkarsh Sinha, Jonathan T Barron, Sofien Bouaziz, Dan B Goldman, Steven M Seitz,
  and Ricardo Martin-Brualla. Nerfies: Deformable neural radiance fields. In Proceedings of the
  IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 5865–5874, 2021.

Albert Pumarola, Enric Corona, Gerard Pons-Moll, and Francesc Moreno-Noguer. D-nerf: Neural
  radiance fields for dynamic scenes. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
  Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 10318–10327, 2021.

Eleanor Rosch, Carolyn B Mervis, Wayne D Gray, David M Johnson, and Penny Boyes-Braem. Basic
  objects in natural categories. Cognitive psychology, 8(3):382–439, 1976.

Mehdi SM Sajjadi, Daniel Duckworth, Aravindh Mahendran, Sjoerd van Steenkiste, Filip Pavetić,
 Mario Lučić, Leonidas J Guibas, Klaus Greff, and Thomas Kipf. Object scene representation
 transformer. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.06922, 2022a.

Mehdi SM Sajjadi, Henning Meyer, Etienne Pot, Urs Bergmann, Klaus Greff, Noha Radwan, Suhani
 Vora, Mario Lučić, Daniel Duckworth, Alexey Dosovitskiy, et al. Scene representation transformer:
 Geometry-free novel view synthesis through set-latent scene representations. In Proceedings of
 the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 6229–6238, 2022b.

Jianbo Shi and Jitendra Malik. Normalized cuts and image segmentation. IEEE Transactions on
   pattern analysis and machine intelligence, 22(8):888–905, 2000.

Nathan Silberman, Derek Hoiem, Pushmeet Kohli, and Rob Fergus. Indoor segmentation and support
  inference from rgbd images. In European conference on computer vision, pp. 746–760. Springer,
  2012.

Dmitriy Smirnov, Michaël Gharbi, Matthew Fisher, Vitor Guizilini, Alexei A. Efros, and Justin
 Solomon. MarioNette: Self-supervised sprite learning. In Advances in Neural Information
 Processing Systems, 2021.

Cameron Smith, Hong-Xing Yu, Sergey Zakharov, Fredo Durand, Joshua B Tenenbaum, Jiajun Wu,
  and Vincent Sitzmann. Unsupervised discovery and composition of object light fields. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2205.03923, 2022.

Elizabeth S Spelke. Principles of object perception. Cognitive science, 14(1):29–56, 1990.

Karl Stelzner, Kristian Kersting, and Adam R Kosiorek. Decomposing 3d scenes into objects via
  unsupervised volume segmentation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.01148, 2021.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Aaron Van Den Oord, Oriol Vinyals, et al. Neural discrete representation learning. Advances in
  neural information processing systems, 30, 2017.
Suhani Vora, Noha Radwan, Klaus Greff, Henning Meyer, Kyle Genova, Mehdi SM Sajjadi, Etienne
  Pot, Andrea Tagliasacchi, and Daniel Duckworth. Nesf: Neural semantic fields for generalizable
  semantic segmentation of 3d scenes. arXiv preprint arXiv:2111.13260, 2021.
Erik Wijmans, Abhishek Kadian, Ari Morcos, Stefan Lee, Irfan Essa, Devi Parikh, Manolis Savva,
  and Dhruv Batra. Dd-ppo: Learning near-perfect pointgoal navigators from 2.5 billion frames.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:1911.00357, 2019.
Bangbang Yang, Yinda Zhang, Yinghao Xu, Yijin Li, Han Zhou, Hujun Bao, Guofeng Zhang, and
  Zhaopeng Cui. Learning object-compositional neural radiance field for editable scene rendering.
  In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 13779–13788,
  2021.
Ka Yee Yeung and Walter L. Ruzzo. Details of the adjusted rand index and clustering algorithms
  supplement to the paper “ an empirical study on principal component analysis for clustering gene
  expression data ” ( to appear in bioinformatics ). 2001.
Alex Yu, Vickie Ye, Matthew Tancik, and Angjoo Kanazawa. pixelnerf: Neural radiance fields from
  one or few images. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
  Recognition, pp. 4578–4587, 2021a.
Hong-Xing Yu, Leonidas J Guibas, and Jiajun Wu. Unsupervised discovery of object radiance fields.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.07905, 2021b.
Shuaifeng Zhi, Tristan Laidlow, Stefan Leutenegger, and Andrew J Davison. In-place scene la-
  belling and understanding with implicit scene representation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
  International Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 15838–15847, 2021.


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A     F URTHER E XPERIMENTS AND Q UALITATIVE E XAMPLES

A.1    M ORE C OMPLEX R EAL -W ORLD S CENES (NYU-D EPTH )

We provide more segmentation examples of NRC on cluttered, real-world scenes (figure 4). We find
that NRC reasonably segments categories that overlap with those of THOR. Additionally we evaluate
NRC and comparable methods on more difficult scenes of NYU Depth to see how complexity of
the scene affects performance. Specifically we filter for scenes with 5 or more objects in them for
evaluation on unsupervised segmentation. In general performance degrades (Table 5), though NRC
performance decreases less compared to uORF and ObSuRF.


         Image


      Ground Truth


       Predicted


Figure 4: Segmentation examples of cluttered scenes. Further segmentation examples of cluttered,
real-world scenes from NYU Depth. NRC scales better to cluttered scenes compared to other methods
as the rendering and memory cost is constant in the number of objects.


A.2    M ATTERPORT-3D AND G IBSON E XPERIMENTS

We train NRC on scenes from MatterPort3D. Qualitative examples can be found in figure 6 and
quantitative results can be found in Table 6. We find NRC performs slightly worse on MatterPort3D
compared to on THOR likely due to the greater visual complexity. This is reinforced by the evidence
that the learned codebook size is 67 whereas for THOR it is on average ∼ 53. A greater number of
learned codes indicates that NRC requires more expressivity to accurately reconstruct Matterport3D
scenes. For a given scene we find corresponding frames by filtering for images within 20 degrees
viewing angle of each other.
We evaluate NRC and ObSuRF on the Habitat Point Navigation Challenge. We train NRC and
ObSuRF on data collected from random walks through the Habitat environment. We use a ResNet-50
initialized with a MoCo backbone pretrained on ImageNet. We report success rate, shortest-path
length, and distance to goal. Qualitative examples can be found in the supplemental. We find that
NRC outperforms ObSuRF and ImageNet pretraining. Qualitatively we find that NRC is better at
navigating around objects compared to ObSuRF.


                                                14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 5: Predicted object depth maps for depth ordering. The predicted object masks are
overlayed with the predicted depth map. We average the per pixel depth for each predicted object
mask to infer which object is closer. NRC’s object localization leads to sharp object masks and less
error when predicting average object depth.



B     I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS

B.1   NRC

For the segmentation experiments we use the modified ResNet34 used by Yu et al. (2021b). For the
decoder we use a 3-layer with hidden dimension of 512. We train with a learning rate of 1e − 4 with
the ADAM optimizer. We set the near field to .4 and far field to 5.5. We train from scratch, and from
the video MoCo model trained on ProcTHOR. We found starting from the pretrained initialization
reduced the number of training epochs required for convergence. For the model from scratch we
train for 300 epochs. For the model from MoCo initialization we train for 100 epochs. While
training we use a sliding window of 5 frames to determine corresponding images in ProcTHOR. By
corresponding images we mean the image given to the model and the ground truth novel view image.
Given a sliding window of n frames we randomly select 2 images from this interval. We ablate over
2, 5, and 10 frames. We found 5 images led to the best segmentation results and therefore used that
window size for object-navigation.
For object-navigation we use a ResNet50 for fair comparison to CLIP and Video MoCo. We train
wit the same hyper-parameters as discussed above for segmentation with the only change being the
architecture. We train for 200M steps using PPO with default hyper-parameters to match Khandelwal
et al. (2022) in RoboTHOR.


Table 5: Performance on cluttered scenes of NYU Depth. We filter for scenes with 5 or more
objects and report the ARI of NRC and comparable methods. NRC outperforms ObSuRF and uORF
particularly on cluttered scenes, as it can support an unbounded number of objects.

                                  Method      NYU Depth (Hard)
                                  uORF               .046
                                  ObSuRF             .092
                                  NRC                .139


                                                15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


         Image


      Ground Truth


       Predicted


Figure 6: Segmentation examples for MatterPort3D. Segmentation examples on MatterPort3D. We
train NRC on ∼ 190,000 images of MatterPort3d and learn 67 categorical codes. This increase in the
learned number of codes is likely due to the increased visual complexity of MatterPort3D compared
to THOR. We find similar segmentation results to those on THOR and NYU Depth.

B.2    U ORF

We use the implementation available at https://github.com/KovenYu/uORF We train on
the training set of ProcTHOR which contains ∼ 1.5 million images. We train three different variations
of the uORF no GAN model: from scratch, fine-tune with encoder and decoder pre-trained on
CLEVR-567, and fine-tune with all three components pre-trained on CLEVR-567. For variations that
train the slot attention component from scratch, we try setting the number of slots to 8 (default) and
16. We train for 10 epochs when loading from a pre-trained model, and for 15 epochs when training
from scratch; roughly half of the epochs are coarse epochs, and we set percept_in to roughly one
third of the epochs. We train for less epochs because our dataset is much larger. Our images within
scene batch size is 4, and we turn off shuffling to ensure that batches contain images that are close
together within the scene. We pass in the fixed locality parameter, but also set the decoder’s locality
parameter to false. To compensate between differences between our dataset and CLEVR-567, we
tune nss scale, object scale, near plane, and far plane. We train models on a single NVIDIA A40.

B.3    O B S U RF

We use the official implementation provided by Stelzner et al. (2021) at https://github.com/
stelzner/obsurf. We trained 3 variations of the ObSuRF model: onfrom scratch, from CLEVR-

Table 6: Unsupervised segmentation performance of NRC and ObSuRF on MatterPort3D. We
find NRC performs slightly worse on MatterPort3D compared to on THOR likely due to the greater
visual complexity. This is reinforced by the observation that NRC learns 67 codes for MatterPort3D
whereas 53 are learned for THOR.

                                      Method      MatterPort3D
                                      ObSuRF           .178
                                      NRC              .237


                                                  16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Table 7: Habitat Point Navigation Challenge. The performance of various visual encoders on the
point navigation challenge. We find that NRC outperforms other 3D-object centric methods due to its
ability to scale to more objects and visually complex environments.

                            Method                SPL    SR    Goal Dist
                            ImageNet Pretrain     .82    .94   .73
                            ObSuRF                 .77   .84   .81
                            NRC                    .85   .96   .68



3D pretrained weights, and from MultiShapeNet pretrained weights. For the pretrained models we
lowered the learning rate by a factor of 10 to 1e− 5. For training from scratch we used the default
learning rate of 1e − 4. For the number of slots we tried the default number, 5, and 10. We report the
results of the best model which was from scratch with 10 slots. For object navigation experiments
in RoboTHOR, we used the model with the highest ARI which was training from scratch with 10
slots. We learn a policy network comprised of a 1-layer GRU with 512 hidden units which maps to a
6 dimensional logit and scalar which are used for the actor-critic. We train with DD-PPO for 200M
steps. For the encoder, we use a ResNet-50 architecture.
To construct the feature vector fed to the GRU we use the output of the ResNet-50 which is 2048×7×7.
We pass this through a 2-convolutional layers to sample down to 32 × 7 × 7 then concatenate this
with the trainable goal state embedding matrix which is 32x7x7. This visual feature vector of shape
64 × 7 × 7 is then passed through another 2-layer convolutional network to be of size 32 × 7 × 7.


B.4   OSRT

We do not compare with OSRT Sajjadi et al. (2022a) on data sets that were not evaluated in the
original paper. We contacted the authors, but a public implementation has not been released yet at the
time of this work.


C     DATASETS

C.1   P ROC THOR

The ProcTHOR dataset Deitke et al. (2022) consists of 10,000 procedurally generated indoor rooms
in the THOR environment. For our dataset we collect 10 video sequences of 300 actions from 500
randomly chosen training scenes. Each actions consisting of either rotation or stepping in a specified
direction. Actions are determined by a heuristic planner which moves throughout the scene. In total
we collect 1.5 millions image frames. See Figure 7 for a sample of the dataset.
For evaluation of ARI we consider the 20 largest objects, floor, and ceiling. uORF and ObSuRF
decompose scenes into 5-10 objects and therefore do not handle scenes with many small objects.
We evaluate ARI only on the 20 largest objects in THOR which are the following: {ArmChair,
Bathtub, BathtubBasin, Bed, Cabinet, Drawer, Dresser, Chair, CounterTop, Curtains, Desk, Desktop,
CoffeeTable, DiningTable, SideTable, Floor, Fridge, Television, TVStand, Toilet.}


C.2   CLEVR-3D

CLEVR-3D (Johnson et al., 2017) is a synthetic dataset which consists of geometric primitives placed
on a monochrome background. Following the convention of (Stelzner et al., 2021) we evaluate on
this benchmark for unsupervised object segmentation. Following convention we evaluate on the first
500 scenes of the validation set and report foreground - adjusted random index. For class level labels
we consider objects with the shape to be of the same class.


                                                 17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


          Figure 7: Snippets of Videos from ProcTHOR dataset used for training NRC.



      Table 8: Performance of NRC with a fixed codebook of various sizes on ProcTHOR.

                             Codebook Size     ProcTHOR (ARI)
                                   10               .247
                                   20               .256
                                   30               .266
                                   40               .279
                                   50               .286
                                   60               .293
                                   70               .288
                                   80               .295
                                   90               .279
                                   100              .273


                                               18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                   Input View        Novel View          Predicted


Figure 8: Reconstruction examples from NRC. For scenes and objects that are closer to the training
distribution, reconstruction quality is significantly better.

C.3   I NSTANCE L EVEL ACCURACY

For comparison to the instance level classification performed by ObSuRF and uORF, we filtered for
images in ProcTHOR which have one object of each class. In this setting, class and instance level
classification are equivalent.

         Table 9: The size of the learned codebook averaged over 5 runs on each dataset.

                                                Codebook Size
                                 CLEVR-3D           15.6 ± 1.2
                                 ProcTHOR           53.8 ± 2.4


                                               19
