Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


E XACT R EPRESENTATION OF S PARSE N ETWORKS WITH
S YMMETRIC N ONNEGATIVE E MBEDDINGS
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT

         Many models for undirected graphs are based on factorizing the graph’s adjacency
         matrix; these models find a vector representation of each node such that the
         predicted probability of a link between two nodes increases with the similarity (dot
         product) of their associated vectors. Recent work has shown that these models are
         unable to capture key structures in real-world graphs, particularly heterophilous
         structures, wherein links occur between dissimilar nodes. In contrast, a factorization
         with two vectors per node, based on logistic principal components analysis (LPCA),
         has been proven not only to represent such structures, but also to provide exact low-
         rank factorization of any graph with bounded max degree. However, this bound has
         limited applicability to real-world networks, which often have power law degree
         distributions with high max degree. Further, the LPCA model lacks interpretability
         since its asymmetric factorization does not reflect the undirectedness of the graph.
         We address the above issues in two ways. First, we prove a new bound for the LPCA
         model in terms of arboricity rather than max degree; this greatly increases the
         bound’s applicability to many sparse real-world networks. Second, we propose an
         alternative graph model whose factorization is symmetric and nonnegative, which
         allows for link predictions to be interpreted in terms of node clusters. We show that
         the bounds for exact representation in the LPCA model extend to our new model.
         On the empirical side, our model is optimized effectively on real-world graphs with
         gradient descent on a cross-entropy loss. We demonstrate its effectiveness on a
         variety of foundational tasks, such as community detection and link prediction.


1   I NTRODUCTION
Graphs naturally arise in data from a variety of fields including sociology (Mason & Verwoerd,
2007), biology (Scott, 1988), and computer networking (Bonato, 2004). A key underlying task
in machine learning for graph data is forming models of graphs which can predict edges between
nodes, form useful representations of nodes, and reveal interpretable structure in the graph, such as
detecting clusters of nodes. Many graph models fall under the framework of edge-independent graph
generative models, which can output the probabilities of edges existing between any pair of nodes.
The parameters of such models can be trained iteratively on the network, or some fraction of the
network which is known, in the link prediction task, i.e., by minimizing a predictive loss. To choose
among these models, one must consider two criteria: 1) whether the model can express structures of
interest in the graph, 2) whether the model expresses these structure in an interpretable way.

Expressiveness of low-dimensional embeddings As real-world graphs are high-dimensional
objects, graph models generally compress information about the graph. Such models are exemplified
by the family of dot product models, which associate each node with a real-valued “embedding”
vector; the predicted probability of a link between two nodes increases with the similarity of their
embedding vectors. These models can alternatively be seen as factorizing the graph’s adjacency
matrix to approximate it with a low-rank matrix. Recent work of Seshadhri et al. (2020) has shown
that dot product models are limited in their ability to model common structures in real-world graphs,
such as triangles incident only on low-degree nodes. In response, Chanpuriya et al. (2020) showed
that with the logistic principal components analysis (LPCA) model, which has two embeddings per
node (i.e., using the dot product of the ‘left’ embedding of one node and the ‘right’ embedding of
another), not only can such structures be represented, but further, any graph can be exactly represented


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


with embedding vectors whose lengths are linear in the max degree of the graph. There are two keys
to this result. First is the presence of a nonlinear linking function in the LPCA model; since adjacency
matrices are generally not low-rank, exact low-rank factorization is generally impossible without a
linking function. Second is that having two embeddings rather than one allows for expression of
non-positive semidefinite (PSD) matrices. As discussed in Peysakhovich & Bottou (2021) that the
single-embedding models can only represent PSD matrices precludes representation of ‘heterophilous’
structures in graphs; heterophilous structures are those wherein dissimilar nodes are linked, in contrast
to more intuitive ‘homophilous’ linking between similar nodes.


Interpretability and node clustering Beyond being able to capture a given network accurately, it is
often desirable for a graph model to form interpretable representations of nodes and to produce edge
probabilities in an interpretable fashion. Dot product models can achieve this by restricting the node
embeddings to be nonnegative. Nonnegative factorization has long been used to decompose data into
parts (Donoho & Stodden, 2003). In the context of graphs, this entails decomposing the set of nodes
of the network into clusters or communities. In particular, each entry of the nonnegative embedding
vector of a node represents the intensity with which the node participates in a community. This allows
the edge probabilities output by dot product models to be interpretable in terms of coparticipation in
communities. Depending on the model, these vectors may have restrictions such as a sum-to-one
requirement, meaning the node is assigned a categorical distribution over communities. The least
restrictive and most expressive case is that of soft assignments to overlapping communities, where the
entries can vary totally independently. In such models, which include the B IG C LAM model of Yang
& Leskovec (2013), the output of the dot product may be mapped through a nonlinear link function
(as in LPCA) to produce a probability for each edge, i.e., to ensure the values lie in [0, 1].


Heterophily: Motivating example To demonstrate how heterophily can manifest in networks, as
well as how models which assume homophily can fail to represent such networks, we provide a simple
synthetic example. Suppose we have a graph of matches between users of a mostly heterosexual
dating app, and the users each come from one of ten cities. Members from the same city are
likely to match with each other; this typifies homophily, wherein links occur between similar nodes.
Furthermore, users having the same gender are are unlikely to match with each other; this typifies
heterophily. (Note that a mostly homosexual dating app would not exhibit heterophily in this sense.)
Figure 1 shows an instantiation of such an adjacency matrix with 1000 nodes, which are randomly
assigned to man or woman and to one of the ten cities. We recreate this network with our proposed
embedding model and with B IG C LAM, which explicitly assumes homophily. (It is far from alone
in this assumption; see Li et al. (2018) for a recent example, along with more examples and further
discussion in Section 3.) We also compare with the SVD of the adjacency matrix, which outputs the
best (lowest Frobenius error) low-rank approximation that is possible without a nonlinear linking
function. Since SVD lacks nonnegativity constraints on the factors, we do not expect intepretability.
In Figure 1, we show how B IG C LAM captures only the ten communities based on city, i.e., only the
homophilous structure, and fails to capture the heterophilous distinction between men and women.
We also plot the error of the reconstructions as the embedding length increases. There are 10 · 2 = 20
different kinds of nodes, meaning the expected adjacency matrix is rank-20, and our model maintains
the lowest error up to this embedding length; by contrast, B IG C LAM is unable to decrease error
after capturing city information with length-10 embeddings. In Figure 3, we visualize the features
generated by the three methods, i.e., the factors returned by each factorization. Our model’s factors
captures the relevant latent structure in an interpretable way. By contrast, SVD’s factors are harder to
interpret, and B IG C LAM does not represent the heterophilous structure.


Summary of main contributions The key contributions of this work are as follows:
       • We prove that the LPCA model admits exact low-rank factorizations of graphs with bounded
         arboricity, which is the minimum number of forests into which a graph’s edges can be
         partitioned. By the Nash-Williams theorem, arboricity is a measure of a graph’s density in
         that, letting S denote an induced subgraph and nS and mS denote the number of nodes and
         edges in S, arboricity is the maximum over all subgraphs S of ⌈ nm S
                                                                          S −1
                                                                               ⌉. Our result is more
         applicable to real-world graphs than the prior one for graphs with bounded max degree,
         since sparsity is a common feature of real networks, whereas low max degree is not.


                                                   2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


       • We introduce a graph model which is both highly expressive and interpretable. Our model
         incorporates two embeddings per node and a nonlinear linking function, and hence is able
         to express both heterophily and overlapping communities. At the same time, our model is
         based on symmetric nonnegative matrix factorization, so it outputs link probabilities which
         are interpretable in terms of the communities it detects.
       • We show how any graph with a low-rank factorization in the LPCA model also admits a
         low-rank factorization in our community-based model. This means that the guarantees on
         low-rank representation for bounded max degree and arboricity also apply to our model.
       • In experiments, we show that our method is competitive with and often outperforms other
         comparable models on real-world graphs in terms of representing the network, doing
         interpretable link prediction, and detecting communities that align with ground-truth.

                                             Expected Adjacency                   Sampled Adjacency
                                             0 200 400 600 800                    0 200 400 600 800
                                         0                                    0                                     1.0
                                       200                                  200                                     0.8
                                       400                                  400                                     0.6
                                       600                                  600                                     0.4
                                       800                                  800                                     0.2
                                                                                                                    0.0

Figure 1: The motivating synthetic graph. The expected adjacency matrix (left) and the sampled
matrix (right); the latter, which is passed to the training algorithms, is produced by treating the entries
of the former as parameters of Bernoulli distributions and sampling. The network is approximately a
union of ten bipartite graphs, each of which correspond to men and women in one of the ten cities.

                          SVD                             BigClam                        Ours                             Frobenius Error
                   0 200 400 600 800               0 200 400 600 800              0 200 400 600 800
               0                               0                             0                                                      SVD
                                                                                                              0.9                   BigClam
             200                             200                           200                                                      Ours
             400                             400                           400                                0.8
             600                             600                           600
             800                             800                           800                                0.7

                                                                                                                          5    10     15   20
                                                                                                                          Embedding Length

Figure 2: Left: Reconstructions of the motivating synthetic graph of Figure 1 with SVD, B IG C LAM,
and our model, using 12 communities or singular vectors. Note the lack of the small diagonal
structure in B IG C LAM’s reconstruction; this corresponds to its inability to capture the heterophilous
interaction between men and women. Right: Frobenius error when reconstructing the motivating
synthetic graph of Figure 1 with SVD, B IG C LAM, and our model, as the embedding length is varied.
The error is normalized by the sum of the true adjacency matrix (i.e., twice the number of edges).

                            SVD                                         BigClam                                           Ours
                   0   200 400 600 800                           0   200 400 600 800                      0    200 400 600 800
               0                                    0.5      0                                        0
                                                             2                               1.0
               2                                                                                      2
                                                             4                                        4                                  2
               4                                    0.0      6                               0.5
               6                                             8                                        6
               8                                     0.5    10                                        8
                                                                                             0.0                                         0
                   0   200 400 600 800                                                                    0    200 400 600 800
               0                                    0.5                                                                                  4
                                                                                                      0
               1                                    0.0                                                                                  2
               2                                                                                      1
                                                     0.5                                                                                 0

Figure 3: Factors resulting from decomposition of the motivating synthetic graph of Figure 1 with
the three models, using 12 communities or singular vectors. The top/bottom rows represent the
positive/negative eigenvalues corresponding to homophilous/heterophilous communities (note that
B IG C LAM does not include the latter). The homophilous factors from B IG C LAM and our model
reflect the 10 cities, and the heterophilous factor from our model reflect men and women. The factors
from SVD are harder to interpret. Note that the order of the communities in the factors is arbitrary.


                                                                            3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


2    C OMMUNITY-BASED G RAPH FACTORIZATION M ODEL
Consider the set of undirected, unweighted graphs on n nodes, i.e., the set of graphs with symmetric
adjacency matrices in {0, 1}n×n . We propose an edge-independent generative model for such graphs.
Given nonnegative parameter matrices B ∈ Rn×k  +
                                                    B
                                                      and C ∈ R+  n×kC
                                                                        , we set the probability of an
edge existing between nodes i and j to be the (i, j)-th entry of matrix Ã:
                                      Ã := σ(BB ⊤ − CC ⊤ ),                                         (1)
where σ is the logistic function. Here kB , kC are the number of homophilous/heterophilous clusters.
 Intuitively, if bi ∈ Rk+B is the i-th row of matrix B, then bi is the affinity of node i to each of the
 kB homophilous communities. Similarly, ci ∈ Rk+C is the affinity of node i to the kC heterophilous
 communities. As an equivalent statement, for each pair of nodes i and j, Ãi,j := σ(bi b⊤           ⊤
                                                                                             j − ci cj ).
We will soon discuss the precise interpretation of this model, but the idea is roughly similar to
 the attract-repel framework of Peysakhovich & Bottou (2021). When nodes i and j have similar
‘attractive’ b embeddings, i.e., when bi b⊤j is high, the likelihood of an edge between them increases,
 hence why the B factor is homophilous. By contrast, the C factor is ‘repulsive’/heterophilous since,
when ci c⊤ j is high, the likelihood of an edge between i and j decreases.


Alternate expression We note that the model above can also be expressed in a form which
normalizes cluster assignments and is more compact, in that it combines the homophilous and
heterophilous cluster assignments. Instead of B and C, this form uses a matrix V ∈ [0, 1]n×k and a
diagonal matrix W ∈ Rk×k , where k = kB + kC is the total number of clusters. In particular, let
mB and mC be the vectors containing the maximums of each column of B and C. By setting
                           V = B × diag m−1         ; C × diag m−1

                                               B                    C
                                                                                               (2)
                          W = diag +m2B ; −m2C ,


the constraint on V is satisfied. Further, V W V ⊤ = BB ⊤ − CC ⊤ , so
                              Ã := σ(BB ⊤ − CC ⊤ ) = σ(V W V ⊤ ).                                   (3)
Here, if vi ∈ [0, 1]k is the i-th row of matrix V , then vi is the soft (normalized) assignment of node i
to the k communities. The diagonal entries of W represent the strength of the homophily (if positive)
or heterophily (if negative) of the communities. For each entry, Ãi,j = σ(vi W v⊤      j ). We use these
two forms interchangeably throughout this work.

Interpretation The edge probabilities output by this model have an intuitive interpretation. Recall
                                                                          p
that there are bijections between probability p ∈ [0, 1], odds o = 1−p        ∈ [0, ∞), and logit ℓ =
log(o) ∈ (−∞, +∞). The logit of the link probability between nodes i and j is v⊤    i W vj , which is a
summation of terms vic vjc Wcc over all communities c ∈ [k]. If the nodes both fully participate in
community c, that is, vic = vjc = 1, then the edge logit is changed by Wcc starting from a baseline
of 0, or equivalently, the odds of an edge is multiplied by exp(Wcc ) starting from a baseline odds of
1; if either of the nodes participates only partially in community c, then the change in logit and odds
is accordingly prorated. Homophily and heterophily also have a clear interpretation in this model:
homophilous communities, which are expressed in B, are those with Wcc > 0, where two nodes
both participating in the community increases the odds of a link, whereas communities with Wcc < 0,
which are expressed in C, are heterophilous, and coparticipation decreases the odds of a link.

3    R ELATED W ORK
Community detection via interpretable factorizations There is extensive prior work on the com-
munity detection / node clustering problem (Schaeffer, 2007; Aggarwal & Wang, 2010; Nascimento
& De Carvalho, 2011), perhaps the most well-known being the normalized cuts algorithm of Shi &
Malik (2000), which produces a clustering based on the entrywise signs of an eigenvector of the graph
Laplacian matrix. However, the clustering algorithms which are most relevant to our work are those
based on non-negative matrix factorization (NMF) (Lee & Seung, 1999; Berry et al., 2007; Wang &
Zhang, 2012; Gillis, 2020), many of which can be seen as integrating nonnegativity constraints into


                                                   4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


the broader, well-studied random dot product graph (RDPG) model (Young & Scheinerman, 2007;
Scheinerman & Tucker, 2010; Athreya et al., 2017; Gallagher et al., 2021; Marenco et al., 2022). One
such algorithm is that of Yu et al. (2005), which approximately factors a graph’s adjacency matrix
A ∈ {0, 1}n×n into two positive matrices H and Λ, where H ∈ Rn×k        +     is left-stochastic (i.e. each
of its columns sums to 1) and Λ ∈ Rk×k +    is diagonal, such that HΛH     ⊤
                                                                             ≈   A. Here H represents a
soft clustering of the n nodes into k clusters, while the diagonal entries of Λ represent the prevalence
of edges within clusters. Note the similarity of the factorization to our model, save for the lack of a
nonlinearity. Other NMF approaches include those of Ding et al. (2008), Yang et al. (2012), Kuang
et al. (2012), and Kuang et al. (2015) (S YM NMF).

Modeling heterophily Much of the existing work on graph models has an underlying assumption of
network homophily (Johnson et al., 2010; Noldus & Van Mieghem, 2015). There has been significant
recent interest in the limitations of graph neural network (GNN) models (Duvenaud et al., 2015;
Kipf & Welling, 2017; Hamilton et al., 2017) at addressing network heterophily (NT & Maehara,
2019; Zhu et al., 2020; Zheng et al., 2022), as well as proposed solutions (Pei et al., 2020; Yan et al.,
2021), but relatively less work for more fundamental models such as those for clustering. Some
existing NMF approaches to clustering do naturally model heterophilous structure in networks. For
example, the Generalized RDPG (Rubin-Delanchy et al., 2017) allows for the representation of
non-PSD adjacency matrices by using a “tri-factorization” like that of Yu et al. (2005), but removing
the constraint that the central diagonal matrix must be nonnegative. The model of Nourbakhsh et al.
(2014) goes further, removing all constraints on this matrix. Another example is the model in Miller
et al. (2009), which is similar to ours, though it restricts the cluster assignment matrix V to be binary;
additionally, their training algorithm is not based on gradient descent as ours is, and it does not scale
to larger networks. More recently, Peysakhovich & Bottou (2021) propose a decomposition of the
form A ≈ D + BB ⊤ − CC ⊤ , where D ∈ Rn×n is diagonal and B, C ∈ Rn×k are low-rank.
Note that their decomposition does not include a nonlinear linking function, and their work does not
pursue a clustering interpretation or investigate setting the factors B and C to be nonnegative.

Overlapping communities and exact embeddings Many models discussed above focus on the
single-label clustering task and thus involve highly-constrained factorizations (e.g., sum-to-one
conditions). We are interested in the closely related but distinct task of multi-label clustering, also
known as overlapping community detection (Xie et al., 2013; Javed et al., 2018), which involves
less constrained, more expressive factorizations. The B IG C LAM algorithm of Yang & Leskovec
(2013) uses the following generative model for this task: the probability of a link between two
nodes i and j is given by 1 − exp(−fi · fj ), where fi , fj ∈ Rk+ represent the intensities with
which the nodes participate in each of the k communities. Note that B IG C LAM assumes strict
homophily of the communities: two nodes participating in the same community always increases
the probability of a link. However, this model allows for expression of very dense intersections of
communities, which the authors observe is generally a characteristic of real-world networks. To
ensure that output entries are probabilities, B IG C LAM’s factorization includes a nonlinear linking
function (namely, f (x) = 1 − ex ), like our model and LPCA. Recent work outside clustering and
community detection on graph generative models (Rendsburg et al., 2020; Chanpuriya et al., 2020)
suggests that incorporating a nonlinear linking function can greatly increase the expressiveness of
factorization-based graph models, to the point of being able to exactly represent a graph. This adds to
a growing body of literature on expressiveness guarantees for embeddings on relational data (Sala
et al., 2018; Bhattacharjee & Dasgupta, 2020; Boratko et al., 2021). Most relevant to our work, as
previously discussed, Chanpuriya et al. (2020) provide a guarantee for exact low-rank representation
of graphs with bounded max degree when using the LPCA factorization model. In this work, we
provide a new such guarantee, except for bounded arboricity, which is more applicable to real-world
networks, and extend these guarantees to our community-based factorization.

4    T HEORETICAL R ESULTS
We first restate the main result from Chanpuriya et al. (2020) on exact representation of graphs
with bounded max degree using the logistic principal components analysis (LPCA) model, which
reconstructs a graph A ∈ {0, 1}n×n using logit factors X, Y ∈ Rn×k via
                                            A ≈ σ(XY ⊤ ).                                              (4)


                                                    5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Note that unlike our community-based factorization, the factors of the LPCA model are not nonnega-
tive, and the factorization does not reflect the symmetry of the undirected graph’s adjacency matrix.
Regardless of the model’s interpretability, the following theorem provides a significant guarantee on
its expressiveness. We use the following notation: given a matrix M , let H(M ) denote the matrix
resulting from entrywise application of the Heaviside step function to M , that is, setting all positive
entries to 1, negative entries to 0, and zero entries to 1/2.
Theorem 4.1 (Exact LPCA Factorization for Bounded-Degree Graphs, Chanpuriya et al. (2020)).
Let A ∈ {0, 1}n×n be the adjacency matrix of a graph G with maximum degree c. Then there exist
matrices X, Y ∈ Rn×(2c+1) such that A = H(XY ⊤ ).

This corresponds to arbitrarily small approximation error in the LPCA model (Equation 4) because,
provided such factors X, Y for some graph A, we have that lims→∞ σ sXY ⊤ = H(XY ⊤ ) = A.

That is, we can scale the factors larger to reduce the error to an arbitrary extent.
We expand on this result in two ways. First, give a new bound for exact embedding in terms of
arboricity, rather than max degree. This increases the applicability to real-world networks, which often
are sparse (i.e., low arboricity) and have right-skewed degree distributions (i.e., high max degree).
Second, we show that any rank-k LPCA factorization can be converted to our model’s symmetric
nonnegative factorization with O(k) communities. This extends the guarantees on the LPCA model’s
power for exact representation of graphs, both the prior guarantee in terms of max degree and our
new one in terms of arboricity, to our community-based model as well. In Appendix A.1, we also
introduce a natural family of graphs - Community Overlap Threshold (COT) graphs - for which our
model’s community-based factorization not only exactly represents the graph, but also must capture
some latent structure to do so with sufficiently low embedding dimensionality.

Arboricity bound for exact representation We will use the following well-known fact: the rank
of the entrywise product of two matrices is at most the product of their individual ranks, that is,
                                 rank(X ◦ Y ) ≤ rank(X) · rank(Y ).
Theorem 4.2 (Exact LPCA Factorization for Bounded-Arboricity Graphs). Let A ∈ {0, 1}n×n
be the adjacency matrix of an undirected graph G with arboricity α. Then there exist embeddings
                2
X, Y ∈ Rn×(4α +1) such that A = H(XY ⊤ ).

Proof. Let the undirected graph A have arboricity α, i.e., the edges can be partitioned into α forests.
We produce a directed graph B from A by orienting the edges in these forests so that each node’s
edges point towards its children. Now A = B + B ⊤ , and every node in B has in-degree at most α.
Let V ∈ Rn×2α be the Vandermonde matrix with Vt,j = tj−1 . For any c ∈ R2α , [V c](t) =
P2α             j−1
   j=1 c(j) · t     , that is, V c ∈ Rn is a degree-(2α) polynomial with coefficients c evaluated at the
integers t ∈ [n] = {1, . . . , n}. Let bi be the ith column of B. We seek to construct a polynomial
such that for t with bi (t) = 1, [V ci ](t) = 0, and [V ci ](t) < 0 elsewhere; that is, when inputting
an index t ∈ [n] such that the tth node is an in-neighbor of the ith node, we want the polynomial to
output 0, and for all other indices in [n], we want it to have a negative output. LettingQN (i) denote the
in-neighbors of the ith node, a simple instantiation of such a polynomial in t is −1 · j∈N (i) (t − j)2 .
Note that since all nodes have in-degree at most α, this polynomial’s degree is at most 2α, and hence
there exists a coefficient vector ci ∈ R2α encoding this polynomial.
Let C ∈ Rn×2α be the matrix resulting from stacking such coefficient vectors for each of the n
nodes. Consider P = V C ∈ Rn×n : Pi,j is 0 if Bi,j = 1 and negative otherwise. Then (P ◦ P ⊤ )i,j
is 0 when either Bi,j = 1 or (B ⊤ )i,j = 1 and positive otherwise; equivalently, since A = B + B ⊤ ,
(P ◦ P ⊤ )i,j = 0 iff Ai,j = 1. Take any positive ϵ less than the smallest positive entry of P ◦ P ⊤ .
Letting J be an all-ones matrix, define M = ϵJ − (P ◦ P ⊤ ). Note that Mi,j > 0 if A = 1 and
Mi,j < 0 if A = 0, that is, M = H(A) as desired. Since rank(J ) = 1 and rank(P ) ≤ 2α, by the
bound on the rank of entrywise products of matrices, the rank of M is at most (2α)2 + 1.           ■

Exact representation with community factorization LPCA factors X, Y ∈ Rn×k can be pro-
cessed into nonnegative factors B ∈ Rn×k
                                     +
                                        B
                                          and C ∈ Rn×k
                                                   +
                                                       C
                                                         such that kB + kC = 6k and
                             BB ⊤ − CC ⊤ = 12 XY ⊤ + Y X ⊤ .

                                                                                    (5)


                                                    6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Observe that the left-hand side can only represent symmetric matrices, but XY ⊤ is not necessarily
symmetric even if H(XY ⊤ )  = A for a symmetric A. For this reason, we use a symmetrization:
let L = 21 XY ⊤ + Y X ⊤ . Note that H(L) = H(XY ⊤ ), so if XY ⊤ constitutes an exact
representation of A in that H(XY ⊤ ) = A, so too do both expressions for L in Equation 5.
Pseudocode for the procedure of constructing B, C given X, Y is given in Algorithm 1. The concept
of this algorithm is to first separate the logit matrix L into a sum and difference of rank-1 components
via eigendecomposition. Each of these components can be written as +vv⊤ or −vv⊤ with v ∈ Rn ,
where the sign depends on the sign of the eigenvalue. Each component is then separated into a sum
and difference of three outer products of nonnegative vectors, via Lemma 4.3 below.
Lemma 4.3. Let ϕ : R → R denote the ReLU function, i.e., ϕ(z) = max{z, 0}. For any vector v,

                        vv⊤ = 2ϕ(v)ϕ(v)⊤ + 2ϕ(−v)ϕ(−v)⊤ − |v||v|⊤ .

Proof. Take any v ∈ Rk . Then

         vv⊤ = (ϕ(v) − ϕ(−v)) · (ϕ(v)⊤ − ϕ(−v)⊤ )
               = ϕ(v)ϕ(v)⊤ + ϕ(−v)ϕ(−v)⊤ − ϕ(v)ϕ(−v)⊤ − ϕ(−v)ϕ(v)⊤
               = 2ϕ(v)ϕ(v)⊤ + 2ϕ(−v)ϕ(−v)⊤ − (ϕ(v) + ϕ(−v)) · (ϕ(v) + ϕ(−v))⊤
               = 2ϕ(v)ϕ(v)⊤ + 2ϕ(−v)ϕ(−v)⊤ − |v||v|⊤ ,
where the first step follows from v = ϕ(v)−ϕ(−v), and the last step from |v| = ϕ(v)+ϕ(−v). ■

Algorithm 1 follows from Lemma 4.3 and constitutes a constructive proof of the following theorem:
Theorem 4.4 (Exact Community Factorization from Exact LPCA Factorization). Given a symmetric
matrix A ∈ {0, 1} and X, Y ∈ Rn×k such that A = H(XY ⊤ ), there exist nonnegative matrices
       n×kB
B ∈ R+      and C ∈ Rn×k
                      +
                          C
                            such that kB + kC = 6k and A = H(BB ⊤ − CC ⊤ ).


Algorithm 1 Converting LPCA Factorization to Community Factorization
input logit factors X, Y ∈ Rn×k
output B ∈ Rn×k+
                    B
                       and C ∈ Rn×k
                                +
                                     C
                                                 kB + kC = 6k and
                                       such that
        BB − CC = 2 XY + Y X ⊤
             ⊤         ⊤    1     ⊤

 1: Set Q ∈ Rn×2k and λ ∈ R2k by truncated eigendecomposition such that
         Q × diag(λ) × Q⊤ = 12 (XY ⊤ + Y X ⊤ )
      ∗
                          √
 2: B ← Q+ × diag(√+λ+ ), where λ+ , Q+ are the positive eigenvalues/vectors
 3: C ∗ ← Q   −
            √ × diag(
                              −
                           √−λ ), where  λ− ,  Q− are the negative eigenvalues/vectors
                     ∗
 4: B ←       2ϕ(B );       2ϕ(−B ); |C ∗ |  ▷ ϕ and | · | are entrywise ReLU and absolute value
                                   ∗
            √             √
 5: C ←       2ϕ(C ∗ );     2ϕ(−C ∗ ); |B ∗ |
 6: return B, C


As stated in the introduction to this section, Theorem 4.4 extends any upper bound on the exact
factorization dimensionality from the LPCA model to our community-based model. That is, up to
a constant factor, the bound in terms of max degree from Theorem 4.1 and the bound in terms of
arboricity from Theorem 4.2 also apply to our model; for brevity, we state just the latter here.
Corollary 4.5 (Exact Community Factorization for Bounded-Arboricity Graphs). Let A ∈ {0, 1}n×n
be the adjacency matrix of an undirected graph G with arboricity α. Then there exist non-
negative embeddings B ∈ Rn×k+
                                B
                                   and C ∈ Rn×k   +
                                                     C
                                                       such that kB + kC = 6(4α2 + 1) and
             ⊤        ⊤
A = H(BB − CC ).

Note that Corollary 4.5 is purely a statement about the capacity of our model; Theorem 4.2 stems from
a constructive proof based on polynomial interpolation, and therefore so too does this corollary. We
do not expect this factorization to be informative about the graph’s latent structure. In the following
Section 5, we will fit the model with an entirely different algorithm for downstream applications.


                                                   7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


5     E XPERIMENTS
We now present a training algorithm to fit our model, then evaluate our method on a benchmark of
five real-world networks. These are fairly common small to mid-size datasets ranging from around
1K to 10K nodes; for brevity, we defer the statistics and discussion of these datasets, including how
some of them exhibit heterophily, to Appendix A.2.

5.1   T RAINING A LGORITHM
Given an input graph A ∈ {0, 1}n×n , we find low-rank nonnegative matrices B and C such that the
model produces Ã = σ(BB ⊤ − CC ⊤ ) ∈ (0, 1)n×n as in Equation 1 which approximately matches
A. In particular, we train the model to minimize the sum of binary cross-entropies of the link
predictions over all pairs of nodes:
                                    X
                            R=−          A log(Ã) + (1 − A) log(1 − Ã) ,                            (6)
       P
where      denotes the scalar summation of all entries in the matrix. We fit the parameters by gradient
descent over this loss, as well as L2 regularization of the factors B and C, subject to the nonnegativity
of B and C. This algorithm is fairly straightforward; pseudocode is given in Algorithm 2. This is
quite similar to the training algorithm of Chanpuriya et al. (2020), but in contrast to that work, which
only targets an exact fit, we explore the expression of graph structure in the factors and their utility
in downstream tasks. Regularization of the factors is implemented to this end to avoid overfitting.
Though we outline a non-stochastic version of the training algorithm, it generalizes straightforwardly
to a stochastic version, i.e., by sampling links and non-links for the loss function.

Algorithm 2 Fitting the Constrained Model
input adjacency matrix A ∈ {0, 1}n×n , regularization weight λ ≥ 0, number of iterations I,
      number of homophilous/heterophilous communities kB /kC
output fitted factors B ∈ Rn×k
                             +
                                B
                                   and C ∈ R+  n×kC
                                                    such that σ(BB ⊤ − CC ⊤ ) ≈ A
                                                                           √                √
 1: Initialize B, C by setting entries to independent samples of Unif(0, 1/ kB ), Unif(0, 1/ kC )
 2: for i ← 1 to I do
                      ⊤
 3:     Ã ← σ(BB       − CC ⊤ )
                 P
 4:     R←−           A log(Ã) + (1 − A) log(1 − Ã)

 5:     R ← R + λ ∥B∥2F + ∥C∥2F
 6:     Calculate ∂B,C R via differentiation through Steps 2 to 4
 7:     Update B, C to minimize R using ∂B,C R, subject to B, C ≥ 0
 8: end for
 9: return B, C


Implementation details Our implementation uses PyTorch (Paszke et al., 2019) for automatic
differentiation and minimizes loss using the SciPy (Jones et al., 2001) implementation of the L-
BFGS (Liu & Nocedal, 1989; Zhu et al., 1997) algorithm with default hyperparameters and up to a
max of 200 iterations of optimization. We set regularization weight λ = 10 as in Yang & Leskovec
(2013). We include code in the form of a Jupyter notebook (Pérez & Granger, 2007) demo. The code
also contains stochastic (i.e., more scalable) versions of the optimization functions.

5.2   R ESULTS
Expressiveness First, we investigate the expressiveness of our generative model, that is, the fidelity
with which it can reproduce an input network. In Section 1, we used a simple synthetic network
to show that our model is more expressive than others due to its ability to represent heterophilous
structures in addition to homophilous ones. We now evaluate the expressiveness of our model on real-
world networks. As with the synthetic graph, we fix the number of communities or singular vectors,
fit the model, then evaluate the reconstruction error. In Figure 4, we compare the results of our model
with those of SVD, B IG C LAM (which is discussed in detail in Section 3), and S YM NMF (Kuang
et al., 2015). S YM NMF simply factors the adjacency matrix as A ≈ HH ⊤ , where H ∈ Rn×k           + ;
note that, like SVD, S YM NMF does not necessarily output a matrix whose entries are probabilities
(i.e., bounded in [0, 1]), and hence it is not a graph generative model like ours and B IG C LAM.


                                                   8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                                                                                                          &URVV (QWURS\
                       )UREHQLXV (UURU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0HWKRG
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              69'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            6\P10)

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              %LJ&ODP
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              2XUV


                                                                  326        33,            %ORJ         $PD]RQ    <RX7XEH                                                 326                        33,       %ORJ             $PD]RQ       <RX7XEH
                                                          Figure 4: Reconstruction error on real-world networks, relative to our model’s error.

For each method, we fix the number of communities or singular vectors at the ground-truth number.
For this experiment only, we are not concerned with learning the latent structure of the graph; the
only goal is accurate representation of the network with limited parameters. So, for a fair comparison
with SVD, we do not regularize the training of the other methods. Our method consistently has the
lowest reconstruction error, both in terms of Frobenius error and entrywise cross-entropy (Equation 6).
Interestingly, we find the most significant improvement exactly on the three datasets which have been
noted to exhibit significant heterophily: POS, PPI, and A MAZON.

Similarity to ground-truth communities To assess the interpretability of clusters generated by our
method, we evaluate the similarity of these clusters to ground-truth communities (i.e., class labels),
and we compare other methods for overlapping clustering. We additionally compare to another
recent but non-generative approach, the V G RAPH method of Sun et al. (2019), which is based on link
clustering; the authors found their method to generally achieve state-of-the-art results in this task.
For all methods, we set the number of communities to be detected as the number of ground-truth
communities. We report F1-Score as computed in Yang & Leskovec (2013). See Figure 5 (left): the
performance of our method is competitive with S YM NMF, B IG C LAM, and vGraph.

                                                                            &RPPXQLW\ 'HWHFWLRQ                                                                                                                                /LQN 3UHGLFWLRQ


                                                                                                                                             0HWKRG                                                                                                                                                   0HWKRG
                                                                                                                                                                                                  )  6FRUH
    )  6FRUH


                                                                                                                                                    Y*UDSK                                                                                                                                                5DQGRP
                                                                                                                                                 6\P10)                                                                                                                                                   6\P10)
                                                                                                                                                    %LJ&ODP                                                                                                                                                 %LJ&ODP
                                                                                                                                                 2XUV                                                                                                                                                       2XUV



                                                               326      33,          %ORJ          $PD]RQ <RX7XEH                                                                                      326     33,             %ORJ         $PD]RQ <RX7XEH
Figure 5: Left: Similarity of recovered communities to ground-truth labels of real-world datasets.
We are unable to run the authors’ implementation of V G RAPH on B LOG with limited memory.
Right: Accuracy of link prediction on real-world datasets.

Interpretable link prediction We assess the predictive power of our generative model on the link
prediction task. As discussed in Section 2, the link probabilities output by our model are interpretable
in terms of a clustering of nodes that it generates; we compare results with our method to those with
other models which permit similar interpretation, namely B IG CLAM and S YM NMF. We randomly
select 10% of node pairs to hold out, fit the models on the remaining 90%, then use the trained models
to predict links between node pairs in the held out 10%. As a baseline, we also show results for
randomly predicting link or no link with equal probability. See Figure 5 (right). The performance of
our method is competitive with or exceeds that of the other methods in terms of F1 Score.

6                  C ONCLUSION
We introduce a community-based graph generative model based on symmetric nonnegative matrix
factorization which is capable of representing both homophily and heterophily. We expand on prior
work guaranteeing exact representation of bounded max degree graphs with a new, more applicable
guarantee for bounded arboricity graphs, and we show that both the prior bound and our new one
apply to our more interpretable graph model. We illustrate our model’s capabilities with experiments
on a synthetic motivating example. Experiments on real-world networks show its effectiveness on
several key tasks. More broadly, our results suggest that incorporating heterophily into models and
methods for networks can improve both theoretical grounding and overall empirical performance,
while maintaining simplicity and interpretability. A deeper understanding of the expressiveness of
both nonnegative and arbitrary low-rank logit models for graphs is an interesting future direction.


                                                                                                                                                                                              9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


R EFERENCES
Charu C Aggarwal and Haixun Wang. A survey of clustering algorithms for graph data. In Managing
  and Mining Graph Data, pp. 275–301. Springer, 2010.
Avanti Athreya, Donniell E Fishkind, Minh Tang, Carey E Priebe, Youngser Park, Joshua T Vogelstein,
  Keith Levin, Vince Lyzinski, and Yichen Qin. Statistical inference on random dot product graphs:
  a survey. The Journal of Machine Learning Research, 18(1):8393–8484, 2017.
Michael W Berry, Murray Browne, Amy N Langville, V Paul Pauca, and Robert J Plemmons.
 Algorithms and applications for approximate nonnegative matrix factorization. Computational
 Statistics & Data Analysis, 52(1):155–173, 2007.
Robi Bhattacharjee and Sanjoy Dasgupta. What relations are reliably embeddable in euclidean space?
  In Algorithmic Learning Theory, pp. 174–195. PMLR, 2020.
Anthony Bonato. A survey of models of the web graph. In Workshop on Combinatorial and
 Algorithmic Aspects of Networking, pp. 159–172. Springer, 2004.
Michael Boratko, Dongxu Zhang, Nicholas Monath, Luke Vilnis, Kenneth L Clarkson, and Andrew
 McCallum. Capacity and bias of learned geometric embeddings for directed graphs. Advances in
 Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:16423–16436, 2021.
Bobby-Joe Breitkreutz, Chris Stark, Teresa Reguly, Lorrie Boucher, Ashton Breitkreutz, Michael
  Livstone, Rose Oughtred, Daniel H Lackner, Jürg Bähler, Valerie Wood, et al. The biogrid
  interaction database: 2008 update. Nucleic acids research, 36(suppl 1):D637–D640, 2007.
Sudhanshu Chanpuriya, Cameron Musco, Konstantinos Sotiropoulos, and Charalampos Tsourakakis.
  Node embeddings and exact low-rank representations of complex networks. Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 33, 2020.
Chris Ding, Tao Li, and Michael I Jordan. Nonnegative matrix factorization for combinatorial
  optimization: Spectral clustering, graph matching, and clique finding. In 2008 Eighth IEEE
  International Conference on Data Mining, pp. 183–192. IEEE, 2008.
David L. Donoho and Victoria Stodden. When does non-negative matrix factorization give a correct
  decomposition into parts? In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 16, pp. 1141–
 1148. MIT Press, 2003.
David Duvenaud, Dougal Maclaurin, Jorge Aguilera-Iparraguirre, Rafael Gómez-Bombarelli, Tim-
  othy Hirzel, Alán Aspuru-Guzik, and Ryan P. Adams. Convolutional networks on graphs for
  learning molecular fingerprints. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 28, pp.
  2224–2232, 2015.
Jacob G Foster, David V Foster, Peter Grassberger, and Maya Paczuski. Edge direction and the
  structure of networks. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 107(24):10815–10820,
  2010.
Ian Gallagher, Andrew Jones, and Patrick Rubin-Delanchy. Spectral embedding for dynamic networks
  with stability guarantees. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:10158–10170,
  2021.
Nicolas Gillis. Nonnegative Matrix Factorization. SIAM, 2020.
Will Hamilton, Zhitao Ying, and Jure Leskovec. Inductive representation learning on large graphs. In
 Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 30. Curran Associates, Inc., 2017.
Takeshi Hase, Yoshihito Niimura, and Hiroshi Tanaka. Difference in gene duplicability may explain
  the difference in overall structure of protein-protein interaction networks among eukaryotes. BMC
  Evolutionary Biology, 10(1):1–15, 2010.
Muhammad Aqib Javed, Muhammad Shahzad Younis, Siddique Latif, Junaid Qadir, and Adeel Baig.
 Community detection in networks: A multidisciplinary review. Journal of Network and Computer
 Applications, 108:87–111, 2018.


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Samuel Johnson, Joaquı́n J Torres, J Marro, and Miguel A Munoz. Entropic origin of disassortativity
  in complex networks. Physical Review Letters, 104(10):108702, 2010.
Eric Jones, Travis Oliphant, Pearu Peterson, et al. SciPy: Open source scientific tools for Python,
  2001. URL http://www.scipy.org/.
Thomas N Kipf and Max Welling. Semi-supervised classification with graph convolutional networks.
  International Conference on Learning Representations, 2017.
Da Kuang, Chris Ding, and Haesun Park. Symmetric nonnegative matrix factorization for graph
  clustering. In Proceedings of the 2012 SIAM International Conference on Data Mining, pp.
 106–117. SIAM, 2012.
Da Kuang, Sangwoon Yun, and Haesun Park. Symnmf: nonnegative low-rank approximation of a
  similarity matrix for graph clustering. Journal of Global Optimization, 62(3):545–574, 2015.
Daniel D Lee and H Sebastian Seung. Learning the parts of objects by non-negative matrix factoriza-
  tion. Nature, 401(6755):788–791, 1999.
Ye Li, Chaofeng Sha, Xin Huang, and Yanchun Zhang. Community detection in attributed graphs: An
  embedding approach. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 32,
  2018.
Dong C Liu and Jorge Nocedal. On the limited memory BFGS method for large scale optimization.
 Mathematical Programming, 45(1-3):503–528, 1989.
Bernardo Marenco, Paola Bermolen, Marcelo Fiori, Federico Larroca, and Gonzalo Mateos. Online
  change point detection for weighted and directed random dot product graphs. IEEE Transactions
  on Signal and Information Processing over Networks, 8:144–159, 2022.
Oliver Mason and Mark Verwoerd. Graph theory and networks in biology. IET Systems Biology, 1
  (2):89–119, 2007.
Miller McPherson, Lynn Smith-Lovin, and James M Cook. Birds of a feather: Homophily in social
 networks. Annual review of sociology, 27(1):415–444, 2001.
Kurt T. Miller, Thomas L. Griffiths, and Michael I. Jordan. Nonparametric latent feature models for
  link prediction. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 22, pp. 1276–1284. Curran
  Associates, Inc., 2009.
Maria CV Nascimento and Andre CPLF De Carvalho. Spectral methods for graph clustering–a
 survey. European Journal of Operational Research, 211(2):221–231, 2011.
Mark EJ Newman. Assortative mixing in networks. Physical Review Letters, 89(20):208701, 2002.
Rogier Noldus and Piet Van Mieghem. Assortativity in complex networks. Journal of Complex
  Networks, 3(4):507–542, 2015.
Farshad Nourbakhsh, Samuel Rota Bulo, and Marcello Pelillo. A matrix factorization approach to
  graph compression. In 2014 22nd International Conference on Pattern Recognition, pp. 76–81.
  IEEE, 2014.
Hoang NT and Takanori Maehara. Revisiting graph neural networks: All we have is low-pass filters.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:1905.09550, 2019.
Adam Paszke, Sam Gross, Francisco Massa, Adam Lerer, James Bradbury, Gregory Chanan, Trevor
  Killeen, Zeming Lin, Natalia Gimelshein, Luca Antiga, Alban Desmaison, Andreas Kopf, Edward
 Yang, Zachary DeVito, Martin Raison, Alykhan Tejani, Sasank Chilamkurthy, Benoit Steiner,
  Lu Fang, Junjie Bai, and Soumith Chintala. Pytorch: An imperative style, high-performance deep
  learning library. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 32, pp. 8024–8035. Curran
 Associates, Inc., 2019.
Hongbin Pei, Bingzhe Wei, Kevin Chen-Chuan Chang, Yu Lei, and Bo Yang. Geom-gcn: Geometric
  graph convolutional networks. In 8th International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR
  2020, 2020.


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Fernando Pérez and Brian E. Granger. IPython: a system for interactive scientific computing.
  Computing in Science and Engineering, 9(3):21–29, May 2007. ISSN 1521-9615. doi: 10.1109/
  MCSE.2007.53. URL https://ipython.org.
Alexander Peysakhovich and Leon Bottou. An attract-repel decomposition of undirected networks.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.09671, 2021.
Jiezhong Qiu, Yuxiao Dong, Hao Ma, Jian Li, Kuansan Wang, and Jie Tang. Network embedding as
   matrix factorization: Unifying deepwalk, line, pte, and node2vec. In Proceedings of the Eleventh
   ACM International Conference on Web Search and Data Mining, pp. 459–467. ACM, 2018.
Luca Rendsburg, Holger Heidrich, and Ulrike Von Luxburg. Netgan without gan: From random walks
  to low-rank approximations. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 8073–8082.
  PMLR, 2020.
Patrick Rubin-Delanchy, Joshua Cape, Minh Tang, and Carey E Priebe. A statistical interpretation of
  spectral embedding: the generalised random dot product graph. arXiv preprint arXiv:1709.05506,
  2017.
Frederic Sala, Chris De Sa, Albert Gu, and Christopher Ré. Representation tradeoffs for hyperbolic
  embeddings. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 4460–4469. PMLR, 2018.
Satu Elisa Schaeffer. Graph clustering. Computer Science Review, 1(1):27–64, 2007.
Edward R Scheinerman and Kimberly Tucker. Modeling graphs using dot product representations.
  Computational statistics, 25(1):1–16, 2010.
John Scott. Social network analysis. Sociology, 22(1):109–127, 1988.
C Seshadhri, Aneesh Sharma, Andrew Stolman, and Ashish Goel. The impossibility of low-rank
  representations for triangle-rich complex networks. Proceedings of the National Academy of
  Sciences, 117(11):5631–5637, 2020.
Jianbo Shi and Jitendra Malik. Normalized cuts and image segmentation. IEEE Transactions on
   Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 22(8):888–905, 2000.
Fan-Yun Sun, Meng Qu, Jordan Hoffmann, Chin-Wei Huang, and Jian Tang. vgraph: A generative
  model for joint community detection and node representation learning. In Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems 32, pp. 512–522, 2019.
Lei Tang and Huan Liu. Relational learning via latent social dimensions. In Proceedings of the 15th
  ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, pp. 817–826.
  ACM, 2009.
Yu-Xiong Wang and Yu-Jin Zhang. Nonnegative matrix factorization: A comprehensive review.
  IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering, 25(6):1336–1353, 2012.
Jierui Xie, Stephen Kelley, and Boleslaw K. Szymanski. Overlapping community detection in
   networks: The state-of-the-art and comparative study. ACM Computing Surveys, 45(4):43:1–43:35,
   2013.
Yujun Yan, Milad Hashemi, Kevin Swersky, Yaoqing Yang, and Danai Koutra. Two sides of the
  same coin: Heterophily and oversmoothing in graph convolutional neural networks. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2102.06462, 2021.
Jaewon Yang and Jure Leskovec. Overlapping community detection at scale: a nonnegative matrix
  factorization approach. In Proceedings of the Sixth ACM International Conference on Web Search
  and Data Mining, pp. 587–596, 2013.
Jaewon Yang and Jure Leskovec. Defining and evaluating network communities based on ground-truth.
  Knowledge and Information Systems, 42(1):181–213, 2015.
Zhirong Yang, Tele Hao, Onur Dikmen, Xi Chen, and Erkki Oja. Clustering by nonnegative matrix
  factorization using graph random walk. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  pp. 1079–1087, 2012.


                                                12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Stephen J Young and Edward R Scheinerman. Random dot product graph models for social networks.
  In International Workshop on Algorithms and Models for the Web-Graph, pp. 138–149. Springer,
  2007.
Kai Yu, Shipeng Yu, and Volker Tresp. Soft clustering on graphs. In Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, pp. 1553–1560, 2005.
Xin Zheng, Yixin Liu, Shirui Pan, Miao Zhang, Di Jin, and Philip S Yu. Graph neural networks for
  graphs with heterophily: A survey. arXiv:2202.07082, 2022.
Ciyou Zhu, Richard H Byrd, Peihuang Lu, and Jorge Nocedal. Algorithm 778: L-BFGS-B: Fortran
  subroutines for large-scale bound-constrained optimization. ACM Transactions on Mathematical
  Software (TOMS), 23(4):550–560, 1997.
Jiong Zhu, Yujun Yan, Lingxiao Zhao, Mark Heimann, Leman Akoglu, and Danai Koutra. Beyond
   homophily in graph neural networks: Current limitations and effective designs. Advances in Neural
   Information Processing Systems, 33, 2020.
Katharina Anna Zweig. Are word-adjacency networks networks? In Towards a theoretical framework
  for analyzing complex linguistic networks, pp. 153–163. Springer, 2016.


                                                13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A     A PPENDIX
A.1    COT G RAPH E XACT R EPRESENTATION

As a theoretical demonstration of the capability of our model to learn latent structure, we additionally
show that our model can exactly represent a natural family of graphs, which exhibits both homophily
and heterophily, with small k and interpretably. The family of graphs is specified below in Definition 1;
roughly speaking, nodes in such graphs share an edge iff they coparticipate in some number of
homophilous communities and don’t coparticipate in a number of heterophilous communities. For
example, the motivating graph described in Section 1 would be an instance of such a graph if an edge
occurs between two users iff the two users are from the same city and have different genders.
Definition 1 (Community Overlap Threshold (COT) Graph). An unweighted, undirected graph whose
edges are determined by an overlapping clustering and a “thresholding” integer t ∈ Z as follows:
for each vertex i, there are two latent binary vectors bi ∈ {0, 1}kb and ci ∈ {0, 1}kc , and there is an
edge between vertices i and j iff bi · bj − ci · cj ≥ t.
Theorem A.1 (Compact Representation of COT Graphs). Suppose A is the adjacency matrix of a
COT graph on n nodes with latent vectors bi ∈ {0, 1}kb and ci ∈ {0, 1}kc for i ∈ {1, 2, . . . , n}. Let
k = kb + kc . Then, for any ϵ > 0, there exist V ∈ [0, 1]n×(k+1) and diagonal W ∈ R(k+1)×(k+1)
such that σ(V W V ⊤ ) − A F < ϵ.

Proof. Let t be the thresholding integer of the graph, and let the rows of B ∈ {0, 1}n×kb and
C ∈ {0, 1}n×kc contain the vectors b and c of all nodes. Via Equation 2, we can find V ∗ ∈ [0, 1]n×k
and diagonal W ∗ ∈ Rk×k such that V ∗ W ∗ V ∗⊤ = BB ⊤ − CC ⊤ . Now let
                                                         ∗
                                    ∗                    W       0
                          V = (V       1)       W =            1       .
                                                          0    2 −t

Then (V W V ⊤ )ij = bi · bj − ci · cj + 12 − t. Hence (V W V ⊤ )ij > 0 iff bi · bj − ci · cj > t − 21 ,
which is true iff Aij = 1 by the assumption on the graph. Similarly, (V W V ⊤ )ij < 0 iff Aij = 0.
It follows that
                        lim σ V (sW )V ⊤ = lim σ sV W V ⊤ = A.

                                                                                                   ■
                         s→∞                       s→∞


                                                   14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A.2   DATASET D ESCRIPTIONS

As stated in Section 5, we now briefly describe the five real-world datasets. Statistics for these
datasets are given in Table 1.

Table 1: Statistics of datasets used in our experiments. As in Sun et al. (2019), for YOU T UBE
and A MAZON, we take only nodes which participate in at least one of the largest 5 ground-truth
communities. Note that degeneracy is an upper bound on arboricity.
   Name         Reference                   Nodes         Edges   Labels   Max Degree   Degeneracy
   B LOG        Tang & Liu (2009)           10,312    333,983        39         3,992           114
   YOU T UBE    Yang & Leskovec (2015)       5,346     24,121         5           628            19
   POS          Qiu et al. (2018)            4,777     92,406        40         3,644            49
   PPI          Breitkreutz et al. (2007)    3,852     76,546        50           593            29
   A MAZON      Yang & Leskovec (2015)         794      2,109         5            29             6

B LOG is a social network of relationships between online bloggers; the node labels represent interests
of the bloggers. Similarly, YOU T UBE is a social network of YouTube users, and the labels represent
groups that the users joined.
POS is a word co-occurrence network: nodes represent words, and there are edges between words
which are frequently adjacent in a section of the Wikipedia corpus. Each node label represents the
part-of-speech of the word. PPI is a subgraph of the protein-protein interaction network for Homo
Sapiens. Labels represent biological states. Finally, A MAZON is a co-purchasing network: nodes
represent products, and there are edges between products which are frequently purchased together.
Labels represent categories of products.
While social networks like the former two in this list are generally dominated by homophily (McPher-
son et al., 2001), the latter three should exhibit significant heterophily. For co-purchasing networks
like A MAZON, depending on the product, two of the same kind of product are generally not co-
purchased, e.g., Pepsi and Coke, as discussed in Peysakhovich & Bottou (2021). Though less
intuitively accessible, there is also prior discussion of disassortativity in word adjacencies (Foster
et al., 2010; Zweig, 2016), as well as in PPI networks (Newman, 2002; Hase et al., 2010).


                                                     15
