Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


I MPROVING L ANGUAGE M ODEL P RETRAINING WITH
T EXT S TRUCTURE I NFORMATION
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT

         Inter-sentence pretraining tasks learn from sentence relationships and facilitate
         high-level language understanding that cannot be directly learned in word-level
         pretraining tasks. However, we have found experimentally that existing inter-
         sentence methods for general-purpose language pretraining improve performance
         only at a relatively small scale but not at larger scales. For an alternative, we
         propose Text Structure Prediction (TSP), a more sophisticated inter-sentence task
         that uses text structure to provide more abundant self-supervised learning signals
         to pretraining models at larger scales. TSP classifies sentence pairs over six de-
         signed text structure relationships and it can be seen as an implicit form of learning
         high-level language understanding by identifying key concepts and relationships
         in texts. Experiments show that TSP provides improved performance on language
         understanding tasks for models at various scales. Our approach thus serves as an
         initial attempt to demonstrate that the exploitation of text structure can facilitate
         language understanding.


1   I NTRODUCTION

General-purpose pretrained language models have been widely applied in natural language process-
ing (NLP). The most representative model of these models is BERT (Devlin et al., 2019), which is
pretrained simultaneously on two pretraining tasks: a masked language model (MLM) task, and a
next sentence prediction (NSP) task. While MLM masks words and requires models to fill clozes,
NSP is an inter-sentence task of predicting whether two texts are continuous. Inter-sentence tasks
learn relationships between sentences and facilitate high-level language understanding that is not
directly learned by word-level pretraining tasks (Devlin et al., 2019). However, the representative
inter-sentence task, NSP, has been found to fail to improve performance (Liu et al., 2019; Yang et al.,
2019). Although a few successors of NSP have been proposed, they are still not widely adopted and
researched. In this paper, we show that the existing inter-sentence methods for general-purpose
language pretraining are actually suboptimal; to improve on those methods’ weaknesses, we then
propose an alternative that redefines what is learned from sentence relations.
The existing general-purpose inter-sentence pretraining tasks include NSP (Devlin et al., 2019),
which discriminates whether two texts come from different documents; sentence order prediction
(SOP) (Lan et al., 2020), which discriminates whether two texts are swapped; and sentence structure
objective (SSO) (Wang et al., 2020), which discriminates whether two texts come from different
documents or are swapped. To investigate claims of improved performance, we experimented these
methods at three different scales (Small, Base, and Large), which mainly followed the setting of
BERT (Devlin et al., 2019). The model size and the amount of consumed data increased from
Small to Base and then to Large scale (see Appendix A for the details). As seen in Figure 1, our
experimental results show that the existing methods improved performance only at the Small-scale
whereas they undermined or failed to improve performance for models at larger scales.
In investigating the reason for little improvement by the existing methods at larger scales, we no-
ticed that all of the aforementioned methods split an input text into two segments and learn from
only the relationship between the two segments, thus ignoring the text’s underlying structure. As
illustrated in Figure 2, text structure can be seen as the organization of information in texts. Without
text structure, a text becomes a long continuous word sequence, which is hard to read and makes
it difficult to identify key concepts and logical relationships for humans. This intuitive understand-


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                                                      MLM
                                 79
                                                                                                      MLM + NSP
                                 76
                                                                                                      MLM + SOP

                                 73                                                                   MLM + SSO


                     SuperGLUE
                                 70                                                                   MML + TSP


                                 67

                                 64

                                 61

                                 58
                                           Small               Base               Large
Figure 1: Experimental results on the language understanding benchmark SuperGLUE (Wang et al.,
2019) at the Small, Base, and Large scales. The experiment compared the effect on the performance
of using different inter-sentence tasks (NSP, SOP, SSO, and our proposed task, TSP) when learned
concurrently with the word-based MLM pretraining task. By taking advantage of text structure
information, TSP outperforms pure MLM at different scales, whereas the other inter-sentence base-
lines (NSP, SOP, and SSO) failed to improve the performance at larger scales in our experiments.


       World Quantum Day was apparently yesterday, and Google feted the occasion
       with the launch of The Qubit Game, as spotted by 9to5Google. Created in
                                                                                          Paragraph I (3 sentences):
       partnership with Doublespeak games, it's a “playful journey to building a
                                                                                          Brief introduction of The Qubit Game
       quantum computer, one qubit at a time," Google said. It also hopes the game,
       and World Quantum Day, will help generate some interest in the field.
                                                                                                             Further
                                                                                                             describe
       The game resolves around Qubits, the basic building block of a quantum
       computer. It's pretty straightforward (you won't need to learn any quantum
       entanglement math or physics) with the goal of increasing the number of            Paragraph II (4 sentences)
       Qubits while keeping them cool. The more Qubits you have, the more difficult
                                                                                          The details of the game.
       it gets. Eventually, you'll "discover new upgrades, complete big research
       projects and hopefully become a little more curious about how we're building
       quantum computers," wrote Google Quantum head of education Abe Asfaw.                                  Explain
                                                                                                              the reason
       The goal is to draw attention to quantum computing, because it seems there's
       a dearth of people working in the field. To that end, Google is bringing the       Paragraph III (2 sentences)
       game to the classroom, hoping to encourage educators to talk about the             Google's intention behind the game.
       subject and expand access to quantum computing research.

                                                                                                              Conclude
       "We need more students pursuing careers building or using quantum
       computers, and understanding what it would be like to be a quantum scientist
                                                                                          Paragraph IV (2 sentences)
       or engineer," wrote Asfaw. "For me, that’s what World Quantum Day is all
                                                                                          The meaning of World Quantum Day.
       about: showing everyone what quantum computing really is and how they can
       get involved."


Figure 2: Example of text structure in real text. The document comprises multiple paragraphs,
where each paragraph is composed of multiple sentences. Each paragraph conveys a specific concept
constructed by the sentences that the paragraph is composed of, while the order of concepts comes
with a clear intention and forms a logical flow. This suggests that the combination of hierarchy and
order in text structure hides valuable clues to high-level language comprehension.


ing of human reading ability inspires us to explore the possibility that text structure can provide
models’ language understanding ability abundant learning signals of high-level semantics and their
interaction, especially for models at larger scales. Hence, our goal in this paper is to demonstrate
that learning from text structure can improve general-purpose language model pretraining. We thus
propose a new inter-sentence task that better exploits text structure to examine our hypothesis.
The proposed task, Text Structure Prediction (TSP), is our initial attempt to integrate text struc-
ture information into general-purpose language pretraining. Regarding the task design, we view
text structure in terms of two axes: ordering and hierarchy. Hierarchies are nested groupings of
sentences, such as paragraphs or sections, where each group conveys a specific concept and its su-


                                                                      2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


perordinate group conveys a more global concept. The order of sentences represents the flow of
context and connections between information such as chronological process or cause-effect rela-
tionship (Danes, 2015). Thus, the solution of the TSP task requires two abilities: understanding of
the semantics of sentences to group them into nested concepts (reflected by hierarchical relation-
ships), and identification of connective relations between them (reflected by ordering relationships).
Specifically, we propose six inter-sentence relations for learning from text structure information,
which combine three hierarchical levels and two ordering directions. As a result, the TSP task re-
quires a model to classify sentence pairs over the six defined text structure relationships. More
details of TSP are given in Section 3. Through experiments we have shown the following: (1) Our
proposed method continues to improve performance on a language understanding benchmark at the
Small, Base, and Large scales, whereas the inter-sentence baselines fail to do so. (2) Our proposed
method is comparable to or better than the baselines on almost all language understanding tasks in
the benchmarks. Accordingly, the results have shown the effectiveness and potential of exploiting
text structure information for general-purpose language pretraining.
In summary, the contributions of this paper are as follows
      1. We find that existing inter-sentence tasks for general-purpose language pretraining did not
         bring significant improvement in our settings. In our experiments, these approaches per-
         form well at a relatively small scale, but fail to improve or even degrade performance at
         larger scales.
      2. We propose the use of text structure information to provide more valuable learning signals
         for general-purpose language pretraining. For our initial attempt at this, we designed the
         Text Structure Prediction (TSP) task and show that TSP improves performance at all scales
         in our experiments. We thus demonstrate that the exploitation of text structure information
         is a promising research direction for facilitating general-purpose language understanding.

2     R ELATED W ORK
2.1   W ORD -L EVEL P RETRAINING

Self-supervised word representation learning has rapidly developed in the past several years. GPT
(Radford et al., 2018) predicts the next token with the information from the previous tokens. ELMo
(Peters et al., 2018) uses a bidirectional framework to produce contextualized word representations
by fusing the final hidden states of two LSTM networks processing information in different direc-
tions. BERT (Devlin et al., 2019) achieves deep bidirectional pretraining via the MLM task, which
masks certain words in the input and then predicts the masked words. Since BERT’s success, trans-
fer learning has become mainstream in NLP. Many research initialize their models with pretrained
models to reuse learned representations for their target tasks. Also, the development of word-level
pretraining tasks has become prosperous. For example, ELECTRA (Clark et al., 2020) detects re-
placed tokens that come from incorrect predictions by another MLM model, while PMI-Masking
(Levine et al., 2021) samples and masks collocations instead of words. In addition to encoder-based
BERT and decoder-based GPT, word-level pretraining methods that are based on encoder-decoder
such as T5 (Raffel et al., 2020) and BART (Lewis et al., 2020) are also developed, which gain great
success on text generation tasks. Our proposed approach is learned simultaneously with a word-level
pretraining task, and it can be easily combined with any word-level pretraining task that is based on
transformer encoder, with negligible additional computational and memory costs.

2.2   S ENTENCE -L EVEL P RETRAINING

Approaches for learning sentence representations mainly fall into three categories. The first type is
sentence bottleneck, including Skip-Thought (Kiros et al., 2015) and CMLM (Yang et al., 2021),
aims to generate single or multiple sentence representations that are useful for word prediction ob-
jectives. The sentence bottleneck methods compress the encoded sentence into bottleneck repre-
sentations and thus benefiting from information bottleneck (Tishby et al., 1999). The second type
is contrastive learning, including COCO-LM (Meng et al., 2021) and CLEAR (Wu et al., 2020),
which makes representations of positive sentence pairs closer and vice versa. Contrastive learning
methods improve uniformity and ease the anisotropy problem that limits the expressiveness of em-
beddings (Gao et al., 2021). The third type is inter-sentence learning, including NSP and SOP


                                                  3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


described in Section 1, which learns sentence representations by capturing relationships between
sentences. Since inter-sentence methods learn from interactions of sentences, they inherently also
encode relationships between sentences and facilitate contextualization of multiple sentences. There
is currently no research comparing the three kinds of methods with each other, and each type ben-
efits from different principles. However, the inter-sentence approach is the only one that explicitly
encodes and contextualizes multiple sentences. Our proposed approach belongs to the inter-sentence
category.


2.3     I NTER -S ENTENCE TASKS

In terms of the kinds of sentence relationships to be learned, most inter-sentence tasks are sentence
ordering tasks that rearrange a set of sentences into their original order (Cui et al., 2020; Kumar et al.,
2020), whereas our proposed sentence relationships (Section 3.2) include ordering relationships but
are not restricted to them. Regarding the creation of sentence representations, instead of encoding
each sentence individually (Prabhumoye et al., 2020), our proposed framework (Section 3.1) adopts
an approach of concatenating sentences into an input sequence, whereby information flows across
sentences; thus, the created sentence representations are contextualized. In terms of semantic units,
approaches such as NSP and SOP capture relationships between segments that are two halves of a
text sequence that may include many sentences. In contrast, our approach processes sentences as
in many other approaches. Finally, for task objectives, some approaches aim to identify coherent
text (Barzilay & Lapata, 2008; Mesgar & Strube, 2018) or learning discourse representations (Iter
et al., 2020), whereas our baselines (NSP, SOP, SSO) and our proposed method are for creating
general-purpose language models.


3     P ROPOSED M ETHOD

We explain our proposed method in two parts. Section 3.1 introduces the overall proposed frame-
work for creating sentence embeddings and then performing six-class classification over sentence
pairs using created sentence embeddings. Figure 3 shows an overview of this framework. Sec-
tion 3.2 further elaborates on the six inter-sentence relationships that we designed for classification
and learning over sentence pairs. Overall, the implementation of TSP comes with several advan-
tages: (1) It is a self-supervised task that does not require external resources or human labeling. (2)
It can easily be combined with any pretraining task that outputs contextual word representations. An
example is provided in Appendix F. (3) It can be learned concurrently with other tasks in one for-
ward pass. (4) It only requires constructing an output head on top of a text encoder, with negligible
extra parameters and computations.


3.1     P ROPOSED F RAMEWORK

3.1.1    I NPUT SEQUENCE

Given a text sequence, we mark the scope of each sentence in the sequence by using the NLTK
toolkit (Bird et al., 2009), which is based on Punkt (Kiss & Strunk, 2006). The result is an sequence
that can be described as x =< x1,1 , x1,2 , ..., x1,n1 , ..., xk,1 , xk,2 , ..., xk,nk >, where xi,t is the t-th
token in sentence i, ni is the length of sentence i, and k is the number of sentences in x. Next, the
sequence’s sentences are shuffled to enable the model to learn to identify their correct order. We
have found that shuffling all of a sequence’s sentences introduces noise into the model; thus, we
shuffle only a limited percentage of the sentences (15% in this work, as explained in Appendix C),
while keeping the other sentences at their original positions. Additionally, to learn simultaneously
from the MLM task, we follow the same procedure used in BERT to corrupt the sequence: 15%
tokens are selected; then, 80% of them are replaced with a [MASK] token, 10% are replaced with
random tokens, and 10% are unchanged. Finally, we add sentinel tokens [CLS] and [SEP] to the
sequence as in BERT, and a masked and partially shuffled input sequence is thus obtained for the
model.


                                                       4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


 Sentence Embeddings       S3               S2                S1


                         Average          Average           Average
                                                                                     TSP Loss
  Token Hidden States

                                     Transformer Encoder
                                                                               6-Class Classification

   Partially Shuffled
                        Sentence 1       Sentence 3        Sentence 2
    Input Sequence

                                                                             S1          S2             S3

    Input Sequence      Sentence 1       Sentence 2        Sentence 3



Figure 3: Overview of the proposed Text Structure Prediction (TSP) task. (left) Before an input
sequence is sent to the encoder, certain randomly selected sentences in the sequence are shuffled.
After encoding, a sentence embedding is obtained by averaging the encoded states of the tokens
belonging to that sentence. (right) The TSP loss is calculated for performing six-class classification
over sentence pairs by their sentence embeddings, where the six classes are shown in Figure 4.


3.1.2   S ENTENCE EMBEDDING
To obtain sentence representations, we first calculate contextualized token hidden states:
                                                 h = fθ (x′ ),                                           (1)
where fθ is the transformer encoder function and x′ is a corrupted and partially shuffled input token
sequence. By averaging the hidden state vectors of tokens that belong to the sentence, we obtain its
sentence embedding:
                                               Σn hi,t
                                          si = t=1       ,                                         (2)
                                                  ni
where hi,t is the hidden state vector of the t-th token in the i-th sentence and ni is the length of
the i-th sentence. Additionally, through the transformer encoder’s attention mechanism, each token
interacts with all tokens in the input sequence rather than only the tokens in the sentence it belongs
to. As a result, the sentence embeddings are contextualized and aware of other sentences in the
same sequence. This means that when we compare sentences for their structure relationships, not
only the sentences themselves but also their context are considered. Since identifying structure
relationships using only information from the compared sentences can be very hard, it is intuitive
that models are motivated to encode high-level interactions between sentences in the context into
sentence representations.

3.1.3   PAIRWISE CLASSIFICATION
Next, we perform six-class classification over sentence pairs to learn the text structure relationship
between sentences. Given a pair of sentences, we pass their sentence embeddings to a classifier to
obtain prediction logits zi,j = W2 (GELU (W1 (si ⊕ sj ))). ⊕ denotes vector concatenation, sk is
the embedding of the k-th sentence, and GELU is the activation function proposed by Hendrycks
& Gimpel (2016). Finally, the loss in the Text Structure Prediction (TSP) task is the cross-entropy
loss:
                                                    exp(zi,j,yi,j )
                                Ltsp [i, j] = −log 6                ,                              (3)
                                                  Σc=1 exp(zi,j,c )
where yi,j is the correct label for the relationship between the i-th and j-th sentences, and zi,j,c is
the c-th element of the logit vector for the sentence pair. The final TSP loss Ltsp is the average over
the TSP losses for all sentence pairs in a mini-batch, where the sentences in each sentence pair are
in the same sequence. Overall, a model is optimized by minimizing the sum of MLM loss Lmlm
and our TSP loss Ltsp :
                                           L = Ltsp + Lmlm .                                        (4)


                                                      5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


        Next Sentence Prediction (NSP)                                Text Structure Prediction (TSP)
                Different Document

                     Neighbor                                           Same Document Same Document
                                                                         Reverse Order Normal Order
        Sentence Order Prediction (SOP)


                                                          Hierarchy
            Neighbor          Neighbor                                 Same Paragraph   Same Paragraph
          Reverse Order     Normal Order                                Reverse Order    Normal Order


        Sentence Structure Objective (SSO)
                                                                          Neighbor         Neighbor
                Different Document                                      Reverse Order    Normal Order

            Neighbor          Neighbor
          Reverse Order     Normal Order
                                                                                    Order


Figure 4: Inter-sentence relationship sets for (left) our baselines and (right) TSP. An inter-sentence
task classifies pairs of texts into one of the relations in its own defined sets. For example, if two
sentences are in the same paragraph (but not adjacent) and in reverse order, the TSP task should
classify the pair as Same Paragraph & Reverse Order. Note that we leave Different Document for
future work because of its lack of difficulty (Lan et al., 2020) and complexity of implementation.
By comparing the defined relations, we can see that TSP takes better advantage of the text structure
and is a more complex task that is expected to provide more valuable knowledge.



3.2   P ROPOSED T EXT S TRUCTURE R ELATIONSHIPS

The key part of the training objective is our design of six classes to represent six text structure
relationships between sentences. As illustrated on the right in Figure 4, these relationships are the set
of combination of three hierarchical relationships {neighbor, same paragraph, same document} and
two ordering relationships {normal order, reverse order}. Concretely, these relationships are defined
as follows. The hierarchical relationships include (1) neighbor (two sentences are adjacent), (2)
same paragraph (two sentences are in the same paragraph but not adjacent), and (3) same document
(two sentences are in the same document but not adjacent or in the same paragraph). The ordering
relationships include (1) normal order (two sentences are in the forward order), and (2) reversed
order (two sentences are in the reversed order).



3.3   L EARNING E XPECTATION FROM H IERARCHY AND O RDER

The text hierarchy describes the semantics hierarchy and the interactions between the semantics.
As shown in Figure 2, the semantics of sentences are included in higher-level paragraph semantics,
and paragraph semantics are included in higher-level document semantics. Relationships between
semantics at different levels and the same level can also be seen in the example. To group sen-
tences nestedly, models are expected to summarize semantics at different levels from the context,
while capturing relationships and interactions between these semantics. Intuitively, it can provide
unique learning signals for models’ understanding ability on and between texts at different levels of
granularity.
The order of sentences depends on the logical relations that connect the different concepts described
in the sentences. These relations can be chronological relations, cause-effect relations, and so on.
Textual coherence is also an important clue for sentence order. A model must recognize relations
between concepts and identify coherence to rearrange the order of sentences. Moreover, learning
from sentence order has long been shown to be useful for many downstream applications (Cui et al.,
2020).


                                                   6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


4     E XPERIMENTS

4.1     S ETUP

4.1.1    P RETRAINING

All models in this paper were pretrained on OpenWebText (Gokaslan & Cohen, 2019), an open-
source recreation of the WebText corpus described in GPT2 (Radford et al., 2019). It includes
38GB of texts from 8,013,769 documents extracted from Reddit posts. Note that we did not use
Wikipedia+BookCorpus because of the public unavailability of official BookCorpus (Zhu et al.,
2015). In preprocessing the pretraining data, we delimited paragraphs by blank lines and marked
the scopes of sentences with the sentence splitter of NLTK (Bird et al., 2009) for the use of TSP.
For this paper, we experimented with pretraining models on word-based MLM with different inter-
sentence tasks or on MLM only. In particular, we mainly followed BERT’s pretraining setting and
referred to the setting of ELECTRA (Clark et al., 2020), another popular pre-trained model. We
trained with a sequence length of 512 and 1 million training steps at the Base and Large scales, or
with a length of 128 and 1.45 million steps at the Small scale. The batch sizes vary with the scale,
as described along with other details in Appendix A. To ensure fair comparisons, all models at the
same scale had almost the same computational cost and number of parameters in both training and
inference. Note that we did not perform any hyperparameter search, although we think it could help
our proposed method to perform better.

4.1.2    E VALUATION

Our pretrained models were evaluated on the widely adopted SuperGLUE benchmark (Wang et al.,
2019) for evaluating general language understanding systems. SuperGLUE contains tasks cover-
ing natural language inference tasks RTE (Dagan et al., 2006) and CB, multiple-choice reasoning
task COPA (Melissa et al., 2011), question-answering tasks BoolQ (Clark et al., 2019), MultiRC
(Khashabi et al., 2018), ReCoRD (Zhang et al., 2018), and word sense disambiguation task WiC
(Pilehvar & Camacho-Collados, 2019). The metrics used here for these tasks are the same as those
the ones described in the SuperGLUE paper.
Because some of the evaluation datasets are small and the scores on them could vary substantially
depending on the random seed, we followed the ELECTRA setting and finetuned 10 runs for each
task from the same pretrained checkpoint for every model. Here, we took the median score of 10
runs for our development set results (Appendix D), and we used the best-performing model on the
development set for evaluation on the test set. In contrast to certain related papers, we did not apply
tricks such as intermediate finetuning or ensembling during the stage of finetuning. Similarly, we
excluded the WSC task because it involves intermediate finetuning and publicly unavailable training
data to obtain decent results (Kocijan et al., 2019). More details about our finetuning are given in
Appendix B.

4.2     R ESULTS

Table 1 lists the averaged SuperGLUE scores. TSP improved on pure MLM and outperformed the
inter-sentence baselines at all scales. These results show the effectiveness and potential of incor-
porating text structure information into learning. The results also reveal two findings. First, NSP
undermined or made little difference in the performance, which matches the claims of Liu et al.
(2019); Yang et al. (2019). Second, while SOP has been claimed to improve NSP on the GLUE
benchmark (Wang et al., 2018; Lan et al., 2020), we found that it failed to outperform NSP in our
experiment.
Next, we analyze the scaling of the four inter-sentence tasks. Although the inter-sentence baselines
(NSP, SOP, and SSO) improved on pure MLM at the Small scale, at the larger scales they failed to
improve on pure MLM by a significant margin or even undermined the performance. We suspect
the reason to be the task difficulty. While the Small-scale models learned from the inter-sentence
baseline tasks, those tasks may not have been difficult enough to provide valuable learning signals
to models at larger scales. We can also see that SSO (the fusion of NSP and SOP) is slightly
more complicated than NSP and SOP, and it slightly outperformed both NSP and SOP at Base


                                                  7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Table 1: Experiment results on the SuperGLUE test set at different scales. Overall, TSP outper-
formed MLM at the different scales, whereas the other inter-sentence baselines (NSP, SOP, and
SSO) failed to achieve improvement. Note that because the sizes and settings for the naming of
scales (e.g., Small, Base, and Large) differ greatly in different papers, results may not be directly
comparable between papers.

                                       CB          COPA    MultiRC     RTE    WIC    BoolQ   ReCoRD
  Scale   Model             Avg.
                                    Avg. F1/Acc.    Acc.    F1a/EM     Acc.   Acc.    Acc.     F1/Acc.
          MLM               58.8    75.7/81.6      57.6    60.3/13.6   58.3   60.9   70.4    49.4/48.6
          MLM+NSP (BERT)    61.1    76.2/82.0      58.4    61.1/14.7   65.5   65.5   71.5    50.1/49.3
 Small    MLM+SOP           59.9    77.7/80.4      59.0    61.7/14.5   63.0   60.4   71.7    48.3/47.4
          MLM+SSO           60.8    74.4/81.6      57.2    61.1/14.3   66.1   66.1   71.8    49.3/48.6
          MLM+TSP (ours)    61.5    83.0/86.0      59.4    62.4/14.3   66.1   60.2   71.8    50.5/49.8
          MLM               71.0    84.8/90.4      63.2    73.2/28.6   71.3   66.1   79.4    79.1/78.2
          MLM+NSP (BERT)    70.8    84.5/90.8      66.0    73.8/30.6   73.2   68.8   70.9    77.9/76.9
  Base    MLM+SOP           71.0    83.5/90.4      70.0    71.7/25.4   70.8   68.1   78.3    74.9/74.0
          MLM+SSO           71.6    84.8/89.6      71.2    73.0/28.5   72.3   68.0   76.9    75.0/74.0
          MLM+TSP (ours)    73.6    84.2/91.2      72.4    75.8/33.5   74.1   66.6   80.6    79.2/78.5
          MLM               76.5    87.4/92.4      73.6    77.8/37.5   76.6   68.7   82.7    86.5/85.7
          MLM+NSP (BERT)    76.5    83.6/89.6      76.0    78.2/38.4   77.4   71.0   81.7    85.1/84.4
 Large    MLM+SOP           76.4    84.8/90.4      74.6    79.3/40.9   77.1   68.6   82.2    85.2/84.5
          MLM+SSO           76.6    81.8/88.4      74.6    79.6/40.9   78.5   70.6   82.1    85.1/84.3
          MLM+TSP (ours)    79.0    93.5/94.8      77.4    80.5/43.2   79.1   72.4   82.7    85.8/85.2


and Large scales. On the other hand, with the better use of text structure information, TSP was
designed as more complicated (six inter-sentence relations instead of two or three inter-sentence
relations for the inter-sentence baseline tasks, as shown in Figure 4) and more difficult. TSP provides
valuable knowledge for models at all scales, especially for Large-scale models, which have the
largest capability and consumed data to better exploit the difficult TSP task, thus yielding the largest
improvement over other baselines as compared to the other scales. Encouraged by this observation,
we expect that models with even larger model sizes and training data would also benefit significantly
from learning text structure information.
While TSP provided competitive or better performance on most of the tasks, we also found that
it performed well on the reasoning (CB, RTE, and COPA) and question-answering (MultiRC and
BoolQ) tasks. We can view a question and an answer as two texts that share a similar concept and
can be placed in the same hierarchical group, such as a paragraph or a pair of consecutive sentences.
Likewise, we can view reasoning in terms of whether two texts are coherent. From these view-
points, the results are consistent with our interpretation that TSP facilitates language understanding
by strengthening recognition and comparison of concepts and reasoning relationships (Section 3.2).
On the other hand, although ReCoRD is a QA task, it is more like prediction of a masked entity in a
paragraph given the context, which may explain why pure MLM was the leading model for ReCoRD
at the Large scale. Regarding WiC, a word sense disambiguation task, TSP showed an interesting
phenomenon. Compared to other baselines in the WiC task, TSP performed poorly at the Small
scale, got better at the Base scale, and became the best-performing model at the Large scale. We can
relate this result to our surmise on the scaling effect mentioned above. Learning of the complicated
TSP stretches models’ capabilities, and small models may not have enough capability to encode in-
formation that is useful for word-level tasks like WiC, whereas large models have enough capability
that complicated sentence-level learning can even help with word-level understanding. While more
elaborate approaches will be needed to analyze the effect of learning text structure information on
different types of downstream tasks, which is outside the scope of this paper, we hope to have a good
starting point by providing interesting results and explanations for those who follow.
In addition to the main results, we also reported other experiment results. First, we reported scores
on the SuperGLUE development set in Appendix D, which showed similar results as in Table 1.
Second, we reported results on the GLUE benchmark in Appendix E. Finally, to demonstrate that
our proposed approach is generally useful, we did an experiment showing that TSP can be easily
combined with another word-based pretraining task (see Appendix F for details). Additionally, this


                                                      8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                 Table 2: Ablation results for the designed text structure relations.

                                                    #ordering     #hierarchical
      Model                      #total classes                                   SuperGLUE
                                                   relationship    relationship
      MLM+TSP                           6               2               3               73.9
      MLM+TSP - paragraph               4               2               2               73.2
      MLM+TSP - hierarchy               2               2               -               72.5
      MLM+TSP - order                   3               -               3               71.9
      MLM                               -               -               -               71.2


experiment also shows that TSP still improves performance in its preliminary results, which suggests
that learning text structure information may generalize to pretraining tasks other than MLM.

5   A BLATION S TUDY
To investigate whether the proposed TSP text structure relations are helpful, we experimented
with different TSP variations in which some text structure relations were ablated. Specifically,
MLM+TSP -hierarchy adopted only the 2 ordering relationships (normal, reversed), MLM+TSP -
order adopted only the 3 hierarchical relationships (neighbor, paragraph, document), and MLM+TSP
-paragraph combined the 2 ordering relationships with only the 2 hierarchical relationships (neigh-
bor, document) , with no discrimination of whether two sentences were in the same paragraph.
The results on the SuperGLUE development set of models at the Base scale are shown in Table 2.
First, we found that the models pretrained with TSP benefitted from both the hierarchy relationships
and the ordering relationships, as both MLM+TSP - hierarchy and MLM+TSP - order underper-
formed MLM+TSP and outperformed MLM. Second, the performance slightly dropped when it was
not discriminated whether two sentences were in the same paragraph, which shows that the adja-
cency of sentences is not the only important factor, and that discrimination of hierarchical groups
at different levels matters. Although other design elements such as discrimination of sections and
documents remain unexplored, we will encourage future work to explore further, whereas in this
paper we focus on uncovering the potential for integrating text structure information.

6   C ONCLUSION
Despite their stated usefulness for high-level language understanding and continued development,
inter-sentence tasks have not gained enough attention as expected. Our experiments have shown
that existing inter-sentence approaches for general-purpose language pretraining can not improve
performance or even degrade performance at scales larger than Small. Furthermore, these existing
approaches ignore a large part of text structure information and oversimplify complicated text struc-
tures into one relationship between two lengthy parts of a text sequence. The goal of this paper
was thus to explore the potential of utilizing text structure information to provide more valuable
learning signals and maintain the improvement at larger scales. For an initial attempt to achieve this
goal, we proposed Text Structure Prediction (TSP), a self-supervised inter-sentence pretraining task
that can easily be combined with any encoder-based pretraining task. TSP redefines what is learned
from sentence pairs via text structure relationships. Specifically, these text structure relationships
combine hierarchical and ordering relationships, which can be seen as implicit learning signals for
language understanding via recognition of concepts and reasoning relationships respectively. In this
paper, we have shown that (1) inter-sentence baselines (NSP, SOP, SSO) were not helpful for perfor-
mance at larger scales in our settings, whereas TSP improved the overall performance of models at
all scales in our experiments, which again demonstrates that inter-sentence tasks for learning from
inter-sentence relationships can help language understanding. Moreover, (2) the good scaling and
significant improvement at the Large scale showed that the exploitation of text structure information
can result in a sophisticated task that provides valuable knowledge for models with a large capability
and data size. Finally, although there may still be much room for different ways to exploit text struc-
ture information, we have shown the effectiveness and potential of exploiting such information, and
we expect that this work will encourage more research on learning from text structure information.


                                                  9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


R EFERENCES
Regina Barzilay and Mirella Lapata. Modeling local coherence: An entity-based approach. Com-
  putational Linguistics, 34(1):1–34, 2008.
Steven Bird, Ewan Klein, and Edward Loper. Natural language processing with Python: analyzing
  text with the natural language toolkit. ” O’Reilly Media, Inc.”, 2009.
Christopher Clark, Kenton Lee, Ming-Wei Chang, Tom Kwiatkowski, Michael Collins, and Kristina
  Toutanova. BoolQ: Exploring the surprising difficulty of natural yes/no questions. In Proceedings
  of the 2019 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational
  Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers), pp. 2924–2936.
  Association for Computational Linguistics, June 2019.
Kevin Clark, Minh-Thang Luong, Quoc V. Le, and Christopher D. Manning. Electra: Pre-training
  text encoders as discriminators rather than generators. In International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2020.
Baiyun Cui, Yingming Li, and Zhongfei Zhang. BERT-enhanced relational sentence ordering net-
  work. In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Pro-
  cessing (EMNLP), pp. 6310–6320. Association for Computational Linguistics, November 2020.
Ido Dagan, Oren Glickman, and Bernardo Magnini. The pascal recognising textual entailment chal-
  lenge. In Joaquin Quiñonero-Candela, Ido Dagan, Bernardo Magnini, and Florence d’Alché Buc
  (eds.), Machine Learning Challenges. Evaluating Predictive Uncertainty, Visual Object Classifi-
  cation, and Recognising Tectual Entailment, pp. 177–190. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2006.
Frantisek Danes. FUNCTIONAL SENTENCE PERSPECTIVE AND THE ORGANIZATION OF THE
  TEXT. De Gruyter Mouton, 2015.
Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. BERT: Pre-training of deep
  bidirectional transformers for language understanding. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of
  the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language
  Technologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers), pp. 4171–4186. Association for Computational
  Linguistics, June 2019.
Tianyu Gao, Xingcheng Yao, and Danqi Chen. SimCSE: Simple contrastive learning of sentence
  embeddings. In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
  Processing, pp. 6894–6910. Association for Computational Linguistics, November 2021.
Aaron Gokaslan and Vanya Cohen. Openwebtext corpus. http://Skylion007.github.io/
  OpenWebTextCorpus, 2019.
Dan Hendrycks and Kevin Gimpel. Gaussian error linear units (gelus). arXiv: Learning, 2016.
Dan Iter, Kelvin Guu, Larry Lansing, and Dan Jurafsky. Pretraining with contrastive sentence ob-
  jectives improves discourse performance of language models. In Proceedings of the 58th Annual
  Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 4859–4870. Association for Com-
  putational Linguistics, July 2020.
Daniel Khashabi, Snigdha Chaturvedi, Michael Roth, Shyam Upadhyay, and Dan Roth. Look-
  ing beyond the surface: A challenge set for reading comprehension over multiple sentences. In
  Proceedings of the 2018 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Com-
  putational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, Volume 1 (Long Papers), pp. 252–262.
  Association for Computational Linguistics, June 2018.
Ryan Kiros, Yukun Zhu, Russ R Salakhutdinov, Richard Zemel, Raquel Urtasun, Antonio Torralba,
  and Sanja Fidler. Skip-thought vectors. In C. Cortes, N. Lawrence, D. Lee, M. Sugiyama, and
  R. Garnett (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 28. Curran Asso-
  ciates, Inc., 2015.
Tibor Kiss and Jan Strunk. Unsupervised multilingual sentence boundary detection. Computational
  Linguistics, 32(4):485–525, 2006.


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Vid Kocijan, Ana-Maria Cretu, Oana-Maria Camburu, Yordan Yordanov, and Thomas Lukasiewicz.
  A surprisingly robust trick for winograd schema challenge. CoRR, abs/1905.06290, 2019.
Pawan Kumar, Dhanajit Brahma, Harish Karnick, and Piyush Rai. Deep attentive ranking networks
  for learning to order sentences. Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 34
  (05):8115–8122, April 2020.
Zhenzhong Lan, Mingda Chen, Sebastian Goodman, Kevin Gimpel, Piyush Sharma, and Radu Sori-
  cut. Albert: A lite bert for self-supervised learning of language representations. In International
  Conference on Learning Representations, 2020.
Yoav Levine, Barak Lenz, Opher Lieber, Omri Abend, Kevin Leyton-Brown, Moshe Tennenholtz,
  and Yoav Shoham. {PMI}-masking: Principled masking of correlated spans. In International
  Conference on Learning Representations, 2021.
Mike Lewis, Yinhan Liu, Naman Goyal, Marjan Ghazvininejad, Abdelrahman Mohamed, Omer
 Levy, Veselin Stoyanov, and Luke Zettlemoyer. BART: Denoising sequence-to-sequence pre-
 training for natural language generation, translation, and comprehension. In Proceedings of the
 58th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 7871–7880. Associa-
 tion for Computational Linguistics, July 2020.
Yinhan Liu, Myle Ott, Naman Goyal, Jingfei Du, Mandar Joshi, Danqi Chen, Omer Levy, Mike
  Lewis, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Veselin Stoyanov. Roberta: A robustly optimized BERT pretraining
  approach. CoRR, abs/1907.11692, 2019.
Roemmele Melissa, Bejan Cosmin, Adrian, and Gordon Andrew, S. Choice of plausible alterna-
  tives: An evaluation of commonsense causal reasoning. In AAAI Spring Symposium on Logical
  Formalizations of Commonsense Reasoning, pp. 21–23, Stanford University, March 2011.
Yu Meng, Chenyan Xiong, Payal Bajaj, saurabh tiwary, Paul Bennett, Jiawei Han, and XIA SONG.
  Coco-lm: Correcting and contrasting text sequences for language model pretraining. In M. Ran-
  zato, A. Beygelzimer, Y. Dauphin, P.S. Liang, and J. Wortman Vaughan (eds.), Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, volume 34, pp. 23102–23114. Curran Associates, Inc., 2021.
Mohsen Mesgar and Michael Strube. A neural local coherence model for text quality assessment.
 In Proceedings of the 2018 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing,
 pp. 4328–4339. Association for Computational Linguistics, October-November 2018.
Matthew E. Peters, Mark Neumann, Mohit Iyyer, Matt Gardner, Christopher Clark, Kenton Lee, and
 Luke Zettlemoyer. Deep contextualized word representations. In Proceedings of the 2018 Con-
 ference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human
 Language Technologies, Volume 1 (Long Papers), pp. 2227–2237. Association for Computational
 Linguistics, June 2018.
Mohammad Taher Pilehvar and Jose Camacho-Collados. WiC: the word-in-context dataset for eval-
 uating context-sensitive meaning representations. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of the
 North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language
 Technologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers), pp. 1267–1273. Association for Computational
 Linguistics, June 2019.
Shrimai Prabhumoye, Ruslan Salakhutdinov, and Alan W Black. Topological sort for sentence order-
  ing. In Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics,
  pp. 2783–2792. Association for Computational Linguistics, July 2020.
Alec Radford, Karthik Narasimhan, Tim Salimans, Ilya Sutskever, et al. Improving language under-
  standing by generative pre-training. 2018.
Alec Radford, Jeff Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario Amodei, and Ilya Sutskever. Language
  models are unsupervised multitask learners. 2019.
Colin Raffel, Noam Shazeer, Adam Roberts, Katherine Lee, Sharan Narang, Michael Matena, Yanqi
  Zhou, Wei Li, and Peter J. Liu. Exploring the limits of transfer learning with a unified text-to-text
  transformer. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 21(140):1–67, 2020.


                                                  11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Naftali Tishby, Fernando C. Pereira, and William Bialek. The information bottleneck method. In
  Proc. of the 37-th Annual Allerton Conference on Communication, Control and Computing, pp.
  368–377, 1999.
Alex Wang, Amanpreet Singh, Julian Michael, Felix Hill, Omer Levy, and Samuel Bowman. GLUE:
  A multi-task benchmark and analysis platform for natural language understanding. In Proceedings
  of the 2018 EMNLP Workshop BlackboxNLP: Analyzing and Interpreting Neural Networks for
  NLP, pp. 353–355. Association for Computational Linguistics, November 2018.
Alex Wang, Yada Pruksachatkun, Nikita Nangia, Amanpreet Singh, Julian Michael, Felix Hill, Omer
  Levy, and Samuel Bowman. Superglue: A stickier benchmark for general-purpose language
  understanding systems. In H. Wallach, H. Larochelle, A. Beygelzimer, F. d'Alché-Buc, E. Fox,
  and R. Garnett (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 32. Curran
  Associates, Inc., 2019.
Wei Wang, Bin Bi, Ming Yan, Chen Wu, Jiangnan Xia, Zuyi Bao, Liwei Peng, and Luo Si. Struct-
 bert: Incorporating language structures into pre-training for deep language understanding. In
 International Conference on Learning Representations, 2020.
Zhuofeng Wu, Sinong Wang, Jiatao Gu, Madian Khabsa, Fei Sun, and Hao Ma. Clear: Contrastive
  learning for sentence representation, 2020.
Zhilin Yang, Zihang Dai, Yiming Yang, Jaime Carbonell, Russ R Salakhutdinov, and Quoc V
  Le. Xlnet: Generalized autoregressive pretraining for language understanding. In H. Wallach,
  H. Larochelle, A. Beygelzimer, F. d'Alché-Buc, E. Fox, and R. Garnett (eds.), Advances in Neu-
  ral Information Processing Systems, volume 32. Curran Associates, Inc., 2019.
Ziyi Yang, Yinfei Yang, Daniel Cer, Jax Law, and Eric Darve. Universal sentence representation
  learning with conditional masked language model. In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference on
  Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pp. 6216–6228. Association for Computa-
  tional Linguistics, November 2021.
Sheng Zhang, Xiaodong Liu, Jingjing Liu, Jianfeng Gao, Kevin Duh, and Benjamin Van Durme.
  Record: Bridging the gap between human and machine commonsense reading comprehension,
  2018.
Y. Zhu, R. Kiros, R. Zemel, R. Salakhutdinov, R. Urtasun, A. Torralba, and S. Fidler. Aligning books
   and movies: Towards story-like visual explanations by watching movies and reading books. In
   2015 IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), pp. 19–27. IEEE Computer
   Society, dec 2015.


                                                12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A    P RETRAINING D ETAILS

The details given in Table 3 apply to all the models in this paper. In most cases, we used the same
hyperparameters as for BERT and ELECTRA. At the Large scale, we adopted a setting closer to
BERT-Large because ELECTRA’s setting for the Large scale requires much higher memory and
computational cost than our computational resource could handle. For the Large scale, we also
slightly increased the batch size to 288, which we found that avoids divergence in our experiments.
Additionally, inspired by BERT, we trained with a sequence length of 128 for the first half of the
training steps and then with a sequence length of 512 for the rest while keeping the same number
of tokens in a batch to speed up pretraining in our Large-scale experiments. Note that we did not
perform any hyperparameter search, although we think it could help our proposed method to perform
better.

                              Table 3: Pretraining hyperparameters.

                Hyperparameter                       Small        Base      Large
                Number of layers                     12           12        24
                Hidden size                          256          768       1024
                FFN inner hidden size                1024         3072      4096
                Attention head size                  4            12        16
                Attention heads                      64           64        64
                Embedding size                       128          768       1024
                Mask percent                         15           15        15
                Learning rate decay                  Linear       Linear    Linear
                Warmup steps                         10000        10000     10000
                Learning rate                        5e-4         2e-4      1e-4
                Adam ϵ                               1e-6         1e-6      1e-6
                Adam β1                              0.9          0.9       0.9
                Adam β2                              0.999        0.999     0.999
                Dropout                              0.1          0.1       0.1
                Weight decay                         0.01         0.01      0.01
                Batch size                           128          256       288
                Training steps (MLM/ELECTRA)         1.45M/1M     1M/-      1M/-



B    F INETUNING D ETAILS

Our finetuning setting (see Table 4 for details) mostly followed that of ELECTRA. Most tasks were
finetuned for 3 epochs. However, inspired by ELECTRA, which increases the number of epochs to
10 for the RTE task, we also found that increasing the number of epochs to 10 helped stabilize the
finetuning performance for CB and BoolQ. Except for this, we did not perform any hyperparameter
search for finetuning.

                              Table 4: Finetuning hyperparameters.

               Hyperparameter         Value
               Learning rate          3e-4 for Small, 1e-4 for Base, 5e-5 for Large
               Adam epsilon           1e-6
               Adam beta 1            0.9
               Adam beta 2            0.999
               Layerwise LR decay     0.8 for Base/Small, 0.9 for Large
               Learning rate decay    Linear
               Warmup fraction        0.1
               Dropout                0.1
               Weight decay           0.1
               Batch size             32
               Training epochs        10 for RTE, CB, BoolQ; 3 for other tasks.


                                                13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


For the WiC and ReCoRD tasks, in which span embeddings for words or entities are required to
compare spans with each other, we created span embeddings by applying average pooling to the
final hidden representations of the tokens constructing a span and we compared spans by passing the
concatenated span embeddings to the classifiers.


C    S HUFFLING R ATE

Table 5: Comparison of different sentence shuffling rates in terms of the SuperGLUE development
set results for Small-scale MLM-based models. We choose 15% as our final choice for shuffling
rate. The results show that TSP is not sensitive to the extent of shuffling, but shuffling is necessary
for TSP.

                                    Shuffling rate      SuperGLUE
                                         0%                59.7
                                        15%                60.3
                                        30%                60.3
                                        50%                60.2
                                       100%                60.1

Among the sentences in a given input sequence, we randomly shuffled 15% of them while other
sentences stay at their original positions, to prevent complete leakage of the original ordering and
hierarchical information. We also experimented with different rates for such kind of partial shuffling,
and the results are listed in Table 5. The case of no shuffling and complete shuffling gave the worst
results, while there was little difference in performance for shuffling of 15 ∼ 50%. Accordingly, the
results indicate that shuffling is needed, but the proposed task is not sensitive to the partial shuffling
rate. We chose 15% as the partial shuffling rate in this paper because it was the lowest shuffling rate
in this analysis that gave a good performance with minimal corruption of inputs.


D    R ESULTS ON THE S UPER GLUE D EVELOPMENT S ET

For reference, Table 6 lists our experimental results on the SuperGLUE development set.


E    R ESULTS ON THE GLUE BENCHMARK

The GLUE benchmark is the predecessor of the SuperGLUE benchmark. Compared to the old
GLUE benchmark, SuperGLUE comes with a new set of more difficult language understanding
tasks and improved resources, which encourages us to evaluate models on SuperGLUE as our main
results. At the same time, we also provide GLUE results for readers’ reference. As shown in Table 8,
the proposed task, which learns from both hierarchical and ordering relationships, also outperform
other baselines on the GLUE benchmark at Small, Base, and Large scales.


F    C OMBINATION WITH OTHER W ORD -L EVEL P RETRAINING M ETHOD

Because the proposed method can easily be added on top of other word-level pretraining methods,
we conduct an experiment to evaluate whether the proposed method improves performance when it
is not combined with MLM. ELECTRA (Clark et al., 2020), another word-level pretraining method,
was adopted as the alternative to MLM in this experiment. We chose ELECTRA because it is
a discriminative pretraining method that performs binary classification to detect replaced words
among all words, making it largely different from MLM, which is generative and predicts masked
words. Although ELECTRA comprises a generator to generate inputs for discrimination and a
discriminator to detect replaced tokens in generated inputs, the generator is discarded after pre-
training, and only the discriminator is used for finetuning. This is why, when combining TSP with
ELECTRA, we applied TSP only to the discriminator and the generation stage remained unchanged.


                                                   14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


          Table 6: Results of MLM-based models on the SuperGLUE development set.

                                          CB           COPA        MultiRC           RTE         WIC     BoolQ         ReCoRD
 Scale   Model                Avg.
                                       Avg. F1/Acc.      Acc.        F1a/EM           Acc.       Acc.       Acc.         F1/Acc.
         MLM                  58.7    83.9/77.6         55.0       67.1/12.8         59.6        61.0      70.7        39.0/48.2
         MLM+NSP (BERT)       60.4    70.7/80.4         58.0       67.0/14.5         66.4        65.8      73.0        38.6/48.1
 Small   MLM+SOP              60.0    71.7/78.6         55.0       67.2/14.8         68.6        63.5      73.2        39.1/48.2
         MLM+SSO              60.0    65.0/75.0         56.0       67.3/14.9         66.4        68.8      73.2        39.3/49.1
         MLM+TSP (ours)       60.7    72.9/80.4         59.0       66.6/15.2         68.6        62.1      73.5        39.7/49.1
         MLM                  71.2    90.6/92.9         63.0       75.1/27.3         73.7        66.9      80.1        64.9/78.0
         MLM+NSP (BERT)       71.6    89.9/92.9         63.0       75.8/28.7         73.8        70.1      79.9        64.1/76.9
  Base   MLM+SOP              70.2    83.7/87.5         66.0       75.1/26.8         72.6        68.7      79.1        62.2/74.6
         MLM+SSO              70.8    86.3/91.1         66.0       75.5/26.7         72.2        70.3      78.9        62.4/74.9
         MLM+TSP (ours)       73.9    88.1/92.9         72.0       79.0/34.1         77.6        68.3      80.6        65.2/78.2
         MLM                  76.4    93.0/94.6         70.0       80.3/35.8         80.7        70.1      83.3        71.7/85.5
         MLM+NSP (BERT)       76.7    93.7/94.6         70.5       81.5/41.6         81.2        69.7      82.5        70.7/84.2
 Large   MLM+SOP              77.0    93.2/94.6         71.0       82.0/43.0         80.9        69.0      83.3        71.1/85.0
         MLM+SSO              77.3    93.6/94.1         71.5       82.9/43.1         82.0        70.2      83.3        70.6/84.2
         MLM+TSP (ours)       78.0    94.3/96.4         72.0       83.3/45.4         82.0        70.5      83.9        71.4/85.0

Table 7: Results of MLM-based models on the GLUE development set. ”Pearson” stands for Pear-
son correlation. ”Spearman” stands for Spearman correlation.

                                 CoLA       SST        MRPC            STS             QQP          MultiNLI          QNLI    RTE
 Scale Model           Avg.
                              Matthew’s Corr Acc.       F1/Acc    Pearson/Spearman     F1/Acc.    matched/unmatched   Acc.     Acc.
      MLM            77.3        47.0       90.0      89.4/85.0    83.6/83.2         84.6/88.5      79.2/80.3         85.2    59.6
      MLM+NSP (BERT) 79.1        44.4       89.8      90.0/85.8    88.4/88.0         85.4/89.1      79.9/81.0         88.3    66.4
Small MLM+SOP        78.4        44.5       89.6      89.2/84.8    85.3/84.8         85.1/88.8      78.8/79.3         86.6    68.6
      MLM+SSO        79.2        45.1       89.6      90.1/85.8    88.2/87.8         85.6/89.2      80.3/81.2         88.7    66.4
      MLM+TSP (ours) 79.8        46.8       89.7      91.0/87.2    87.1/86.7         85.6/89.3      80.2/81.2         88.9    68.6
      MLM            84.6        61.5       93.5      92.2/89.1    89.7/89.5         87.9/91.0      86.6/86.7         91.8    73.7
      MLM+NSP (BERT) 84.3        60.4       93.1      91.5/88.2    90.4/90.1         87.9/91.0      85.3/85.7         91.7    73.8
Base MLM+SOP         83.5        58.1       92.0      91.7/88.5    89.9/89.6         87.7/90.9      84.9/85.2         91.0    72.6
      MLM+SSO        83.9        60.3       92.5      91.6/88.2    90.7/90.3         87.5/90.8      85.0/85.5         91.5    72.2
      MLM+TSP (ours) 85.5        62.5       93.9      92.5/89.7    90.7/90.4         87.8/91.0      86.3/86.6         92.8    77.6
      MLM            86.5        62.5       95.0      92.0/88.8    90.8/90.7         89.0/91.7      88.7/89.1         93.3    80.7
      MLM+NSP (BERT) 86.2        60.2       94.5      92.2/89.2    91.8/91.4         88.8/91.7      88.0/88.3         93.0    81.2
Large MLM+SOP        86.5        61.7       94.6      92.6/89.7    91.6/91.4         88.9/91.7      88.3/88.6         93.0    80.9
      MLM+SSO        86.5        61.5       94.5      92.2/88.8    91.8/91.6         88.8/91.6      88.4/88.5         93.0    82.0
      MLM+TSP (ours) 87.4        64.7       95.1      93.4/90.9    91.8/91.6         89.1/91.9      88.3/89.0         94.1    82.0



Note that, as in the previous experiments, TSP added negligible parameters and computation to the
ELECTRA pretraining.
The experimental results are listed in Table 9. When combined with ELECTRA, the proposed
method could still improve the SuperGLUE score. Because of limited computational resources and
time, we did not perform these experiments beyond the Small-scale, but we expect that the proposed
method would perform well in such cases. Overall, this experiment shows the capability of the
proposed method to be combined with other word-level pretraining methods, thus suggesting the
opportunity to improve such methods via text structure learning in the future.


                                                          15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Table 8: Results of MLM-based models on the GLUE development set. ”Pearson” stands for Pear-
son correlation. ”Spearman” stands for Spearman correlation.

                                    CoLA          SST      MRPC            STS             QQP         MultiNLI          QNLI   RTE
 Scale   Model            Avg.
                                 Matthew’s Corr    Acc.     F1/Acc    Pearson/Spearman     F1/Acc.   matched/unmatched   Acc.   Acc.
         MLM              77.3       47.0         90.0    89.4/85.0    83.6/83.2         84.6/88.5     79.2/80.3         85.2   59.6
         MLM+NSP (BERT)   79.1       44.4         89.8    90.0/85.8    88.4/88.0         85.4/89.1     79.9/81.0         88.3   66.4
 Small   MLM+SOP          78.4       44.5         89.6    89.2/84.8    85.3/84.8         85.1/88.8     78.8/79.3         86.6   68.6
         MLM+SSO          79.2       45.1         89.6    90.1/85.8    88.2/87.8         85.6/89.2     80.3/81.2         88.7   66.4
         MLM+TSP (ours)   79.8       46.8         89.7    91.0/87.2    87.1/86.7         85.6/89.3     80.2/81.2         88.9   68.6
         MLM              84.6       61.5         93.5    92.2/89.1    89.7/89.5         87.9/91.0     86.6/86.7         91.8   73.7
         MLM+NSP (BERT)   84.3       60.4         93.1    91.5/88.2    90.4/90.1         87.9/91.0     85.3/85.7         91.7   73.8
 Base    MLM+SOP          83.5       58.1         92.0    91.7/88.5    89.9/89.6         87.7/90.9     84.9/85.2         91.0   72.6
         MLM+SSO          83.9       60.3         92.5    91.6/88.2    90.7/90.3         87.5/90.8     85.0/85.5         91.5   72.2
         MLM+TSP (ours)   85.5       62.5         93.9    92.5/89.7    90.7/90.4         87.8/91.0     86.3/86.6         92.8   77.6
         MLM              86.5       62.5         95.0    92.0/88.8    90.8/90.7         89.0/91.7     88.7/89.1         93.3   80.7
         MLM+NSP (BERT)   86.2       60.2         94.5    92.2/89.2    91.8/91.4         88.8/91.7     88.0/88.3         93.0   81.2
 Large   MLM+SOP          86.5       61.7         94.6    92.6/89.7    91.6/91.4         88.9/91.7     88.3/88.6         93.0   80.9
         MLM+SSO          86.5       61.5         94.5    92.2/88.8    91.8/91.6         88.8/91.6     88.4/88.5         93.0   82.0
         MLM+TSP (ours)   87.4       64.7         95.1    93.4/90.9    91.8/91.6         89.1/91.9     88.3/89.0         94.1   82.0


Table 9: Results of ELECTRA-based models on the SuperGLUE development set. TSP performs
well even when combined with another word-level pretraining method that is vastly different from
MLM.

                                 Scale            Model                     SuperGLUE
                                                  ELECTRA                      57.4
                                                  ELECTRA+NSP                  58.6
                                 Small            ELECTRA+SOP                  58.5
                                                  ELECTRA+SSO                  60.6
                                                  ELECTRA+TSP                  60.7


                                                               16
