Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


R EVISITING P OPULATIONS
IN M ULTI -AGENT C OMMUNICATION

 Paul Michel∗ Mathieu Rita             Kory Mathewson         Olivier Tieleman      Angeliki Lazaridou
 ENS-PSL      INRIA, Paris             DeepMind               DeepMind              DeepMind



                                               A BSTRACT

            Despite evidence from sociolinguistics that larger groups of speakers tend to
            develop more structured languages, the use of populations has failed to yield
            significant benefits in emergent multi-agent communication. In this paper we
            reassess the validity of the standard training protocol and illustrate its limitations.
            Specifically, we analyze population-level communication at the equilibrium in
            sender-receiver Lewis games. We find that receivers co-adapt to senders they
            are interacting with, which limits the effect of the population. Informed by this
            analysis, we propose an alternative training protocol based on “partitioning” agents.
            Partitioning isolates sender-receiver pairs, limits co-adaptation, and results in a new
            global optimization objective where agents maximize (1) their respective ”internal”
            communication accuracy and (2) their alignment with other agents. In experiments,
            we find that agents trained in partitioned populations are able to communicate
            successfully with new agents which they have never interacted with and tend to
            develop a shared language. Moreover, we observe that larger populations develop
            languages that are more compositional. Our findings suggest that scaling up to
            populations in multi-agent communication can be beneficial, but that it matters
            how we scale up.1


1       I NTRODUCTION
Uncovering the mechanisms that underlie our ability to communicate using language is an important
stepping stone towards developing machine learning models that are capable of coordinating and
interacting via natural language. Over the last few years, there has been increasing interest in
simulating the emergence of language using artificial agents trained with reinforcement learning to
communicate to achieve a cooperative task (Lazaridou & Baroni, 2020). Typically, agents are trained
to perform a variant of the Lewis signaling game (Lewis, 1969; Skyrms, 2010) wherein a sender
emits a message describing an object and a receiver attempts to reconstruct the object based on the
description. This line of work has applications to semi-supervised learning. For example, agents
that develop languages exhibiting universal properties of natural languages may be used as useful
initialization for downstream tasks such as image captioning (Lazaridou et al., 2020) or representation
learning (Dessı̀ et al., 2021).
Most previous research has focused on communication between a single pair of agents. However,
there is mounting evidence that the communication protocols developed in this restricted setting
become highly specialized and exhibit properties that are at odds with those found in human languages
(Bouchacourt & Baroni, 2018; Chaabouni et al., 2019): for example agents are able to solve the task
successfully while using languages that are not compositional (Kottur et al., 2017; Chaabouni et al.,
2020). These idiosyncrasies of the emergent languages can preclude their use in practical applications
(Lazaridou et al., 2020). As a possible solution, a growing body of work is advocating for scaling
up the emergent communication literature to populations of more than two agents communicating
simultaneously (Harding Graesser et al., 2019; Kim & Oh, 2021; Rita et al., 2022a; Chaabouni
et al., 2022). Indeed, there is substantial evidence within the language sciences that population
dynamics shape the language structure Raviv et al. (2019); Nölle et al. (2020). In spite of this fact,
several negative results have been obtained, showing that training agents in population yield marginal
    ∗
        Now at DeepMind. Contact at pmichel31415@gmail.com.
    1
        Code to reproduce our experiments can be found at https://github.com/pmichel31415/EGG


                                                      1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


benefits without explicit pressure towards e.g. population diversity (Rita et al., 2022a) or emulation
mechanisms (Chaabouni et al., 2022).
In this paper, we call into question the way such populations are trained. By studying a simple
referential game, we evaluate populations on two desirable features observed in natural language:
• Agents are able to communicate with new partners within the same population (Gupta et al., 2021)
• Larger populations tend to develop more structured languages (Nölle et al., 2020).
We provide evidence that populations of artificial agents do not always possess these features (as
also attested by previous work, e.g. Kim & Oh (2021); Chaabouni et al. (2022)). To shed light on
this phenomenon, we analyze the behaviour of agents in a population at the equilibrium (§2). We
find that with the standard training procedure, the functional form of the objective is the same as
that of a single pair of agents, due to receivers co-adapting to their training partners. As our main
contribution, we propose an alternative training procedure which partitions sender-receiver pairs and
limits co-adaptation of receiver agents (§3). We show that this new training paradigm maximizes a
different objective at the population level. In particular, it explicitly promotes mutual-intelligibility
across different agents.
In experiments, we find that agents trained in partitioned populations are able to communicate
successfully with new communication partners with which they have never interacted during training,
and that languages spoken by various agents tend to be similar to one another (§5). In addition, we
observe that (1) languages developed in partitioned populations tend to be more compositional and
(2) there is a population size effect whereby larger populations develop more structured languages
(§6). Our results show that there are multiple ways to generalize from single agent pairs to larger
populations, and that these design choices matter when it comes to studying the emergent language.
2     C OMMUNICATION G AME
We study communication in referential games, a variant of the Lewis signaling game (Lewis, 1969)
proposed by Lazaridou et al. (2017). The game proceeds as follows: during each round, a sender
agent π observes an object x ∈ X (e.g., an arbitrary categorical entity, or a natural images) sampled
from input space X according to distribution p and generates a message m ∼ π(· | x). Messages
consist of variable length sequences of tokens picked from a discrete vocabulary V . Note that the
tokens themselves are arbitrary and meaningless (typically they are represented as numbers from
1 to |V |). A receiver agent ρ then observes message m and must predict the original object from
among a set of candidates C = {x, y1 , . . . y|C−1| } containing x and |C| − 1 distractors, where each
distractor y is sampled uniformly without replacement from the input space excluding the original
object, X \ {x}. Concretely, this is implemented by calculating a score f (y, m) for each candidate y
                                                                                              f (x,m)
and defining the probability of a candidate conditioned on the message ρ(· | m, C) as P e f (y,m) .
                                                                                              y∈C
Based on the receiver’s success, the sender agent receives a reward R(x, ρ(· | m, C)).
In practice, both senders and receivers are implemented as neural networks πθ and ρψ with parameters
θ and ψ estimated by gradient descent. The sender is trained to maximize its expected reward using the
REINFORCE algorithm (Williams, 1992), while the receiver maximizes the expected log-likelihood
of identifying the original object, log ρψ (x | m, C) (also known as the InfoNCE objective; Oord
et al. (2018)). Denoting as Ex∼p the expectation over x sampled from p, the corresponding training
objectives are:
                          Js (θ) = Ex∼p Em∼πθ (·|x) EC∼p R(x, ρψ (· | m, C))                       (1)
                          Jr (ψ) = Ex∼p Em∼πθ (·|x) EC∼p log ρψ (x | m, C)                            (2)

2.1   P OPULATION L EVEL T RAINING

The two-player referential game can be generalized to larger populations of agents (Mordatch &
Abbeel, 2018; Chaabouni et al., 2022). In the most general case, we consider a population of Ns
senders and Nr receivers that are linked by a bipartite communication graph G defining connections
between senders and receiver (πθi , ρψj ) (Harding Graesser et al., 2019; Kim & Oh, 2021). At
training time, sender-receiver pairs are repeatedly sampled and trained to perform a round of the
game. Importantly, only agent pairs that are connected in the communication graph are sampled.
Throughout this paper, we will refer to this type of training as Standard training.


                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


With this training procedure, agents are trained to maximize their communicative success with all
their neighbors in the communication graph. Let N G (i) refer to the neighbors of the i-th node in
the graph, and Js,i→j (respectively Jr,i→j ) denote the objective of πθi (respectively ρψj )) in the
pairwise communication from sender i to receiver j. We can write the overall objective for sender i
(and receiver j, respectively) as:
                    1      X                                        1       X
   Js,i (θi ) =                  Js,i→j (θi ) and Jr,j (ψj ) =                    Jr,i→j (ψj ). (3)
                | N G (i)|                                      | N G (j)|
                         j∈N G (i)                                                i∈N G (j)


At test time, the population is evaluated by averaging the referential accuracy across all possible
sender-receiver pairings. Following previous work, in this paper we focus on populations with an
equal number N := Ns = Nr of senders and receivers, meaning that there are up to N 2 possible
pairings.

2.2   W HAT DOES P OPULATION - LEVEL T RAINING O PTIMIZE ?

To shed light on the differences between training a single agent pair and training a population of
agents, we analyze the objective optimized by the population. Inspired by (Rita et al., 2022b)’s
analysis in the two-player case, we study the behaviour of the population at the optimum, that is when
senders and receivers have reached a Nash equilibrium (Osborne & Rubinstein, 1994).
In this section, we make the simplifying assumption that C = X . In other words, receiver agents must
pick the correct candidate out of all possible objects in X . This allows us to remove the conditioning
on C and write ρψ (x | m, C) = ρψ (x | m). We make this simplification to reduce clutter in notations.
Nevertheless, our key observations still hold for C ̸= X (see Appendix C for a detailed discussion).
At a Nash equilibrium, the optimal receiver parameters ψj∗ satisfy
                                                         1        X
                ρψj∗ = arg max Jr,j (ψj ) = arg max                             Jr,i→j (ψj ).          (4)
                          ψj                   ψj   | N G (j)|
                                                                    i∈N G (j)


Assuming that receiver ρψj has high enough capacity, and training is able to reach the global optimum,
the solution of the optimization problem in Equation 4 has an analytical solution ρψj∗ which can be
                          ∗
                                  (m | x) := | N G1 (j)| i∈N G (j) πθi∗ (m | x), the mixture of all senders
                                                        P
written as a function of πN G (j)
communicating with receiver j:
                                                             ∗
                                       ∗
                                                            πN G (j)
                                                                     (m | x)p(x)
                       ρψj∗ (x | m) = πN G (j)
                                               (x | m) =          ∗                  .
                                                            Ey∼p πN G (j)
                                                                          (m | y)
                                                       ∗
In other words, ρψj∗ is the posterior associated with πN G (j)
                                                               (full derivation in appendix B).
An important implication of this result is that when the population graph is fully connected (all
senders
 Pn
          are connected to all receivers), each receiver converges to the same optimum π ∗ (x | m) =
   i=1P i (m|x)p(x)
       π θ
Ey∼p n                , the posterior of the mixture of all senders in the population. Plugging this back
        i=1 πθi (m|x)
into each sender’s objective, we have
                             Js,i (θi∗ ) = Ex∼p Em∼πθ∗ (·|x) R(x, π ∗ (· | m))
                                                        i

Summing across all senders, we can rewrite the global objective optimized by the senders as
                                     max
                                      ∗
                                         Ex∼p Em∼π∗ R(x, π ∗ (· | m)).                                 (5)
                                      θ

In other words, at the equilibrium, the population maximizes the expected reward of the “sender
ensemble” π ∗ , rather than that of individual agents πθi∗ : the objective of a population N agents is
functionally the same irrespective of N . We postulate that this indifference to the population size
may account for the surprising lack of effect of larger populations observed in some previous work
(Rita et al., 2022a; Chaabouni et al., 2022). Differences in behaviour must be attributed to effects
stemming from training dynamics (e.g. it becomes more difficult for receivers to learn the posterior
π ∗ (x | m)), or be imposed through extraneous modifications of the population objective (for example
explicit imitation components; Chaabouni et al. (2022)).


                                                    3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A second observation is that there is no direct pressure for agents that communicate at training time
to develop the same language. Indeed, it is entirely possible that all senders develop different but
non-overlapping languages: it suffices that no two senders communicating with a shared receiver
use the same message m to describe a different object. In this case receivers can simply learn their
neighboring sender’s languages and there is no need for the senders to converge to a unified language.

3     PARTITIONING AGENTS
A key difference between the usual population                                       Sender gradient (      )
setting and populations of humans in laboratory              Sender     Receiver
                                                                                    Receiver gradient (      )
experiments is that agents are not usually split
into “senders” and “receivers”. Rather, each par-
ticipant in the experiment assumes both a sender
and receiver role (Galke et al., 2022). Our hy-
pothesis is that, counter to what is customary
in the emergent communication literature, tying
senders and receivers is key in surfacing useful
population-level dynamics in multi-agent com-
munication.                                         Figure 1: In the standard setting (left), both
                                                    receivers (in blue) are trained by maximizing
To operationalize this sender-receiver coupling, their discrimination objective with respect to both
we identify an “agent” as a sender-receiver senders. With partitioning, receiver ρ (resp.
                                                                                                        ψ1
pair. During training, we only train receiver ρψi ρ ) is only trained to maximize its communica-
                                                     ψ2
with its associated sender πθi . In other words, tion objective with sender π (resp. π )
                                                                                 θ1                 θ2
Jr,i (ψi ) := Jr,i→i (ψi ). In doing so, we “parti-
tion” the agents by preventing receiver i from co-adapting to other senders j ̸= i. This procedure is
illustrated in Figure 1. Note that senders can nevertheless still train with rewards from neighboring
receivers, and so communication across agents can still emerge. Importantly, partitioning prevents
receivers from learning to recognize multiple languages, as they are now only trained on messages
emitted by a single sender.
Following a similar analysis as Section 2.2, we derive that at the optimum, receiver ρψi∗ (x | m) now
                                                                                               πθ∗ (m|x)p(x)
takes the form of the posterior associated with its respective sender, πθi∗ (x | m) = Eiy∼p πm|y
(derivation in Appendix B). We can thus write the population-level objective at the equilibrium as
       N
          "                                                                                    #
    1 X                                              X
            Ex∼p Em∼πθ∗ (·|x) R(x, πθi∗ (· | m)) +         Ex∼p Em∼πθ∗ (·|x) R(x, πθj∗ (· | m)) . (6)
   N i=1 |               i
                               {z              } j∈N G (i)           i

                    Internal communication         |                {z                        }
                                                                     Mutual intelligibility

Note that the functional form of the objective can now be decomposed into two parts: an “internal
communication” objective which takes the same form as that of a single pair of agents, and a “mutual
intelligibility” objective which enforces that neighboring agents are able to communicate successfully.
In experiments, we show that this explicit pressure towards mutual intelligibility promotes the
emergence of a single language within the population, which in turn enables agents to communicate
with new partners outside of their training neighborhood.
4     E XPERIMENTAL S ETTING
4.1   DATASETS
We perform experiments on two datasets: a simple, synthetic “attribute/values” dataset and a more
realistic image dataset.

Attribute/Values In this dataset, each object is represent by a collection of abstract “attributes”.
Specifically, each input x is a vector of 4 attributes, each of which can take 10 total values. This
results in 104 total attribute/value combinations (Kottur et al., 2017; Chaabouni et al., 2020). In
each setting we hold out 1, 000 combinations to be used as a validation, and 1, 000 more for use
as a test set. We can thus ensure that we are evaluating the agents’ ability to generalize to unseen
combinations of attributes.


                                                      4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


ImageNet In addition to toy objects, we perform experiments with referential games based on more
realistic objects. Following Chaabouni et al. (2022), we use the ImageNet (Deng et al., 2009) dataset
of natural images. The dataset consists of about 1.4M training images collected on the internet and
annotated for 1,000 labels from the WordNet database (Miller, 1995). Images are first encoded as
2048-sized real-valued vectors with a (frozen) ResNet pre-trained with BYOL (Grill et al., 2020)
before being passed to sender and receivers.

4.2   G AME A RCHITECTURE

Both sender and receiver agents are based on 1 layer LSTMs (Hochreiter & Schmidhuber, 1997) with
embedding and hidden dimensions of size 256. Specifically, the sender first encodes the object x into
a vector of size 256, which is concatenated to the input of the LSTM. At each step, the output of
the LSTM cell is passed through a fully connected layer to produce logits of size |V |. A softmax
function is then applied to obtain normalized probabilities over the vocabulary. During training,
messages are generated by sampling from the distribution whereas at test time we generate messages
deterministically via greedy decoding. In both cases, generation stops whenever a special “<EOS>”
is generated, or when the number of tokens reaches a fixed limit L.
The receiver encodes the message with an LSTM encoder, the output of which is the fed into a
fully connected layer to yield a vector of size 512. The candidate objects C are then scored by
computing the dot product of this vector with a 512-dimensional encoding of each candidate. The
conditional distribution over candidates is then obtained by taking a softmax. We set the reward
function for the sender to the log-likelihood assigned by the receiver to the correct candidate,
R(x, ρψ (· | m)) = log ρψ (x | m).
Throughout all experiments, we set the vocabulary size |V | to 20 and the maximum length of the
messages, L, to 10. This means that the communication channel used by the agents has a capacity
of about 2010 which ensures that there is no communication bottleneck (the size of the channel is
several orders of magnitude larger than the size of our datasets). Our implementation, based on the
EGG toolkit (Kharitonov et al., 2021), will be open-sourced upon de-anonymization.


4.3   P OPULATION TRAINING

We train populations following the procedure outlined by
Chaabouni et al. (2022): for each minibatch of data, we
sample K pairs from the population (uniformly among
the pairs linked in the communication graph). Each pair
plays an episode of the game, and the agents are updated
simultaneously following the gradients of their respective
objectives. We take K = max(10, N ) to ensure that each
agent plays the game at least once at every step on aver-
age. This procedure needs to be modified for partitioned
populations: since receiver j is only with its respective (a) Fully-connected           (b) Circular
sender instead of with all of its neighbors, there is now
only a |NG1(j)| chance that receiver j will be updated every Figure 2: Example of communication
                                                               graphs used in this paper
step (the probability that the pair (j, j) is sampled). For
larger populations, especially those that are fully-connected, this dramatically slows down training as
receivers are updated very infrequently. To address this issue, we modify the procedure as follows:
for every sampled agent pair (πθi , ρψj ), we calculate both Js,i→j and Jr,i→i and update both πθi and
ρψi . Note that this necessitates calculating both ρψj (x | m, C) and ρψi (x | m, C) and therefore we
incur a small computational overhead. However we only observe a ∼ 5% increase in training time
due to the fact that we are back-propagating through only one of the two receivers, ρψi (x | m, C).
With this modification, we recover the property that each agent (sender or receiver) is updated once
every step on average.
In all experiments we train with a batch size of 1024 with the Adam optimizer (Kingma & Ba, 2014)
using a learning rate of 0.001 for the attribute/value dataset and 0.0001 for Imagenet. The other
parameters are set to β1 = 0.9, β2 = 0.999 and ε = 10−8 . We apply ℓ2 regularization with a
coefficient of 10−5 .


                                                  5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Table 1: Accuracies with training partners and new partners on both datasets. Numbers are reported
with standard deviation across all pairs for 3 independent experiments

                                         ImageNet                      Attribute/Values
                                  Standard    Partitioned          Standard       Partitioned
          Training partners      97.09 ±1.10     99.75 ± 0.08    99.88 ± 0.15    99.81 ± 0.22
            New partners         5.41 ±13.57     96.24 ± 3.25    7.81 ± 18.28    40.37 ± 29.44
Table 2: Language similarity between training partners and new partners on both datasets. Numbers
are reported with standard deviation across all pairs for 3 independent experiments

                                          ImageNet                    Attribute/Values
                                    Standard   Partitioned         Standard     Partitioned
             Training partners     0.28 ± 0.07     0.40 ± 0.02   0.28 ± 0.05     0.36 ± 0.01
               New partners        0.22 ± 0.19     0.37 ± 0.15   0.23 ± 0.19     0.31 ± 0.17

We systematically augment the sender objectives with an entropy maximizing term, which has been
found to encourage exploration (Williams & Peng, 1991). The coefficient for this entropy term is
set to 0.1 in all experiments. To reduce the variance of the policy gradient in REINFORCE, we
substract a baseline computed by taking the average reward within a mini-batch for each pair (Sutton
et al., 1999). We evaluate the population every epoch (every 5 epochs for the Attribute/Value dataset)
on the validation set. We only evaluate on up to 100 unique pairs sampled uniformly within the
population, this time without consideration for the communication graph. We train for a fixed number
of epochs, selecting the best model based on the average validation accuracy across all evaluation
pairs. Although convergence is not guaranteed in this general-sum communication game, in all
reported experiments we find that agents converge reliably with our choice of hyper-parameters.
5     C OMMUNICATION WITH N EW PARTNERS
In our first set of experiments, we evaluate the ability of agents trained in populations to communicate
with partners they haven’t interacted with during training.
5.1 C IRCULAR P OPULATIONS
Specifically, we study “circular” populations of agents arranged on a ring lattice. Each agent (sender-
receiver pair) i is only trained with neighboring agents i − 1, . . . , i + 1 and the graph is cyclical (see
Figure 6a). We choose this type of population because it is an extreme case of a population where
each agent has the same, minimal amount of neighbors (two), yet there is still a path between any two
agents. In this context, training partners are sender-receiver pairs that are connected in the graph and
have interacted during the training phase whereas new partners refers to pairs that have not interacted
during training. Experiments with other population types are reported in Appendix D.
We report results along two metrics:
• Communication Accuracy of sender/receiver pairs on an evaluation set. This measures how
  successful the pair is in communicating.
• Language Similarity between senders. This metric (also called synchronization in Rita et al.
  (2022a)) is calculated as 1 − δi,j , where δi,j is the normalized edit distance between messages
  output by two senders, averaged across all objects in our evaluation set.
We report these metrics for both training partners and new partners. Note that high communication
accuracy does not always entail similar languages: it is possible for the receivers to achieve high
accuracy despite all senders sending different messages for any given object (it is only necessary for
a given message to unambiguously refer to one object across senders).

5.2   PARTITIONING E NABLES S UCCESSFUL Z ERO -S HOT C OMMUNICATION

In Table 1 and 2, we report accuracies and similarities for circular populations of 20 sender-receiver
pairs trained on ImageNet and the Attribute/Values dataset. All metrics are calculated on the test set
and averaged across 3 independent experiments.


                                                     6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                    100                                                                              standard
                                                                         0.4
                     80                                                                              partitioned


                                                            Similarity
                     60


         Accuracy
                                              standard                   0.3
                     40                       partitioned
                     20                                                  0.2
                      0
                          0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10                               0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
                                   Distance                                              Distance
                              (a) Accuracy                                         (b) Similarity2

Figure 3: Accuracy and language similarity as a function of the distance between two agents in the
communication graph.

We observe that in populations following the standard training paradigm (Standard), there is a stark
discrepancy between training and new partners. Indeed, on both datasets the accuracy with training
partners reaches a very high value, above 95%. Yet, the accuracy when agents communicate with
new partners drops down to less than 10%. On the other hand, in Partitioned populations, agents
reach a much higher accuracy with non-neighbors, up to 96% on ImageNet and 40%. A similar trend
holds for language similarity.
Note that all metrics on new partners exhibit high standard deviation. An explanation is that among
non-neighboring pairs there is a different behaviour depending on how far the two agents are in the
population. This is verified in Figure 3, which displays a breakdown as a function of the distance
between two agents in the communication graph (on ImageNet). We find that without partitioning,
accuracy drops off sharply to close to 0 for agents at a distance ≥ 2, whereas it decreases almost
linearly with the distance in the partitioned case, down to about 95% for the most distant agents.

5.3   T RAINING DYNAMICS
We further investigate the evolution of accuracies during training. In Figure 4, we plot the evaluation
accuracies of both standard and partitioned populations broken down by distance between pairs,
focusing on the ImageNet dataset. Note that there are two training phases in the standard case. Up to
epoch ≈ 10, the accuracy for all training pairs increases, after which agents over-fit to their training
partners (distances 0 and 1) and the accuracy on other pairs decreases to a plateau.
On the other hand, Figure 4b illustrates the pressure for mutual-intelligibility in partitioned popula-
tions: as accuracy between training pairs reaches close to 99% accuracy (around epoch 20), accuracies
across distant pairs increases rapidly before plateauing above 90%. In fact, our results show that the
most distant accuracies are still increasing after 150 epochs, albeit very slowly.

6     PARTITIONED P OPULATION D EVELOP M ORE C OMPOSITIONAL L ANGUAGES
In this section, we investigate the effect of partitioning on the structure of the language, with a focus
on compositionality.
6.1   M EASURING C OMPOSITIONALITY
A language is said to be compositional (Szabó, 2020) when the meaning of a whole utterance can
be systematically deduced from the meaning of its components (i.e. words). It has been argued
that compositionality makes languages easier to learn (Davidson, 1965). Consequently, emergent
communication protocols that are compositional may ultimately be easier to understand by humans.
A common metric for measuring compositionality in emergent languages is the topographic similarity
(Brighton & Kirby, 2006; Lazaridou et al., 2018). Topographic similarity captures the intuition that a
compositional language will map similar “meanings” to similar messages: the phrase “a red bird” is
more similar to the phrase “a blue bird” than to “a powerful computer”. In practice, the topographic
similarity is computed by measuring the Spearman rank correlation coefficient (Spearman, 1904)
between (1) the pairwise distances across all objects and (2) the pairwise distance across all messages.
  2
    By construction, the similarity of a sender with itself (corresponding to a distance of 0) is always one. We
omit this value from the figure to better illustrate the trends for distance ≥ 1.


                                                            7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


               100                                                       100
               80                                                         80
                                                                                                                 Distance
               60                                                         60                                          0


         acc
                                                                                                                      2


                                                                   acc
               40                                                         40                                          4
                                                                                                                      6
               20                                                         20                                          8
                                                                                                                      10
                0                                                          0                                          All
                     0   25     50    75     100   125   150                   0   20    40   60     80    100 120 140
                                     epoch                                                         epoch
                              (a) Standard                                              (b) Partitioned

Figure 4: Evolution of validation accuracy during training across agent pairs at various distances in
the communication graph. Results are aggregated over all agent pairs and 3 populations.


6.2   E FFECT OF P OPULATION S IZE ON C OMPOSITIONALITY
We run experiments on our Attribute/Values dataset, with both standard and partitioned populations
that are fully-connected (see Figure 6d). Population sizes range from 2 to 25 sender-receiver pairs.
We compute topographic similarity using the Hamming distance in the object space (the distance
between two objects is the number of attributes in which they differ) and the normalized edit distance
between messages. In Figure 5a, we observe that while standard population-level training does
increase the topographic similarity of the language overall, population size has very little effect:
populations of sizes 3 and 20 both reach about the same value of 30 on average. On the other hand,
partitioning greatly increases the effect of population size on compositionality: populations of size
20 have a significantly higher topographic similarity than populations of size 5, with a ≈ 10 points
difference.


6.3   C O - ADAPTATION IS R ESPONSIBLE FOR THE D ECREASE IN C OMPOSITIONALITY
Up until this point, we have described partitioning (or lack thereof) as a binary choice. However, it is
possible to partition a population only partially, by allowing receiver j to train with senders i ̸= j
occasionally with probability α > 0. In doing so, the optimal receiver now becomes the posterior
associated with a mixture between πθi∗ (m | x) and π ∗ (m | x) (see Appendix B for the derivation). If
0 < α < 1, receivers are now optimizing for a different objective (as in partitioned populations), but
some amount of co-adaptation is still allowed. We perform this experiment on the Attribute/Values
dataset with a fully connected population of size 10, varying the degree of co-adaptation α ranging
in {0, 0.1, 0.5, 0.9, 1}. α = 0 corresponds to partitioned training whereas α = 1 is equivalent to
standard training. All populations converge to > 99% accuracy. However, in Figure 5b we find that
topographic similarity drops as soon as we introduce minimal amounts of co-adaptation (α = 0.1)
and decreases steadily to the level of standard populations as α grows to 1. This further corroborates
our hypothesis that reducing co-adaptation promotes the emergence of a more structured language,
and that eliminating it altogether (in a partitioned population) yields the best results.

6.4   I MPORTANCE OF M UTUAL I NTELLIGIBILITY
Recall that the objective of a partitioned population at the equilibrium (Equation 6) can be decomposed
in two terms: an “internal communication” corresponding to the single agent pair objective and a
“mutual intelligibility” term which encourages senders to align their languages. Importantly, the
latter is the only element that separates a partitioned population from a collection of isolated agents.
To measure its effect on the compositionality of the emergent language, we train fully connected
populations of size 10 and decrease the relative weight of the mutual intelligibility term. This is
implemented by making the pair (πθi , ρθi ) more likely to be sampled than other pairs (πθi , ρθj ),
j ̸= i by a factor × 1−ββ . We let β range from 0.5 (partitioned population) to 0.0 (collection of
isolated sender-receiver pairs). In Figure 5c, we find that emergent languages retain high topographic
similarity even at small β, and the sharp drop-off occurs only when β is very close to 0. This confirms
that the mutual intelligibility term exerts a strong pressure towards compositionality. We investigate
the evolution of the two terms during training in Appendix E.

                                                               8
 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                                                                                                                    40


                                                                                                                                           Topographic similarity
                                                                     Topographic similarity
Topographic similarity
                         40                                                                   40
                                                                                              38                                                                    35
                         35
                                                                                              36
                         30                                                                                                                                         30
                                                       standard
                                                                                              34
                         25                            partitioned                            32                                                                    25
                                                       Single Pair                            30
                              2345   10      15        20       25                                 0.0    0.2    0.4    0.6    0.8   1.0                                 0.0    0.1    0.2     0.3    0.4     0.5
                                     Population size                                                     Co-adaptation probability                                       Mutual Intelligibility relative weight
  (a) Topographic similarity as a func- (b) Topographic similarity with (c) Topographic similarity when ab-
  tion of population size on an at- varying degrees of partitioning (pop- lating the mutual-intelligibility term
  tribute/value communication game. ulations of size 10).                 (populations of size 10).
                          Figure 5: Influence of partitioning on the topographic similarity of the emergent languages.

  7                           R ELATED W ORK
There is a rich history of modeling the emergence of language as the solution to a cooperative game
that can be traced back to functional theories of language (Wittgenstein, 1953; Austin, 1962; Clark,
1996). With a regain of interest for the study of language evolution (Crawford & Sobel, 1982;
Christiansen & Kirby, 2003), a rich literature has developed around computational simulations of
the emergence of language based on simple language games (Lewis, 1969; Skyrms, 2010; Batali,
1998; Cangelosi & Parisi, 2002). Examples include studying evolutionary models of the emergence
of grammar (Nowak & Komarova, 2001), the influence of cultural transmission (Brighton & Kirby,
2006), game theoretical considerations (Huttegger et al., 2014) or linguistic diversity (Livingstone &
Fyfe, 1999) among others.
 The recent success of deep learning in natural language processing has spurred interest in studying
 signaling games between deep neural network trained with reinforcement learning to solve a signaling
 game (Lazaridou et al., 2017; Foerster et al., 2016). Several follow-ups have taken this idea further
 by extending it to more complex games or environment (Sukhbaatar et al., 2016; Havrylov & Titov,
 2017; Jaques et al., 2019; Das et al., 2019) or by adding an element of competition (Singh et al., 2018;
 Noukhovitch et al., 2021) or negotiation (Cao et al., 2018) or even explicit pressure towards certain
 desirable properties (Kottur et al., 2017; Choi et al., 2018; Li & Bowling, 2019; Ren et al., 2019).
 In parallel, several efforts have been made to understand the properties of the emergent languages
 (Bouchacourt & Baroni, 2018; Chaabouni et al., 2019; 2020).
Within this growing literature, many authors have explicitly studied the use of populations of more than
two agents. Various works have argued for augmenting populations with an explicit pressure towards
more structure languages, via e.g. generational transmission (Cogswell et al., 2019), adversarial
regularization (Tieleman et al., 2019), varying learning speeds (Rita et al., 2022a) or imitation learning
and voting (Chaabouni et al., 2022). Although the focus is often on fully-connected populations,
some authors have explored more complex communication graphs, for the purpose of modeling
contact linguistics (Harding Graesser et al., 2019) or the effect of social network structure on the
language (Dubova et al., 2020). Recent work from Kim & Oh (2021) is perhaps closest to our own:
the authors study the effect of population size and connectivity in the standard training paradigm.
The purpose of this paper is to highlight the impact of the training procedure on these very effects.

  8                           C ONCLUSION
 Empirical findings in socio-linguistics suggest that population dynamics should help in simple
 sender-receiver communication games. In this paper, we observed that populations trained by naively
 extending the simple 1-1 protocol to N × N agent pairs fail to exhibit some of the properties that
 are observed in human populations. Motivated by an analysis of populations at the equilibrium, we
 described an alternative training paradigm, based on agents partitioning to reduce co-adaptation.
 Empirically, we find that partitioning enables us to recover some of the aforementioned properties.
 Our findings call attention to the fact that there is more than one way to generalize two single to many
 agents, and simple design choices can have a great impact on the training dynamics and ultimately the
 effect of population on the emergent language. Beyond emergent communication, we hope that this
 observation can inspire similar work in other cooperative multi-agent problems where co-adaptation
 between agents may counteract population effects.


                                                                                                                  9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


R EFERENCES
John Langshaw Austin. How to do things with words. Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA,
  1962.
John Batali. Computational simulations of the emergence of grammar. Approaches to the evolution
  of language: Social and cognitive bases, pp. 405, 1998.
Diane Bouchacourt and Marco Baroni. How agents see things: On visual representations in an
  emergent language game. In Proceedings of the 2018 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
  Language Processing (EMNLP), pp. 981–985, 2018.
Henry Brighton and Simon Kirby. Understanding linguistic evolution by visualizing the emergence
  of topographic mappings. Artificial life, 12(2):229–242, 2006.
Angelo Cangelosi and Domenico Parisi. Computer simulation: A new scientific approach to the
  study of language evolution. In Simulating the evolution of language, pp. 3–28. Springer, 2002.
Kris Cao, Angeliki Lazaridou, Marc Lanctot, Joel Z Leibo, Karl Tuyls, and Stephen Clark. Emergent
  communication through negotiation. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Learning
  Representations (ICLR), 2018.
Rahma Chaabouni, Eugene Kharitonov, Emmanuel Dupoux, and Marco Baroni. Anti-efficient
  encoding in emergent communication. In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual Conference on Neural
  Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), volume 32, 2019.
Rahma Chaabouni, Eugene Kharitonov, Diane Bouchacourt, Emmanuel Dupoux, and Marco Baroni.
  Compositionality and generalization in emergent languages. In Proceedings of the 8th Annual
  Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL), pp. 4427–4442, 2020.
Rahma Chaabouni, Florian Strub, Florent Altché, Eugene Tarassov, Corentin Tallec, Elnaz Davoodi,
  Kory Wallace Mathewson, Olivier Tieleman, Angeliki Lazaridou, and Bilal Piot. Emergent com-
  munication at scale. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Learning Representations
  (ICLR), 2022.
Edward Choi, Angeliki Lazaridou, and Nando de Freitas. Compositional obverter communication
  learning from raw visual input. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Learning
  Representations (ICLR), 2018.
Morten H Christiansen and Simon Ed Kirby. Language evolution. Oxford University Press, 2003.
Hebert Clark. Using Language. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK, 1996.
Michael Cogswell, Jiasen Lu, Stefan Lee, Devi Parikh, and Dhruv Batra. Emergence of compositional
 language with deep generational transmission. arXiv preprint arXiv:1904.09067, 2019.
Vincent P Crawford and Joel Sobel. Strategic information transmission. Econometrica: Journal of
  the Econometric Society, pp. 1431–1451, 1982.
Abhishek Das, Théophile Gervet, Joshua Romoff, Dhruv Batra, Devi Parikh, Mike Rabbat, and Joelle
  Pineau. Tarmac: Targeted multi-agent communication. In Proceedings of the 36th International
  Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), pp. 1538–1546. PMLR, 2019.
Donald Davidson. Theories of meaning and learnable languages. In Yehoshua Bar-Hillel (ed.),
 Proceedings of the 1964 International Congress for Logic, Methodology, and Philosophy of
 Science, pp. 383–394. Amsterdam: North-Holland, 1965.
Jia Deng, Wei Dong, Richard Socher, Li-Jia Li, Kai Li, and Li Fei-Fei. Imagenet: A large-scale
   hierarchical image database. In Proceedings of the 22nd IEEE Conference on Computer Vision
   and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 248–255, 2009.
Roberto Dessı̀, Eugene Kharitonov, and Marco Baroni. Interpretable agent communication from
  scratch (with a generic visual processor emerging on the side). arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.04258,
  2021.


                                               10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Marina Dubova, Arsenii Kirillovich Moskvichev, and Rob Goldstone. Reinforcement communication
 learning in different social network structures. In Language in Reinforcement Learning Workshop
 2020, 2020.
Jakob Foerster, Ioannis Alexandros Assael, Nando De Freitas, and Shimon Whiteson. Learning to
  communicate with deep multi-agent reinforcement learning. In Annual Conference on Neural
  Information Processing Systems (NIPS), volume 29, 2016.
Lukas Galke, Yoav Ram, and Limor Raviv. Emergent communication for understanding human
  language evolution: What’s missing? In Emergent Communication Workshop at ICLR 2022, 2022.
Jean-Bastien Grill, Florian Strub, Florent Altché, Corentin Tallec, Pierre Richemond, Elena
  Buchatskaya, Carl Doersch, Bernardo Avila Pires, Zhaohan Guo, Mohammad Gheshlaghi Azar,
  et al. Bootstrap your own latent-a new approach to self-supervised learning. In Proceedings of
  the 34th Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), volume 33, pp.
  21271–21284, 2020.
Abhinav Gupta, Marc Lanctot, and Angeliki Lazaridou. Dynamic population-based meta-learning for
  multi-agent communication with natural language. In Proceedings of the 35th Annual Conference
  on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), volume 34, 2021.
Laura Harding Graesser, Kyunghyun Cho, and Douwe Kiela. Emergent linguistic phenomena
  in multi-agent communication games. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical
  Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), pp. 3700–3710, Hong Kong, China, November
  2019. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/D19-1384. URL https:
  //aclanthology.org/D19-1384.
Serhii Havrylov and Ivan Titov. Emergence of language with multi-agent games: Learning to
  communicate with sequences of symbols. In Proceedings of the 31st Annual Conference on Neural
  Information Processing Systems (NIPS), volume 30, 2017.
Sepp Hochreiter and Jürgen Schmidhuber. Long short-term memory. Neural computation, 9(8):
  1735–1780, 1997.
Simon Huttegger, Brian Skyrms, Pierre Tarres, and Elliott Wagner. Some dynamics of signaling
  games. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 111(Supplement 3):10873–10880, 2014.
Natasha Jaques, Angeliki Lazaridou, Edward Hughes, Caglar Gulcehre, Pedro Ortega, DJ Strouse,
  Joel Z Leibo, and Nando De Freitas. Social influence as intrinsic motivation for multi-agent deep
  reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the 36th International Conference on Machine Learning
 (ICML), pp. 3040–3049. PMLR, 2019.
Eugene Kharitonov, Roberto Dessı̀, Rahma Chaabouni, Diane Bouchacourt, and Marco Baroni.
  EGG: a toolkit for research on Emergence of lanGuage in Games. https://github.com/
  facebookresearch/EGG, 2021.
Jooyeon Kim and Alice Oh. Emergent communication under varying sizes and connectivities. In
  Proceedings of the 35th Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS),
  volume 34, 2021.
Diederik P. Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. In Proceedings of
  the International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2014.
Satwik Kottur, José Moura, Stefan Lee, and Dhruv Batra. Natural language does not emerge
  ‘naturally’in multi-agent dialog. In Proceedings of the 2017 Conference on Empirical Methods in
  Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), pp. 2962–2967, 2017.
Angeliki Lazaridou and Marco Baroni. Emergent multi-agent communication in the deep learning
  era. arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.02419, 2020.
Angeliki Lazaridou, Alexander Peysakhovich, and Marco Baroni. Multi-agent cooperation and the
  emergence of (natural) language. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Learning
 Representations (ICLR), 2017.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Angeliki Lazaridou, Karl Moritz Hermann, Karl Tuyls, and Stephen Clark. Emergence of linguistic
  communication from referential games with symbolic and pixel input. In Proceedings of the
  International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2018.
Angeliki Lazaridou, Anna Potapenko, and Olivier Tieleman. Multi-agent communication meets
  natural language: Synergies between functional and structural language learning. In Proceedings
  of the 8th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL), pp. 7663–7674,
  2020.
David Lewis. Convention: A philosophical study. John Wiley & Sons, 1969.
Fushan Li and Michael Bowling. Ease-of-teaching and language structure from emergent communi-
  cation. In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems
  (NeurIPS), volume 32, 2019.
Daniel Livingstone and Colin Fyfe. Modelling the evolution of linguistic diversity. In European
  Conference on Artificial Life, pp. 704–708. Springer, 1999.
George A Miller. Wordnet: a lexical database for english. Communications of the ACM, 38(11):
  39–41, 1995.
Igor Mordatch and Pieter Abbeel. Emergence of grounded compositional language in multi-agent
  populations. In Proceedings of the 32nd Meeting of the Association for Advancement of Artificial
  Intelligence (AAAI), volume 32, 2018.
Jonas Nölle, Riccardo Fusaroli, Gregory J Mills, and Kristian Tylén. Language as shaped by the
  environment: linguistic construal in a collaborative spatial task. Palgrave Communications, 6(1):
  1–10, 2020.
Michael Noukhovitch, Travis LaCroix, Angeliki Lazaridou, and Aaron Courville. Emergent commu-
 nication under competition. In Proceedings of the 20th International Conference on Autonomous
 Agents and MultiAgent Systems, pp. 974–982, 2021.
Martin A Nowak and Natalia L Komarova. Towards an evolutionary theory of language. Trends in
 cognitive sciences, 5(7):288–295, 2001.
Aaron van den Oord, Yazhe Li, and Oriol Vinyals. Representation learning with contrastive predictive
  coding. arXiv preprint arXiv:1807.03748, 2018.
Martin J. Osborne and Ariel Rubinstein. A Course in Game Theory. The MIT Press, 1994. ISBN
 0262150417.
Limor Raviv, Antje Meyer, and Shiri Lev-Ari. Larger communities create more systematic languages.
  Proceedings of the Royal Society B, 286(1907):20191262, 2019.
Yi Ren, Shangmin Guo, Serhii Havrylov, Shay Cohen, and Simon Kirby. Enhance the compositionality
  of emergent language by iterated learning. In 3rd NeurIPS Workshop on Emergent Communication
  (EmeCom@ NeurIPS 2019). URL https://papers. nips. cc/book/advances-in-neural-information-
  processing-systems-32-2019, 2019.
Mathieu Rita, Florian Strub, Jean-Bastien Grill, Olivier Pietquin, and Emmanuel Dupoux. On the
 role of population heterogeneity in emergent communication. In Proceedings of the International
 Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2022a.
Mathieu Rita, Corentin Tallec, Paul Michel, Jean-bastien Grill, and Florain Strub. Emergent com-
 munication: Generalization and overfitting in lewis games. In Proceedings of the 36th Annual
 Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS). 2022b.
Amanpreet Singh, Tushar Jain, and Sainbayar Sukhbaatar. Learning when to communicate at scale in
 multiagent cooperative and competitive tasks. In Proceedings of the International Conference on
 Learning Representations (ICLR), 2018.
Brian Skyrms. Signals: Evolution, learning, and information. OUP Oxford, 2010.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


C Spearman. The proof and measurement of association between two things. The American Journal
  of Psychology, 1904.

Sainbayar Sukhbaatar, Rob Fergus, et al. Learning multiagent communication with backpropagation.
  In Proceedings of the 30th Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS),
  volume 29, 2016.

Richard S Sutton, David McAllester, Satinder Singh, and Yishay Mansour. Policy gradient methods for
  reinforcement learning with function approximation. Proceedings of the 13th Annual Conference
  on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS), 12, 1999.

Zoltán Gendler Szabó. Compositionality. In Edward N. Zalta (ed.), The Stanford Encyclopedia
  of Philosophy. 2020. URL https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/fall2020/
  entries/compositionality/. Accessed: 2022-05-13.

Olivier Tieleman, Angeliki Lazaridou, Shibl Mourad, Charles Blundell, and Doina Precup. Commu-
  nity size effect in artificial learning systems. In ViGIL@ NeurIPS, 2019.

Ronald J Williams. Simple statistical gradient-following algorithms for connectionist reinforcement
  learning. Machine learning, 8(3):229–256, 1992.

Ronald J Williams and Jing Peng. Function optimization using connectionist reinforcement learning
  algorithms. Connection Science, 3(3):241–268, 1991.

Ludwig Wittgenstein. Philosophical Investigations. Blackwell, Oxford, UK, 1953. Translated by
  G.E.M. Anscombe.


A     A PPENDIX

B     D ERIVATION OF THE O PTIMAL R ECEIVER

We first prove a more general result from which the optimal receiver both in the standard and
partitioned can be derived.

B.1   G ENERAL C ASE

Consider a receiver j trained to maximize
                                                    X
                                 Jr,j (ψj ) =                 αi Jr,i→j (ψj )                   (7)
                                                  i∈senders

where αi=1...n are arbitrary weights for the senders (we assume that the αi are positive and sum to
one). We can rewrite the objective as:
                                       X
                         Jr,j (ψj ) =        αi Jr,i→j (ψj )
                                      i∈senders
                                        X
                                  =               αi Em∼πθi (·|x) log ρψj (x | m)
                                      i∈senders



Note that by linearity of expectation we can pass the αi weighted average over the senders inside
                                                                                   ∗
P the expectation and rewrite the second expectation in terms of the mixture πα (m | x) :=
of
   i∈senders αi πθi (m | x):
                  ∗



                     Jr,j (ψj ) = Ex∼p Em∼Pi∈senders αi πθ∗ (m|x) log ρψj (x | m)
                                                                 i

                              = Ex∼p Em∼πα∗ (·|x) log ρψj (x | m)



                                                      13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


With slight abuse of notation, let us now denote by πα∗ (m) := Ex∼p πα∗ (m | x) the marginal
                                                   π ∗ (m|x)p(x)
distribution over messages and πα∗ (x | m) := α π∗ (m)           the associated posterior. Notice that
                                                        α
since by definition πα∗ (m | x)p(x) = πα∗ (x | m)πα∗ (m), we can rewrite the double expectation
Ex∼p Em∼πα∗ (·|x) as Em∼πα∗ (·) Ex∼πα∗ (·|m) by inverting the order of summation. We can therefore
rewrite

                             Jr,j (ψj ) = Em∼πα∗ (·) H(πα∗ (· | m), ρψj (· | m))


where H(p, q) denotes the cross-entropy Eq [− log p] of two distributions p and q. Importantly the
cross-entropy is non-negative and H(p, q) = 0 if and only if p = q.
Consequently, the receiver ρψ will be optimal (Jr,j (ψj ) = 0) if and only if for all m:3

                                                                  πα∗ (m | x)p(x)
                              ρψj∗ (x | m) = πα∗ (x | m) =                         .                          (8)
                                                                  Ey∼p πα∗ (m | y)
□

B.2    O PTIMAL R ECEIVER IN S TANDARD P OPULATIONS

Recall that in standard populations, the training objective for receiver j is:
                                                    1          X
                                Jr,j (ψj ) =                             Jr,i→j (ψj ).
                                               | N G (j)|
                                                             i∈N G (j)


Note that this is a special case of Equation 7 with
                                          (
                                                    1
                                                | N G (j)|    if i ∈ N G (j)
                                      αi =
                                                0             otherwise

Consequently, the derivation in Section B.1 tells us that the optimal receiver is
                                                                    ∗
                                         ∗
                                                                   πN G (j)
                                                                            (m | x)p(x)
                         ρψj∗ (x | m) = πN G (j)
                                                 (x | m) =              ∗                 .                   (9)
                                                                  Ey∼p πN G (j)
                                                                                (m | y)

       ∗
               (m | x) := | N G1 (j)|
                                        P
Where πN                                    i∈N G (j) πθi (m | x)
                                                        ∗
         G (j)


B.3    O PTIMAL R ECEIVER IN PARTITIONED P OPULATIONS

In partitioned populations, the training objective for receiver j is:

                                            Jr,j (ψj ) = Jr,j→j (ψj ).

This is also a special case of Equation 7 with

                                                1            if i = j
                                        αi =
                                                0            otherwise

The derivation in Section B.1 thus yields the optimal receiver
                                                                  πj∗ (m | x)p(x)
                              ρψj∗ (x | m) = πj∗ (x | m) =                         .                        (10)
                                                                  Ey∼p πj∗ (m | y)
  3
    More accurately, if the message space is not finite then the condition holds not for all m, but almost surely.
However throughout the paper we are experimenting with finite (albeit large) message spaces.


                                                        14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                (a) k = 1                (b) k = 2                  (c) k = 3       (d) k = n

Figure 6: Example of ring populations with connectivities ranging from k = 1 (circular population)
to k = n (fully connected population)


B.4   O PTIMAL R ECEIVER IN PARTIALLY PARTITIONED P OPULATIONS

In the partially partitioned populations used in Section 6.3, each receiver’s objective is a mixture
between the standard and partitioned objective. This can also be rewritten as a special case of
Equation 7 with                 
                                               α
                                1 − α + | N G (j)| if i = j
                                
                                      α
                            αi = | N G (j)|           if i ∈ N G (j) \ {i}
                                
                                   0                  otherwise
                                
The optimal receiver can then be rewritten as the posterior distribution associated with the mixture
sender
                                     α × +(1 − α) × πj∗ (x | m)

C     T HE C ASE OF R EFERENTIAL G AMES
In the analysis from Section 2.2 onward, we assumed C = X to simplify notation. We can relax this
assumption without changing our key observation that all receivers are the same at the optimum.
Indeed, in this case the receiver’s objective in a standard population is:
                                1       X
               Jr,j (ψj ) =                    Jr,i→j (ψj )
                            | N G (j)|
                                         i∈N G (j)
                                1          X
                        =                            Ex∼p Em∼πθi (·|x) EC∼p log ρψj (x | m, C)
                            | N G (j)|
                                         i∈N G (j)

                        = Ex∼p Em∼πN
                                   ∗
                                     (j)
                                         (·|x) EC∼p log ρψj (x | m, C)
                                            G


This objective, called InfoNCE (Oord et al., 2018) also has an analytical solution that can be expressed
                   ∗
as a function of πN  G (j)
                           , of the form:
                                                               ∗
                                                              πN       (x|m)
                                                                    G (j)
                                                                    p(x)
                                    ρψj∗ (x | m, C) = P              ∗
                                                                    πN      (y|m)
                                                                                                   (11)
                                                                        (j)
                                                                        G
                                                              y∈C           p(y)

Despite the more complicated form of the optimal receiver, the key ingredients to our analysis
in Sections 2.2 and 3 are preserved: at the optimum, each receiver is a function of the posterior
πN G (j) (x | m) associated with the communication partners to which it co-adapts. A similar analysis
in partitioned populations shows that the optimum for receiver j then only depends on the posterior
associated with its respective sender πθj∗ instead.

D     E XPERIMENTS WITH R ING P OPULATIONS WITH GREATER CONNECTIVITY
The circular population described in Section 5 is an extreme case of a connected population where
each agent has the minimal amount of neighbors (2). To verify that our findings apply to more general


                                                         15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Table 3: Accuracies with training partners and new partners on the Attribute/Values dataset for
ring populations. Numbers are reported with standard deviation across all pairs for 3 independent
experiments

                                                                k=2                                        k=3
                                               Standard            Partitioned               Standard        Partitioned
                 Training partners           99.28 ± 0.36             99.32 ±0.37           99.23 ± 0.39         99.26 ± 0.40
                   New partners              79.67 ±20.78             99.71 ± 0.33          98.08 ± 4.17         99.89 ± 0.12

                      =0                     = 0.001                      = 0.01                      = 0.1                     = 0.5
                Topsim = 25.6             Topsim = 22.7               Topsim = 33.3              Topsim = 37.2             Topsim = 38.1
       80                                                                                                                       Loss
                                                                                                                              Mutual
       60                                                                                                                     intelligibility
                                                                                                                              Internal
loss


       40                                                                                                                     communication
       20
        0
            0        50         100   0        50         100     0        50         100    0        50         100   0        50         100
                   epoch                     epoch                       epoch                      epoch                     epoch

Figure 7: Evolution of internal communication and mutual intelligibility terms with different weight-
ings β (populations of size 10).


(non fully-connected) populations, we perform the same experiment on ring populations with higher
connectivities. We define a ring graph with connectivity k as a circular graph where each vertex is
connected to its k-nearest neighbors on each side (ie agent i is connected to agents i − k, . . . , i + k).
Examples are shown in Figure 6 This allows us to interpolate between circular populations (k = 1)
and fully connected populations (k = n/2) while jointly (1) increasing the number of communication
partner of a given agent and (2) decreasing the path length between any two agents, two properties of
the graph that are arguably most impactful on the mutual intelligibility between agents.
We perform the same experiment as Section 5 with graphs of connectivities k = 2 and k = 3 (resp. 4
and 6 training partners for each agent) on the Attribute/values dataset. We report accuracues in Table
3. We observe that across the board, populations with greater connectivity exhibit higher accuracy in
both conditions. However, we still find that partitioned populations still perform best.

E           F URTHER A NALYSIS OF THE E FFECT OF M UTUAL I NTELLIGIBILITY
In Section 6.4, we find that languages stay highly compositional until the mutual intelligibility weight
β is decreased to almost 0. Our hypothesis is that even with small amounts of mutual intelligibility,
agents will eventually have to optimize this part of the objective after they have maximized their
respective internal communication to the point where the main contributor to the training gradient is
the mutual intelligibility term.
To verify this hypothesis, in Figure 7 we report the evolution of both internal communication and
mutual intelligibility losses during training for various values of the mutual intelligibility weight
β. As expected, we observe that for all but very small values of β, the mutual intelligibility loss
eventually decreases (although it decreases faster for high β).


                                                                        16
