Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


L ATERAL I NHIBITION - INSPIRED STRUCTURE FOR
C ONVOLUTIONAL N EURAL N ETWORK ON I MAGE
C LASSIFICATION
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT
         Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have become powerful and popular tools
         since deep learning emerged for image classification in the computer vision field.
         For better recognition, the dimension of both depth and width has been explored,
         leading to convolutional neural networks with more layers and channels. In addi-
         tion to these factors, neurobiology suggests lateral inhibition (lateral antagonism,
         e.g. Mach band effect), a widely existing phenomenon for vision that increases
         the contrast and sharpness of nearby neuron excitation in the lateral direction to
         help recognition. However, such mechanism has not been well explored in the
         design of convolutional neural network. In this paper, we explicitly explore the
         filter dimension in the lateral direction and propose our lateral inhibition-inspired
         (LI) structure. Our naive design uses the low-pass filter to mimic the strength
         decay of lateral interaction from neighbors regarding the distance. One learnable
         parameter per channel is applied to set the amplitude of the low-pass filter by
         multiplication, which is flexible to model various lateral interactions (including
         lateral inhibition). The convolution result is then subtracted from the input, which
         could increase the contrast and sharpness for better recognition. Furthermore, a
         learnable scaling factor and shift are applied to adjust the value after subtraction.
         Our lateral inhibition-inspired (LI) structure works on both plain convolution and
         the convolutional block with residual connection, while being compatible with the
         existing modules. Preliminary results demonstrate obvious improvements on the
         ImageNet dataset for AlexNet (7.58%) and ResNet-18 (0.81%), respectively, with
         little increase in parameters, indicating the effectiveness of our brain-similar de-
         sign to help feature learning for image classification from a different perspective.


1   I NTRODUCTION
In recent years, convolutional neural networks (CNNs) (Hinton et al., 2012; Simonyan & Zisser-
man, 2015; Szegedy et al., 2015; He et al., 2016) have become powerful and popular tools since
deep learning emerged for image classification in the computer vision field. They have recorded
record-breaking performance and outperformed traditional methods (Quinlan, 1986; Cortes & Vap-
nik, 1995) with hand-crafted features (Lowe, 1999; Dalal & Triggs, 2005) on the ImageNet Large
Scale Visual Recognition Challenge (ILSVRC) (Deng et al., 2009). Today, convolutional neural
networks still possess unique merits, as they have been studied the most, along with the fact that
convolution has a strong connection with the human vision system and image processing, making
them good models for feature learning research.
Different factors have been explored to improve recognition performance of convolutional neural
networks. VGGNet (Simonyan & Zisserman, 2015) applies a small convolution kernel size (3 × 3)
for increased network depth, while ResNet (He et al., 2016) introduces deep residual learning to
make training very deep deep networks feasible. The success of such networks indicates that depth
is a crucial factor for recognition performance. Wide Residual Networks (Zagoruyko & Komodakis,
2016), on the other hand, demonstrate width as another important factor to improved performance.
In addition to these factors, neurobiology suggests the widely existing lateral inhibition (lateral
antagonism, e.g. Mach band effect, shown in Fig. 1), a phenomenon that increases the contrast and
sharpness of nearby neuron excitation in the lateral direction, also important to help feature learning.


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 1: Illustration of Mach band effect. Due to lateral inhibition, the actual perception is different
from the real input, leading to increased contrast and sharpness along the boundary (see curves to-
wards opposite direction), where the dark area becomes darker and the bright area becomes brighter.


However, such an important mechanism has not been well explored in convolutional neural network
design. In recent years, Yang et al. (2015) propose a traditional method using manual double-
opponent design (antagonism) with spatial sparseness constraint for boundary detection, following
the color-opponent mechanism in the human vision system, to highlight the color boundary while
suppressing texture edges. This double-opponent design is further extended (Gao et al., 2015)
for color constancy. Cao et al. (2018) apply lateral inhibition mechanism in the inference stage
of the pre-trained VGGNet (Simonyan & Zisserman, 2015) for visual attention map and saliency
detection. Hasani et al. (2019) propose their surround modulation design, using a manually defined
kernel from the difference of Gaussian (DoG) function, to explore the feasibility of incorporating
the lateral inhibition mechanism. This fixed design is only applied to half channels of the initial
layer (with better performance than applying to the full channels). It is still worth exploring flexible
lateral inhibition-inspired design for convolutional neural network, to incorporate such mechanism
and make it more similar to the brain in the training stage for image classification.
In this paper, inspired by the findings of neurobiology, we explicitly explore the filter dimension
in the lateral direction and propose our lateral inhibition-inspired (LI) structure, which incorporates
the lateral inhibition mechanism in a flexible manner inside modern convolutional neural networks.
Our simple naive design applies the low-pass filter with the central weight eliminated, to mimic
the decay of inhibition strength from neighbors regarding the distance. To set the amplitude of the
low-pass filter by multiplication, a learnable parameter per channel is used, for the flexibility of
modeling various lateral interactions (including lateral inhibition). The convolution result is then
subtracted from the input, which could increase the contrast and sharpness for better recognition.
Furthermore, a learnable scaling factor and shift are applied to adjust the value after subtraction.
Our lateral inhibition-inspired (LI) method works on both plain convolution and convolutional block
with a residual connection, while being compatible with the existing modules. Preliminary results
of our simple naive design demonstrate obvious improvements on the ImageNet dataset for AlexNet
(7.58%), ResNet-18 (0.81%), respectively, with little parameter increase, indicating the effectiveness
of our brain-similar to help feature learning for image classification from a different perspective.
Our main contributions can be summarized as:

       • We propose a lateral inhibition-inspired structure for modern convolutional neural network
         design, which could participate in the training stage for image classification.
       • Our design is flexible compared to the fixed difference of Gaussian (DoG) filter, and could
         be applied to all layers (and channels) with competitive performance.
       • We are the few to explicitly model lateral inhibition as well as other lateral interaction to
         make the network more brain-similar, given the flexible weight design.


                                                   2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


2   R ELATED W ORK

Neurobiology. Lateral inhibition is common in sensory system. Mach reports the Mach bands
effect RATLIFF (1965) due to lateral inhibition that the human vision system perceives increased
contrast and sharpness along the boundary, where the dark area becomes darker and the bright area
becomes brighter. Blakemore et al. (1970) discover that lateral inhibition plays an important role
in orientation detection within the human vision system. It helps to remove redundancy for the
existence of inhibitory signals, as large stimulus covering a whole receptive field would be relatively
ineffective in excitation of neurons.
Traditional method. Yang et al. (2015) propose their double-opponent design with spatial sparse-
ness constraint for boundary detection, by mimicking the color-opponent mechanism in the human
vision system. The single opponent uses a manual antagonism such as red-green and blue-yellow,
while the double opponent combines two opposite single opponent in either center-surround or side-
by-side manner for increased contrast. This design highlights the color boundary while suppressing
texture edges. The double-opponent design is further extended (Gao et al., 2015) for color con-
stancy.
Convolutional Neural Network. Local Response Normalization (LRN) (Hinton et al., 2012) is
introduced in AlexNetalong and is not trainable. Normalization is performed for the value at each
position (x, y) considering neighbors at the same position from nearby channels, with the denomi-
nator as a sum of the squared neighbors, given a scaling factor, bias, as well as the exponential value
for the denominator. It applies lateral inhibition across nearby channels via competition. Batch
normalization (Ioffe & Szegedy, 2015) applies normalization within individual channels, using an
mini-batch mean (shift) and variance, then a scaling factor and re-shift parameter, to constrain all
values in a certain range. Layer normalization (Ba et al., 2016) only consider one single instance,
but performs normalization across all channels using the average and variance from each channel.
Group normalization (Wu & He, 2018) further extends layer normalization by dividing channels
into groups for consideration. Besides normalization methods, Cao et al. (2018) propose their lat-
eral inhibition design using pretrained VGGNet, as top-down step for attention map and weakly
supervised saliency detection. The inhibition value consists of an average term from the neighbors
within the same channel to protect high response zone, and a differential term only consider the
difference from higher activation nearby for inhibition, with weight decay regarding the distance.
The whole formula including term coefficients are intuitively decided and unlearnable, and only
happens in inference stage. Hasani et al. (2019) propose surround modulation for lateral inhibition,
to make network closer to the brain. It applies two gaussian filters (5x5) with 1:1 weight (fixed)
from the difference of Gaussian (DoG) function. However, this fixed design lacks flexibility, which
is only applied to half channels of the initial layer within a small convolutional neural network, due
to the performance drop when applying to full channels or the following layer. The channelwise
normalization (center pool) in Weighted normalization (Pan et al., 2021) improves LRN (Hinton
et al., 2012) from AlexNet by adding extra parameters such as a scaling factor and bias, while fur-
ther adding surround pool for normalization within each channel does not help on ImageNet dataset.
DivisiveNorm (Miller et al., 2021) also similarly follows the design of LRN at each location along
the channel dimension, but changes the numerator to be squared, and adds a weight scaling factor
for each unnormalized activations inside the exponentially weighted sum. The hyper parameters are
manually set for stable training.



3   M ETHOD

Our lateral inhibition-inspired (LI) structure explicitly incorporates the lateral inhibition mechanism
into the design of convolutional neural network, to increase contrast and sharpness for more accurate
perception. Unlike methods only involving in the post-processing stage with the original pre-trained
model unchanged, our method participates in the training stage.
Our lateral inhibition-inspired (LI) design takes two steps: first, it generates the lateral interaction
value based on the input within the spatial neighborhood of each channel; then it subtracts that value
from the original input. Details will be explained in the following parts.


                                                   3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


3.1   L ATERAL I NTERACTION D ESIGN

We design our naive lateral interaction based on neurobiological findings. It follows the principle
that the strength of interaction (including inhibition) from an active neuron decreases as the distance
to that neuron increases in the lateral direction. For implementation, we take the exsiting Gaussian
low-pass filter with central weight eliminated to mimic the strength decay from neighbors. Here, we
denote the function of lateral interaction as LI, Gaussian low-pass filter as G, the central weight value
of the low-pass filter G as C, convolution operation as Conv, the learnable amplitude weights as W
(with one parameter per channel for multiplication to separately decide the channelwise amplitude
of Gaussian low-pass filter G), and the input features as x for our lateral inhibition-inspired structure.
The weights of the 2D Gaussian low-pass filter (G) are calculated using Equation 1. Here u and v
denote the spatial coordinates regarding to the center of the Gaussian low-pass filter, and σ denotes
the standard deviation for weight decay speed from the center (we set filter size as 3 and σ as 1):
                                                     1 − u2 +v2 2
                                       G(u, v) =         e 2σ                                         (1)
                                                   2πσ 2

The lateral interaction function given the input feature x at channel i is defined in Equation 2. First,
convolution on input feature using Gaussian low-pass filter G is applied, then the corresponding
convolution result form the central weight value C (of the low-pass filter G) is subtracted, to only
have interaction from the neighbors. Finally, multiplication is performed by the amplitude parameter
(from the learnable weights W) to decide the amplitude of the Gaussian low-pass filter G per channel.
Different from Surround Modulation (Hasani et al., 2019), which applies 1:1 weight using two
Gaussian low-pass filters in the difference of Gaussian (DoG) function to model lateral inhibition,
our learnable weights W is more flexible (could be zero, positive or negative) to fit various lateral
interactions (for none, lateral inhibition or even the opposite when necessary).

                               LI(xi ) = (Conv(G, xi ) − C ∗ xi ) ∗ Wi                                (2)

3.2   A PPLYING L ATERAL I NTERACTION

We denote the output function as O for applying lateral interaction on input feature x at channel i.
Then the output function is defined in Equation 3, with lateral interaction result subtracted.

                                         O(xi ) = xi − LI(xi )                                        (3)

3.3   A DDITIONAL PARAMETERS

Additional parameters are applied since the interaction result will be subtracted from the original
feature map. Parameters include a scaling factor (v), shift (m), and bias (b). Combination of these
parameters can be explored to find the best setting.

                                    O(xi ) = (O(xi ) + m) ∗ v + b                                     (4)

3.4   S TRUCTURE P LACE

Our lateral inhibition-inspired (LI) structure works on both the plain convolution and the convolu-
tional block with residual connection. For the plain convolution, it is placed after that convolution
(and the activation function), as shown in Fig. 2. For the convolutional block with a residual con-
nection, it is placed inside the residual block before the first convolution, as shown in Fig. 2.

4     E XPERIMENTS
Dataset. We use the ImageNet-1k data set (Russakovsky et al., 2015) to evaluate our proposed
methods. ImageNet-1k dataset consists of 1k object categories, with 1.2 million images for training
and 50k images for validation.


                                                    4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 2: Place for our lateral inhibition-inspired (LI) structure. It is after the plain convolution or
inside the residual block before the first convolution, as shown on the left or right side, respectively.


Experiment Settings. We use the Pytorch (Paszke et al., 2019) deep learning framework and follow
the official training example. We adopt the standard settings: image crop size of 224 × 224, initial
learning rate of 0.01 for AlexNet (Hinton et al., 2012) (which decays every 30 epochs by a factor
of 10), momentum of 0.9, and weight decay of 0.0001. We use standard data augmentation, which
includes random horizontal flipping, random scale and ratio changes in the range of [0.08, 1.0] and
[0.75, 1.33], respectively. Models are trained with batch size of 128 and batch accumulation of 2.
Experiments are performed on 4 GPUs, with 90 epochs for AlexNet following Miller et al. (2021)
(more epochs show little difference) and 100 epochs for ResNet following common practice.
Results. Table 1 shows the results of the baseline model AlexNet (Hinton et al., 2012), related
methods, as well as our naive lateral inhibition-inspired (LI) design on ImageNet dataset. While all
listed methods improve the baseline significantly, our method outperforms others by a large margin.
Layer normalization only consider one instance, which fits better for dynamic input rather than
batch input. Group normalization has further division into groups, therefore limits its performance.
Weighted normalization and Divisive normalization are similar in the normalization design, except
the power number in the numerator and the denominator, as well as the weighted sum. However,
most of them lack the consideration of neighbors within the same channel for lateral interaction,
which our method does.
Table 2 shows the results of the baseline model ResNet (He et al., 2016) and our naive lateral
inhibition inspired (LI) design on ImageNet dataset. Although ResNet contains batch normalization
to improve performance, our design makes the improvement further by 0.81%.
Design Choice. From Table 3 we can see that, with a single scaling factor, our design already
outperforms other methods. Among all the design variants, scaling first with bias is better than shift
first then scaling. While they are both much better than only scaling, the difference between the best
two are not large.


5   C ONCLUSION

In this paper, we propose our lateral inhibition-inspired structure for convolutional neural network
to make it more brain-similar on image classification task. We explicitly explore neurobiology find-
ings, using the guassian low-pass filter with central weight eliminated to mimic the strength decay
regarding the distance. With a learnable weight, our deign is flexible to model lateral inhibition as
well as other lateral interaction. Our design works on both plain convolution and the convolutional
block with residual connection, while being compatible with the existing modules. Preliminary re-
sults using AlexNet and ResNet demonstrate obvious improvements on the ImageNet dataset for


                                                   5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Table 1: Top-1 accuracy of AlexNet models (with only plain convolution) on ImageNet dataset. LI
denotes our lateral inhibition-inspired (LI) design, with little increase in parameters and GFLOPs.
Surround Modulation is added after every convolutional layer as other methods in the experiments.

  Method                                     Top-1 Acc (%)       Params.    GFLOPs      Improv. (abs)
  AlexNet (baseline)                             52.82           62.38M      1.137            -
  +GroupNorm (Wu & He, 2018)                     57.76           62.38M      1.137          4.94
  +LayerNorm (Ba et al., 2016)                   58.81           63.68M      1.137          5.99
  +BatchNorm (Ioffe & Szegedy, 2015)             59.04           62.38M      1.138          6.22
  +WeightedNorm-c (Pan et al., 2021)             59.41           62.38M      1.137          6.59
  +DivisiveNorm (Miller et al., 2021)            59.54           62.38M      1.137          6.72
  +LI (ours)                                     60.39           62.38M      1.143          7.58


Table 2: Top-1 accuracy of ResNet18 models (contains residual block) on ImageNet dataset. LI
denotes our lateral inhibition-inspired (LI) design, with little increase in parameters and GFLOPs.
Our structure is applied to both the initial plain convolution and the following residual blocks. Please
note that ResNet already contains batch normalization to increase performance.

           Method                  Top-1 Acc (%)       Params.    GFLOPs      Improv. (abs)
           ResNet18 (baseline)          70.30          11.69M       1.822              -
           +LI (ours)                   71.11          11.69M       1.838            0.81


image classification, with little increase in parameters. We hope that our research could inspire
researchers to reconsider the value of this track for better feature learning.


R EFERENCES
Jimmy Lei Ba, Jamie Ryan Kiros, and Geoffrey E Hinton. Layer normalization. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1607.06450, 2016.

Colin Blakemore, Roger H S Carpenter, and Mark A Georgeson. Lateral inhibition between orien-
  tation detectors in the human visual system. Nature, 228(5266):37–39, 1970.

Chunshui Cao, Yongzhen Huang, Zilei Wang, Liang Wang, Ninglong Xu, and Tieniu Tan. Lateral
  inhibition-inspired convolutional neural network for visual attention and saliency detection. In
  Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence, volume 32, 2018.

Corinna Cortes and Vladimir Vapnik. Support-vector networks. Machine learning, 20(3):273–297,
  1995.

Navneet Dalal and Bill Triggs. Histograms of oriented gradients for human detection. In 2005 IEEE
  computer society conference on computer vision and pattern recognition (CVPR’05), volume 1,
  pp. 886–893. IEEE, 2005.

Jia Deng, Wei Dong, Richard Socher, Li-Jia Li, Kai Li, and Li Fei-Fei. Imagenet: A large-scale hi-
   erarchical image database. In 2009 IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition,
   pp. 248–255. Ieee, 2009.

Shao-Bing Gao, Kai-Fu Yang, Chao-Yi Li, and Yong-Jie Li. Color constancy using double-
  opponency. IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence, 37(10):1973–1985,
  2015.


                                                   6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Table 3: Top-1 accuracy of AlexNet models (with only plain convolution) on ImageNet dataset. LI
denotes our lateral inhibition-inspired (LI) design. Shift, scaling, and re-shift means that our design
variants are changed by adding additional parameters.

           Method                 Top-1 Acc (%)       Params.   GFLOPs      Improv. (abs)
           AlexNet (baseline)          52.82          62.38M      1.137            -
           +LI (scale)                 59.87          62.38M      1.143          7.05
           +LI (shift-scaling)         60.26          62.38M      1.143          7.44
           +LI (scale-bias)            60.39          62.38M      1.143          7.58


Hosein Hasani, Mahdieh Soleymani, and Hamid Aghajan. Surround modulation: A bio-inspired
  connectivity structure for convolutional neural networks. Advances in neural information pro-
  cessing systems, 32, 2019.
Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image recog-
  nition. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp.
  770–778, 2016.
Geoffrey E Hinton, Alex Krizhevsky, and Ilya Sutskever. Imagenet classification with deep con-
  volutional neural networks. Advances in neural information processing systems, 25:1106–1114,
  2012.
Sergey Ioffe and Christian Szegedy. Batch normalization: Accelerating deep network training by
  reducing internal covariate shift. In Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, volume 37, pp.
  448–456, 2015.
David G Lowe. Object recognition from local scale-invariant features. In Proceedings of the seventh
  IEEE international conference on computer vision, volume 2, pp. 1150–1157. Ieee, 1999.
Michelle Miller, SueYeon Chung, and Kenneth D Miller. Divisive Feature Normalization Improves
 Image Recognition Performance in AlexNet. In International Conference on Learning Represen-
 tations, 2021.
X Pan, E Kartal, L G S Giraldo, and O Schwartz. Brain-inspired weighted normalization for CNN
  image classification. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2021.
Adam Paszke, Sam Gross, Francisco Massa, Adam Lerer, James Bradbury, Gregory Chanan, Trevor
  Killeen, Zeming Lin, Natalia Gimelshein, Luca Antiga, and Others. PyTorch: An Imperative
  Style, High-Performance Deep Learning Library. Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 32:8026–8037, 2019.
J Ross Quinlan. Induction of decision trees. Machine learning, 1(1):81–106, 1986.
F RATLIFF. Mach bands: Quantitative studies on neural networks in the retina. Holden-Day
  (Holden-Day series in psychology), 1965.
Olga Russakovsky, Jia Deng, Hao Su, Jonathan Krause, Sanjeev Satheesh, Sean Ma, Zhiheng
  Huang, Andrej Karpathy, Aditya Khosla, Michael Bernstein, and Others. Imagenet large scale
  visual recognition challenge. International Journal of Computer Vision, 115(3):211–252, 2015.
Karen Simonyan and Andrew Zisserman. Very deep convolutional networks for large-scale image
  recognition. In Proceedings of 3rd International Conference on Learning Representations, 2015.
Christian Szegedy, Wei Liu, Yangqing Jia, Pierre Sermanet, Scott Reed, Dragomir Anguelov, Du-
  mitru Erhan, Vincent Vanhoucke, and Andrew Rabinovich. Going deeper with convolutions. In
  Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 1–9, 2015.
Yuxin Wu and Kaiming He. Group normalization. In Proceedings of the European conference on
  computer vision (ECCV), pp. 3–19, 2018.


                                                  7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Kai-Fu Yang, Shao-Bing Gao, Ce-Feng Guo, Chao-Yi Li, and Yong-Jie Li. Boundary detection us-
  ing double-opponency and spatial sparseness constraint. IEEE Transactions on Image Processing,
  24(8):2565–2578, 2015.
Sergey Zagoruyko and Nikos Komodakis. Wide residual networks. In Proceedings of the British
  Machine Vision Conference, 2016.


                                               8
