Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


G ROUP - WISE V ERIFIABLE D ISTRIBUTED C OMPUTING
FOR M ACHINE L EARNING UNDER A DVERSARIAL
ATTACKS
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                           A BSTRACT

         Distributed computing has been a promising solution in machine learning to
         accelerate the training procedure on large-scale dataset by utilizing multiple
         workers in parallel. However, there remain two major issues that still need to
         be addressed: i) adversarial attacks from malicious workers, and ii) the effect
         of slow workers known as stragglers. In this paper, we tackle both problems
         simultaneously by proposing Group-wise Verifiable Coded Computing (GVCC),
         which leverages coding techniques and group-wise verification to provide
         robustness to adversarial attacks and resiliency to straggler effects in distributed
         computing. The key idea of GVCC is to verify a group of computation results
         from workers at a time, while providing resilience to stragglers through encoding
         tasks assigned to workers with Group-wise Verifiable Codes. Experimental results
         show that GVCC outperforms the existing methods in terms of overall processing
         time and verification time for executing matrix multiplication, which is a key
         computational component in machine learning and deep learning.


1   I NTRODUCTION

Recently, machine learning and big data analysis have achieved huge success in various areas such
as computer vision, natural language processing, and reinforcement learning, etc. Since they usually
demand a massive amount of computation on a large dataset, there has been increasing interest in
distributed systems, where one node is used as a master and the others are used as workers.
One possible option is distributed computing (Dalcín et al., 2005; 2011), where the workers compute
partial computation task received from the master. In distributed computing, the master divides
and distributes tasks (which require far small memory than the original task) to workers, and they
compute the assigned tasks and send results back to a master. Distributed computing can be utilized
to compute matrix multiplication in machine learning, the most important and frequent computation
block. In a distributed setting, however, there exist two foremost considerations to embed distributed
computing in machine learning applications, i) stragglers and ii) adversarial workers.
Stragglers are workers that return their computation results much slower than others. It has been
reported that stragglers can be a serious bottleneck to performing large-scale computation tasks
(Dean & Barroso, 2013; Huang et al., 2017; Tandon et al., 2017). To handle straggler effects,
coded computing was first suggested in Lee et al. (2018). In coded computing, a master encodes a
computation task with a coding technique while retaining redundancy in task allocation. Due to the
redundancy arisen from the coding technique, a master does not need all results of tasks to achieve
the final output and can ignore stragglers. This approach has been applied to various computation
tasks, especially on matrix multiplication (Dutta et al., 2016; Yu et al., 2017; Park et al., 2018;
Reisizadeh et al., 2019; Dutta et al., 2019; Yu et al., 2020).
Moreover, some of the workers could be adversarial workers, which send perturbed results to the
master to contaminate or degrade the performance of neural networks. Many studies (Biggio et al.,
2012; Blanchard et al., 2017; El Mhamdi et al., 2018; Sohn et al., 2020; Bagdasaryan et al., 2020;
Wang et al., 2020) demonstrate that adversarial workers slow down the overall training process and


                                                  1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


        (a) Training curve of neural (b) Distributed computing for a matrix multiplication C = AB
        networks under adversarial under adversarial workers and stragglers.
        attacks.

Figure 1: Training curve of neural networks under adversarial workers and system model for distributed
computing


severely degrade the performance of a neural network. In this paper, we mainly consider attacks from
adversarial workers (i.e. Byzantine workers) in distributed computing, where they try to contaminate
the final computation product by returning wrong computation results for the assigned task.
To demonstrate the effect of adversarial workers in distributed computing, we trained a neural
network under adversarial attack. Fig 1(a) shows the training curve of neural networks on CIFAR-
100. 32 workers were used for training and adversarial workers send random values with the same
magnitude as the original results during training. As we can see in the figure, the training accuracy of
a neural network degraded severely when there exist adversarial workers. The training accuracy of
a neural network converged to 0.99 after 560 epochs when there is no adversarial worker. However,
with only 3.125% of adversarial workers, the training accuracy of the neural network was only 0.89
after 1000 epochs.1
To be robust against adversarial attacks, a master can check whether the computation results from
workers are correct or not to figure out adversarial workers. Based on this idea, there have been
some recent studies that suggest an encoding scheme for assigning computation tasks to workers to
tolerate wrong computation results when obtaining the final computation product, and to identify
adversarial workers from the returned computation results (Yu et al., 2019; Soleymani et al., 2021;
Hong et al., 2022). Another line of research, which we call verifiable computing, has focused on
identifying adversarial workers with a fast verification procedure. In verifiable computing, a master
verifies the correctness of computation results by using a verification key (Freivalds, 1977; Tang
et al., 2022).
In this paper, we focus on designing a fast and robust distributed computing system for matrix
multiplication. We use both a coding approach and verifiable computing to combat adversarial
attacks from malicious workers and straggler effects. Our system model is depicted in Fig 1(b),
where a master encodes the computation tasks, distributes them to the workers, and decodes the
final product after receiving and verifying the computation results from the workers.
To be specific, we suggest a novel encoding scheme that enables verifying a large number of
computation results at a time, and decoding the final computation product from a part of computation
results from the workers to mitigate straggler effects as well. We experiment with various settings
and demonstrate that our proposed scheme can identify adversarial workers and obtain the final
computation product much faster than existing methods. The main contributions of this paper are as
follows.

         • We propose Group-wise Verifiable Coded Computing (GVCC), handling both straggler
           effects and adversarial attacks in distributed computing for matrix multiplication tasks.
           To be more specific, we suggest group-wise verifiable codes (GVC) for encoding the
           computation tasks of workers and provide a suitable group-wise verification algorithm.
   1
       We provide more explanation and detailed experiment settings in Appendix A.


                                                      2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


         We first provide a process of group-wise verification trial (GVT), then propose a two-stage
         verification algorithm based on GVT. We also provide modified verification algorithm that
         can be utilized under straggler effects.
       • We demonstrate the performance of GVCC via experiments in terms of overall processing
         time and verification time for executing matrix multiplication tasks in distributed
         computing under adversarial attacks and straggler effects. According to experimental
         results, GVCC speeds up overall processing time and verification time up to ×1.11 and
         ×3.34 compare to that of the existing verifiable coded computing scheme in Tang et al.
         (2022), and speeds up up to ×2.46 and ×174 than group testing based adversarial attack
         identification scheme for coded matrix multiplication in Hong et al. (2022), respectively.
Notations. For a, b ∈ Z, [a : b] denotes {a, a + 1, . . . , b}.

2     P ROBLEM S ETTING
We consider a distributed computing scenario for matrix multiplication task with one master and E
workers {Wi }Ei=1 . A master wants to perform a matrix multiplication C = AB on input matrices
A ∈ Fa×b
       q    and B ∈ Fb×c q  for a sufficiently large finite field Fq . The master generates encoded
matrices using A and B, then distributes them to workers to allocate tasks. To be specific, the
master encodes Ãi , B̃i and sends them to Wi for i ∈ [1 : E]. After receiving Ãi and B̃i , each
worker Wi computes the allocated task
We assume that some of the workers could be adversarial workers or stragglers. We list our
assumptions on adversarial workers and stragglers as follows:
       • There exist l adversarial workers WL , where L denotes a set of adversarial workers for
         L ⊂ [1 : E] and |L| = l.
       • Stragglers occur randomly depending on the network condition and currently available
         computing resource at each worker.
       • Adversarial workers have knowledge about input matrices A and B, and all the protocol of
         distributed computing including encoding, task allocation, and decoding, only except the
         random key r that is used for verification.2
       • A master cannot be aware of the number of adversarial workers in advance.
       • Adversarial workers cannot collude with each other, which implies that they cannot access
         the information about assigned tasks of other workers.
To improve the performance of distributed computing systems under adversarial attacks and
stragglers, we aim to reduce verification time and overall processing time of distributed matrix
multiplication.

3     BACKGROUND : V ERIFIABLE C OMPUTING AND C ODED C OMPUTING
In this section, we first introduce two methods that are leveraged in GVCC: i) verifiable computing
that enables identifying adversarial workers and ii) coded computing that mitigates the effects of
stragglers.

3.1   V ERIFIABLE C OMPUTING FOR ADVERSARIAL ATTACK

The authors of Freivalds (1977) proposed a verification method (Freivalds’ method) that uses a
random key to verify the computation results. Freivalds’ method for matrix multiplication can be
summarized in three steps as follows.
Computation assignment: A master assigns a matrix multiplication task C = AB for A ∈ Fa×b       q
and B ∈ Fb×c
           q   to an available worker. The worker executes the assigned task, and returns its result
C′ to the master.
  2
    Protecting the random key from the adversarial workers can be realized by randomly generating r at the
master, after receiving results from the workers.


                                                     3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Verification key generation: The master generates a random key r ∈ F1×a
                                                                    q   and computes a
verification key s1 = rA.
Correctness check: The master computes s2 = s1 B = rAB = rC and s2 ′ = rC′ from the
received result. By comparing s2 and s′2 , the master can verify whether C′ is correct or not.
It has been known that the master can identify adversarial workers using this verification process
with probability 1 − 1q in the finite field Fq (Sahraei & Avestimehr, 2019). In this verification
procedure, the master computes ab + bc + ca scalar products while the original task C = AB
requires abc scalar products.

3.2     C ODED C OMPUTING FOR STRAGGLERS

In distributed computing, several methods have been proposed to mitigate straggler effects. One
traditional method is to replicate a computational task and allocate it to multiple workers (Wang
et al., 2014). However, this replication-based method is inefficient as it requires K additional
workers to tolerate a single straggler, when the computational task is divided into K smaller tasks.
To handle straggler effects more efficiently, coded computing was suggested in Lee et al. (2018).
By using a coding theoretic approach for allocation of tasks to workers, the master can retrieve the
final product after receiving enough number of workers. We now define an important metric that has
been used in many coded computing researches.
Recovery threshold R: The minimum number of computation results of tasks from non-adversarial
workers that the master requires to obtain the final product for the worst-case scenario.3
In coded computing, the master can decode the final output from R out of E results and it is able
to tolerate up to E − R stragglers. Therefore, coded computing requires S additional workers for
handling S stragglers, while the replication-based method requires KS additional workers for S
stragglers.

4       G ROUP - WISE V ERIFIABLE C ODED C OMPUTING

In this section, we provide GVC and propose an algorithm for group-wise verification. We also
suggest a modified algorithm for GVCC under straggler effects.

4.1     E NCODING OF G ROUP - WISE V ERIFIABLE C ODES (GVC)

We now explain the encoding procedure of GVC that facilitates group-wise verification at the master.
                                                                                               a
                                                                                                 ×b
In GVC, the master divides input matrices A and B into sub-matrices of equal size Aw ∈ Fqm
                               c
                            b×
for w ∈ [1 : m], and Bz ∈ Fq n for z ∈ [1 : n]. Then input matrices and their product C = AB
are given by
                                                                                     
                 A1                                             A1 B1 · · · A1 Bn
         A =  ...  , B = [ B1 · · · Bn ] , C =                 ..    ..        ..
                                                                                        .       (1)
                                                                                     
                                                                   .       .       .
                 Am                                            Am B1 · · · Am Bn

To generate the encoded matrices, the master uses encoding functions pA and pB constructed by
using sub-blocks of A and B as coefficients, which are given by
                         pA (x) = Σm
                                   i=1 Ai x
                                            i−1
                                                ,      pB (x) = Σnj=1 Bj f j−1 (x),                         (2)

where x represents the variable of encoding functions pA and pB . f (x) is the basic building
component for constructing pB and we now introduce the conditions on f (x) that enable group-
wise verification of GVC.4
    3
      It should be noted that previous works have included stragglers or adversarial workers in the recovery
threshold and in this case, the recovery threshold of GVC can be expressed as R′ = R + S + l.
    4
      The condition for f (x) was also used in squeezed polynomial codes (Hong et al., 2020), in order to reduce
communication load in distributed computing.


                                                       4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Condition I : The polynomial function f (x) used in the encoding function pB (x) should satisfy the
following conditions.
i) f (x) is an mth order polynomial function.
                          E
ii) f (x) has at least m     sets of m evaluation points α1,1 , α1,2 , ..., α E ,m that satisfy f (αt,1 ) =
                                            E                                 m
f (αt,2 ) = · · · = f (αt,m ) = wt for t ∈ 1 : m  .
cUsing the encoding functions and evaluation
                                          Epoints
                                                    satisfying Condition I, the master generates the
encoded matrices Ãt,u and B̃t,u for t ∈ 1 : m   and u ∈ [1 : m] as
                                               i−1
                 Ãt,u = pA (αt,u ) = Σm
                                       i=1 Ai αt,u ,                                                   (3)
                 B̃t,u = pB (αt,u ) = Σnj=1 Bj f j−1 (αt,u ) = Σnj=1 Bj wtj−1 = B̃t,∗ ,
where wt = f (αt,u ) for u ∈ [1 : m], which are the values of encoding functions pA and pB at the
evaluation points x = αt,u .
Remark 1. (Quantization and embedding into the finite field) In this paper, we assume that input
matrices are defined on a finite field Fq , while the dataset for machine learning and polynomial
function f (x) used for encoding are based on the real field R. To express real field data and function
in the finite field, we quantize matrices A, B, and f (x) using v bits, and embed them into a finite
field Fq of integers at modulo a prime q. Quantization of real numbers and embedding into the finite
field have been used in several previous works (Yu et al., 2017; Ji et al., 2021; Tang et al., 2022). To
analyze the effect of quantization in training of the deep neural network, we provide an experiment
in Appendix B.
Remark 2. (Polynomials for GVC) GVC can be constructed using any polynomial satisfying
Condition I. For instance, Chebyshev polynomial, which has been used in several coded computing
studies (Fahim & Cadambe, 2021; Hong et al., 2021), can be used as f (x) by using quantization as
stated in Remark 1. We also provide the proof in Appendix C.
Remark 3. (Reduced Computational
                               E  overhead for encoding) In GVC,    since it is guaranteed B̃t,u =
                                                                1
B̃t,∗ , ∀u ∈ [1 : m] for t ∈ 1 : m , the master encodes (1 + m )E matrices to assign E tasks,
instead of encoding 2E matrices as in the conventional methods. Thus, the computational overhead
for encoding can be lowered by GVC.

4.2     TASK A SSIGNMENT AND C OMPUTING AT WORKERS

                                                                            E
To assign the tasks to workers, the master randomly rearranges workers into m groups of same size,
                                         E
which can be denoted as Wt,u for t ∈ 1 : m and u ∈ [1 : m], and distributes Ãt,u , B̃t,u to Wt,u .
Each worker Wt,u computes the assigned task C̃t,u = Ãt,u B̃t,u , which corresponds to the value of
the evaluation function pC (x) at the evaluation point x = αt,u , where pC (x) is given by

                    pC (x) = pA (x) × pB (x) = Σm    n
                                                i=1 Σj=1 Ai Bj x
                                                                 i−1 j−1
                                                                    f    (x).                          (4)
After each worker finishes the assigned task, it returns its computation result to the master.

4.3     G ROUP - WISE V ERIFICATION FOR GVC

After receiving the results from workers, the master begins a verification process. We first explain a
group-wise verification process and suggest two-stage verification algorithm based on this process.

4.3.1    A GROUP - WISE V ERIFICATION T RIAL (GVT)
                                                                                      E
Let us denote workers with finished computation among {Wt,u }m u=1 by Tt for t ∈ [1 : m ]. By GVC,
a master can verify results from group Tt in a single trial. In conventional verifiable computing
                                                     ′
approach, a master verifies the computation result C̃i for i ∈ [1 : E] individually. However, if
the tasks are encoded by GVC, it is ensured that ΣTt C̃t,u = ΣTt Ãt,u B̃t,u = ΣTt Ãt,u B̃t,∗ =
ΣTt Ãt,u × B̃t,∗ for a group of workers Tt among {Wt,u }m
                                                         u=1 where |Tt | = k (k ≤ m). Therefore,


                                                    5
     Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


     the master can verify k computation results Ãt,u B̃t,u in a group by verifying ΣTt Ãt,u ×B̃t,∗ instead.
     On the basis of this fact, we suggest a process for group-wise verification trial (GVT).
     Verification key generation: For each trial of group-wise verification, a master generates a random
                   a
     key r̄t ∈ F1× m and computes a verification key s̄1,t = r̄t ΣTt Ãt,u .
     Group-wise Correctness check: The master computes s̄2,t = k1 s̄1,t ΣTt B̃t,u = s̄1,t × B̃t,∗ =
     r̄t ΣTt Ãt,u × B̃t,∗ = r̄t ΣTt (Ãt,u B̃t,u ) = r̄t ΣTt C̃t,u and s̄′2,t = r̄t ΣTt C̃′t,u from the received
     computation results. If s̄2,t ̸= s̄′2,t , then the master marks the output of verification trial as Positive,
     which implies there exist more than one adversarial worker in the tested group Tt , and marks as
     Negative otherwise.5

     4.3.2    T WO - STAGE VERIFICATION ALGORITHM

     We now provide a two-stage verification algorithm of GVC, given by Algorithm 1.6


   Algorithm 1: Group-wise Verifiable Coded Computing
 1 Two-stage group-wise verification: After receiving all computation results from workers, the
    master begins group-wise verification.
                   E
 2   for t ∈ [1 : m  ] do
 3    The master verifies m workers using GVT in Section 4.3.1, where Tt = {Wt,u }m u=1 .
 4    if Group-wise verification result for Tt is negative then
 5         Put all workers in Tt to a set of non-adversarial workers T n .        // Stage 1
 6    else
 7         Put all workers in Tt to a set of possible adversarial workers T p .
 8    if |T n | ≥ R then
 9         break;
10     if |T n | < R then
11       The master verifies each worker in T p using GVT for k = 1, and put non-adversarial
           workers whose verification result is negative to T n until |T n | = R.  // Stage 2


     Two-stage group-wise verification: After receiving all computation results of tasks from workers,
     the master starts group-wise verification based on GVT. However, one thing we should take into
     account is that GVC can verify up to m results at once. Thus, we propose a two-stage group-wise
     verification algorithm adjusted to the parameter m.

                                                                           E
             • Stage 1: The master groups {Wt,u }m  u=1 as Tt for t ∈ [1 : m ]. The master performs a
               group-wise verification on Tt using GVT.
             • Stage 2: The master verifies each computation result in Tt if group-wise verification result
               for Tt is positive, until it achieves R non-adversarial workers to obtain C.

     4.4     D ECODING AT THE MASTER

     After verifying R non-adversarial computation results, the master starts decoding. As we can see in
     equation 1 and equation 4, Ai Bj for i ∈ [1 : m], j ∈ [1 : n] can be retrieved from pC (x) to achieve
     C. Since C̃t,u = pC (αt,u ) and pC (x) is a polynomial of degree mn−1, it can be interpolated from
     mn distinct value of C̃t,u . Hence, the master needs any fastest mn non-adversarial computation
     results to decode the final output C. Thus, the recovery threshold of GVC is R = mn.

        5
           It should be noted that group-wise verification trial has the same accuracy with the individual verification
     in Freivalds (1977). We demonstrate this by experiment under various adversarial attacks in Appendix D.
         6
           We do not consider straggler effects here for simplicity, but provide a modified verification algorithm of
     GVC that considers straggler effects in Section 4.5.


                                                             6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Decoding can be done by the inversion of the coefficient matrix in
                  β1 0 . . . β1 m−1                           β1 m−1 f (β1 )n−1
                                                                                                     
                                                                                                           
   C̃1                                       f (β1 ) . . .                                         A1 B1
 ..             ..                         ..                     ..                              ..
 .  =                                                                           ⊗ Im  a  ×          ,
                                                                                       a
                                                                                                         
                     .                            .                    .                  ×m           .
    C̃mn            βmn 0   ...   βmn m−1     f (βmn ) . . .   βmn m−1
                                                                       f (βmn )n−1                 A m n B
                                                                                              (5)
where C̃k and βk for k ∈ [1 : mn] denote the fastest mn computation results and the evaluation
points of them, respectively and ⊗ denotes Kronecker product. It can be also achieved by
interpolation (Kedlaya & Umans, 2011) of pC (x) and extracting Ai Bj from pC (x) by repeated
division of f (x). We provide more detailed decoding process in Appendix E.
Remark 4. (Optimal Recovery threshold) It has been known in Yu et al. (2017) that the optimal
recovery threshold for coded matrix multiplication is mn when A and B are divided into m and
n partitions in a row-wise and a column-wise manner, respectively. Thus GVC also achieves the
optimal recovery threshold.
Remark 5. (Upper bound of tolerating adversarial attacks) Since GVCC requires mn computation
results to obtain the final product, GVCC can tolerate up to lupper = E − S − mn adversarial
workers, where S denotes the number of stragglers.

4.5   M ODIFIED VERIFICATION ALGORITHM OF GVCC UNDER S TRAGGLER E FFECTS

We now provide a modified algorithm that can be used under straggler effects.
Two-stage group-wise verification in modified GVCC:
                                                                       E
       • Stage 1: The master groups {Wt,u }m   u=1 as Tt for t ∈ [1 : m ] as in GVCC. The master
         establishes a certain threshold z. The master starts a group-wise verification for the
         computation results of all groups received up to that time when the master receives z
         computation results from workers.
       • Stage 2: The master first individually verifies the computation results that arrived late, and
         verifies each computation result in Tt if group-wise verification result for Tt is positive,
         until it finds R non-adversarial workers to obtain C.

By setting a proper threshold z, the modified verification algorithm can efficiently deal with straggler
effects. However, it may lose some of the benefits of group-wise verification as a trade-off because
the master verifies a smaller group of workers in a single trial. The impact on overall processing
time will be analyzed in Section 6 via experiment.

5     R ELATED W ORKS
In distributed computing, there have been several studies on handling adversarial attacks and
straggler effects simultaneously. First, to have tolerance over adversarial attacks and provide
resiliency to straggler effects, Lagrange coded computing (LCC) has been suggested in Yu et al.
(2019). In LCC, a master requires 2K additional non-adversarial workers to be robust against
K adversarial workers. In addition, a list-decoding approach has been applied to distributed
matrix multiplication in Subramaniam et al. (2019), and it reduces the additional cost of tolerating
adversarial attacks by a factor of two asymptotically compared to LCC. However, the computational
complexity to perform list-decoding increases quadratically with the number of workers.
Recently, verifiable computing has been introduced to coded computing schemes. The authors of
Tang et al. (2022) have suggested AVCC to counter straggler and adversarial workers. In AVCC,
a master only requires K additional computation results from workers if there exist K adversarial
workers, because it can verify each computation result using a verification key. However, since
the master can verify only a single computation result at a time, the verification process can be a
bottleneck for overall processing if the master utilizes numerous workers in the system.
In addition, there have been several studies that are based on a group-wise identification to find
adversarial workers, while mitigating straggler effects using coded matrix multiplication. First,


                                                   7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


group testing algorithm has been applied to coded computing in Solanki et al. (2019). However,
since it has a constraint on the minimum testable size for group testing, the number of test trials
can be significantly large. To mitigate this limitation, hierarchical group testing (HGT) has been
proposed in Hong et al. (2022). However, HGT imposes high computational complexity on a
master since it requires matrix inversion or Reed-Solomon decoding to identify adversarial workers,
whereas verifiable computing requires matrix-vector multiplications to verify them.

6   E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS


            (a) Number of adversarial workers l              (b) Straggler probability


                     (c) Matrix shape                        (d) Number of workers
                Figure 2: Overall processing time of AVCC, HGT, and GVCC (proposed).

In this section, we provide the performance of GVCC and modified GVCC in terms of overall
processing time, and compare with the two existing schemes, AVCC (Tang et al., 2022) and HGT
(Hong et al., 2022). We proceed distributed matrix multiplication in a cluster of Amazon EC2
cloud, and use one t2.2xlarge node as a master and use t2.micro nodes as workers. Implementation
is done by MPI4py (Dalcín et al., 2005) and matrices are randomly generated by NumPy. We set the
verification time limit as 100 seconds and if the verification process takes more than 100 seconds, we
terminate the experiment and mark it as a failure. We run four experiments and evaluate the overall
processing time. Each experiment is repeated 20 times and the result is depicted in Fig. 2. We also
list stage-wise processing time (encoding (Enc), task assignment (SA), computation & return (CR),
verification (Ver), decoding (Dec), and overall processing times) of experiments in Appendix F.1.
In Fig. 2(a), we compare overall processing time with different number of adversarial workers l,
when A ∈ F3500×6300
              q         , B ∈ F6300×3600
                                q          , m = 5, n = 9, and E = 60. GVCC speeds up overall
processing time compared to AVCC for all cases, and also shows faster overall processing than
HGT when l ≥ 3. As we have claimed in Remark 3, the computational overhead for encoding the
tasks can lowered by GVC, which results in reduced encoding and overall processing time compared
to AVCC. Furthermore, for the verification time of HGT increases significantly with the number of
workers, the verification and overall processing time of GVCC is much lower than HGT when l ≥ 3.
To be specific, GVCC speeds up verification time up to ×3.34 than AVCC, and ×174 than HGT,
and HGT even fails to proceed verification process in the given time limit (100s) when l = 5.
In Fig. 2(b), we show the overall processing time with stragglers in distributed computing
systems, where A ∈ F3500×6300
                     q        , B ∈ F6300×3600
                                      q        , m = 5, n = 9, E = 60, and l = 3. To


                                                  8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


simulate straggler effects in distributed computing, we randomly pick stragglers with probabilities
p = 0, 0.02, 0.05, 0.1, and 0.2. Stragglers are forced to run background thread which slows down
the execution of assigned tasks. In this experiment, we use the modified algorithm in Section 4.5 for
GVCC (z = R = 63) and compare with AVCC and HGT. Since verification is done asynchronously
for the received computation results in GVCC, verification time is added to computation & return
time. As we can see in the Fig 2(b), GVCC outperforms AVCC and HGT for all cases. Thus,
it is claimed that GVCC can efficiently handle straggler effects while leveraging a group-wise
verification approach. We also provide additional experiments with a modified algorithm on another
parameter setting in Appendix F.2.
In Fig. 2(c), we compare overall processing time with different shape of input matrices with three
parameter settings: i) Square (A ∈ Fq3600×3600 , B ∈ Fq3600×3600 ), ii) Tall (A ∈ Fq4500×1500 , B ∈
F1500×4500
  q        ), iii) Fat (A ∈ Fq2700×7000 , B ∈ Fq7000×2700 ), where m = 5, n = 9, l = 3, and E = 60.
GVC speeds up overall processing time compared to AVCC and HGT, regardless of matrix shapes.
The performance of GVCC with the different numbers of workers is depicted in Fig. 2(d). We
run experiments to multiply two input matrices A ∈ F2100×4000
                                                          q          and B ∈ F4000×3861
                                                                                 q       , with three
parameter setting (E, m, n): i) (60, 5, 9), ii) (84, 6, 11), iii) (112, 7, 13), where l = 3. GVCC
achieves the lowest overall processing time in every setting. To be specific, GVCC speeds up
verification time up to ×3.5 than AVCC and ×57.29 than HGT. Furthermore, GVCC speeds up
overall processing time up to ×1.20 than AVCC and ×1.10 than HGT.

                                          Group-wise verifiable size m       Matrix Size N
                 Verification time (ms)
                                            5     6            7          900 1800 3600
                 HGT                      2750 1920          2440        2348 9554 42163
                 AVCC                      140  170           210         16     45      163
                 GVC                       48    48           46          5.6    17       62

          Table 1: Verification time of GVC, AVCC, and HGT with different matrix size and m.


Furthermore, it should be noted that GVC shows more benefit than AVCC as N or m gets bigger.
                                                              R
In specific, our methods have a verification complexity of O( m N 2 ) while AVCC has O(RN 2 ). To
show the performance of GVC with different m and N , we indicate the verification time of GVC
and the other schemes in table 1. We used parameter setting ((E, m, n): i) (60, 5, 9), ii) (84, 6, 11),
iii) (112, 7, 13), where l = 3 (which are same setting with experiment in Fig 2(d)). We indicate the
verification time of HGT, AVCC, and GVC in Table 1. We can see that the verification time of
GVC remains the same value, while other methods show an increase in the verification time. This is
because other methods require the verification of more results as the recovery threshold increases,
but GVC has the same number of groups that needs to be verified. Moreover, to show the benefits
of GVC, we conduct additional experiments. We experimented with the same parameter setting
in Fig 2(a) when l = 3 and only changed the size of the matrix (m, n = 5, 9, E = 60, l = 3 and
a = b = c = N ). We have changed the size of input matrix N from 900 to 3600 to show the benefit
of GVC as N increases, and indicate the verification time in Table 1. As we can see in the table,
verification gap between GVCC and other scheme becomes larger as N increases. In specific, HGT
shows far larger verification time than GVC. Moreover, gap between AVCC and GVC increases
×2.66 when N becomes ×2, and ×9.36 when N becomes ×4.


7   C ONCLUSION

In this paper, we propose GVCC, a robust and fast distributed computing scheme for matrix
multiplication that can deal with two important problems: adversarial attacks and straggler effects.
By combining the verifiable computing with coded computing, GVCC allows a master to verify
a group of computation results at a time, reducing verification time to find adversarial workers
and provide resiliency to straggler effects simultaneously. Consequently, GVCC is shown to
have significant reduction in verification and overall processing time, and experimental results
demonstrate the effectiveness of GVCC in distributed computing systems.


                                                      9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


R EFERENCES
Eugene Bagdasaryan, Andreas Veit, Yiqing Hua, Deborah Estrin, and Vitaly Shmatikov. How to
  backdoor federated learning. In Proceedings of the Twenty Third International Conference on
  Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, volume 108, pp. 2938–2948. PMLR, 26–28 Aug 2020.
Battista Biggio, Blaine Nelson, and Pavel Laskov.       Poisoning attacks against support vector
  machines. In ICML, 2012.
Peva Blanchard, El Mahdi El Mhamdi, Rachid Guerraoui, and Julien Stainer. Machine learning with
  adversaries: Byzantine tolerant gradient descent. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, volume 30, 2017.
Lisandro Dalcín, Rodrigo Paz, and Mario Storti. Mpi for python. Journal of Parallel and Distributed
  Computing, 65(9):1108–1115, 2005.
Lisandro Dalcín, Rodrigo Paz, Pablo Kler, and Alejandro Cosimo. Parallel distributed computing
  using python. Advances in Water Resources, 34(9):1124–1139, 2011. ISSN 0309-1708.
Jeffrey Dean and Luiz André Barroso. The tail at scale. Commun. ACM, 56(2):74–80, 2013.
Sanghamitra Dutta, Viveck Cadambe, and Pulkit Grover. Short-dot: Computing large linear
  transforms distributedly using coded short dot products. In Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, volume 29, 2016.
Sanghamitra Dutta, Mohammad Fahim, Farzin Haddadpour, Haewon Jeong, Viveck Cadambe,
  and Pulkit Grover. On the optimal recovery threshold of coded matrix multiplication. IEEE
  Transactions on Information Theory, 66(1):278–301, 2019.
El Mahdi El Mhamdi, Rachid Guerraoui, and Sébastien Rouault. The hidden vulnerability of
  distributed learning in Byzantium. In Proceedings of the 35th International Conference on
  Machine Learning, volume 80, pp. 3521–3530. PMLR, 10–15 Jul 2018.
Mohammad Fahim and Viveck R. Cadambe. Numerically stable polynomially coded computing.
 IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, 67(5):2758–2785, 2021.
Rusins Freivalds. Probabilistic machines can use less running time. In IFIP congress, volume 839,
  1977.
Sangwoo Hong, Heecheol Yang, and Jungwoo Lee. Squeezed polynomial codes: Communication-
  efficient coded computation in straggler-exploiting distributed matrix multiplication. IEEE
  Access, 8:190516–190528, 2020.
Sangwoo Hong, Heecheol Yang, Youngseok Yoon, Taehyun Cho, and Jungwoo Lee. Chebyshev
  polynomial codes: Task entanglement-based coding for distributed matrix multiplication. In
  Proceedings of the 38th International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 139, pp. 4319–
  4327. PMLR, 18–24 Jul 2021.
Sangwoo Hong, Heecheol Yang, and Jungwoo Lee. Hierarchical group testing for byzantine
  attack identification in distributed matrix multiplication. IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in
  Communications, 40(3):1013–1029, 2022.
Peng Huang, Chuanxiong Guo, Lidong Zhou, Jacob R. Lorch, Yingnong Dang, Murali Chintalapati,
  and Randolph Yao. Gray failure: The achilles’ heel of cloud-scale systems. In Proceedings of
  the 16th Workshop on Hot Topics in Operating Systems, HotOS 2017, Whistler, BC, Canada, May
  8-10, 2017, pp. 150–155. ACM, 2017.
Ruowan Ji, Asit Kumar Pradhan, Anoosheh Heidarzadeh, and Krishna R. Narayanan. Squeezed
  random khatri-rao product codes. In 2021 IEEE Information Theory Workshop (ITW), pp. 1–6,
  2021.
Kiran S Kedlaya and Christopher Umans. Fast polynomial factorization and modular composition.
  SIAM Journal on Computing, 40(6):1767–1802, 2011.


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Kangwook Lee, Maximilian Lam, Ramtin Pedarsani, Dimitris S. Papailiopoulos, and Kannan
  Ramchandran. Speeding up distributed machine learning using codes. IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory,
  64(3):1514–1529, 2018.
Hyegyeong Park, Kangwook Lee, Jy-Yong Sohn, Changho Suh, and Jaekyun Moon. Hierarchical
  coding for distributed computing. In 2018 IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory
  (ISIT), pp. 1630–1634, 2018. doi: 10.1109/ISIT.2018.8437669.
Amirhossein Reisizadeh, Saurav Prakash, Ramtin Pedarsani, and Amir Salman Avestimehr. Coded
 computation over heterogeneous clusters. IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, 65(7):4227–
 4242, 2019.
Saeid Sahraei and A. Salman Avestimehr. Interpol: Information theoretically verifiable polynomial
  evaluation. In 2019 IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory (ISIT), pp. 1112–1116,
  2019.
Jy-yong Sohn, Dong-Jun Han, Beongjun Choi, and Jaekyun Moon. Election coding for distributed
  learning: Protecting signsgd against byzantine attacks. In Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, volume 33, pp. 14615–14625, 2020.
Atnav Solanki, Martina Cardone, and Soheil Mohajer. Non-colluding attacks identification in
  distributed computing. In 2019 IEEE Information Theory Workshop (ITW), pp. 1–5, 2019.
Mahdi Soleymani, Ramy E. Ali, Hessam Mahdavifar, and A. Salman Avestimehr. List-decodable
 coded computing: Breaking the adversarial toleration barrier. IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in
 Information Theory, 2(3):867–878, 2021.
Adarsh M. Subramaniam, Anoosheh Heidarzadeh, and Krishna R. Narayanan. Collaborative
  decoding of polynomial codes for distributed computation. In 2019 IEEE Information Theory
  Workshop (ITW), pp. 1–5, 2019.
Rashish Tandon, Qi Lei, Alexandros G. Dimakis, and Nikos Karampatziakis. Gradient coding:
  Avoiding stragglers in distributed learning. In Proceedings of the 34th International Conference
  on Machine Learning, volume 70, pp. 3368–3376. PMLR, 06–11 Aug 2017.
Tingting Tang, Ramy E. Ali, Hanieh Hashemi, Tynan Gangwani, Salman Avestimehr, and Murali
  Annavaram. Adaptive verifiable coded computing: Towards fast, secure and private distributed
  machine learning. In 2022 IEEE International Parallel and Distributed Processing Symposium
  (IPDPS), pp. 628–638, 2022.
Da Wang, Gauri Joshi, and Gregory Wornell. Efficient task replication for fast response times in
  parallel computation. In The 2014 ACM International Conference on Measurement and Modeling
  of Computer Systems, pp. 599–600, 2014.
Hongyi Wang, Kartik Sreenivasan, Shashank Rajput, Harit Vishwakarma, Saurabh Agarwal, Jy-
  yong Sohn, Kangwook Lee, and Dimitris Papailiopoulos. Attack of the tails: Yes, you really can
  backdoor federated learning. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 33,
  pp. 16070–16084, 2020.
Qian Yu, Mohammad Ali Maddah-Ali, and A Salman Avestimehr. Polynomial codes: an optimal
  design for high-dimensional coded matrix multiplication. In Proceedings of the 31st International
  Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, pp. 4406–4416, 2017.
Qian Yu, Songze Li, Netanel Raviv, Seyed Mohammadreza Mousavi Kalan, Mahdi Soltanolkotabi,
  and Salman A. Avestimehr. Lagrange coded computing: Optimal design for resiliency, security,
  and privacy. In Proceedings of the Twenty-Second International Conference on Artificial
  Intelligence and Statistics, volume 89, pp. 1215–1225. PMLR, 16–18 Apr 2019.
Qian Yu, Mohammad Ali Maddah-Ali, and A Salman Avestimehr. Straggler mitigation in distributed
  matrix multiplication: Fundamental limits and optimal coding. IEEE Transactions on Information
  Theory, 66(3):1920–1933, 2020.


                                                11
