Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


3D-AWARE V IDEO G ENERATION
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT
         Generative models have emerged as an essential building block for many im-
         age synthesis and editing tasks. Recent advances in this field have also enabled
         high-quality 3D or video content to be generated that exhibits either multi-view
         or temporal consistency. With our work, we explore 4D generative adversarial
         networks (GANs) that learn unconditional generation of 3D-aware videos. By com-
         bining neural implicit representations with time-aware discriminator, we develop a
         GAN framework that synthesizes 3D video supervised only with monocular videos.
         We show that our method learns a rich embedding of decomposable 3D structures
         and motions that enables new visual effects of spatio-temporal renderings while
         producing imagery with quality comparable to that of existing 3D or video GANs.


Figure 1: 3D-Aware video generation. We show multiple frames and viewpoints of two 3D videos,
generated using our model trained on the FaceForensics dataset (Rössler et al., 2019). Our 4D GAN
generates 3D content of high quality while permitting control of time and camera extrinsics. Video
results can be viewed from our supplementary html.

1   I NTRODUCTION
Recent advances in generative adversarial networks (GANs) (Goodfellow et al., 2014) have led to
artificial synthesis of photorealistic images (Karras et al., 2019; 2020; 2021). These methods have
been extended to enable unconditional generation of high-quality videos (Chen et al., 2021a; Yu
et al., 2022) and multi-view-consistent 3D scenes (Gu et al., 2022; Chan et al., 2022; Or-El et al.,
2022). However, despite important applications in visual effects, computer vision, and other fields,
no generative model has been demonstrated that is successful in synthesizing 3D videos to date.
We propose the first 4D GAN that learns to generate multi-view-consistent video data from single-
view videos. For this purpose, we develop a 3D-aware video generator to synthesize 3D content that
is animated with learned motion priors, and permits viewpoint manipulations. Two key elements of
our framework are a time-conditioned 4D generator that leverages emerging neural implicit scene
representations (Park et al., 2019; Mescheder et al., 2019; Mildenhall et al., 2020) and a time-aware
video discriminator. Our generator takes as input two latent code vectors for 3D identity and motion,
respectively, and it outputs a 4D neural fields that can be queried continuously at any spatio-temporal
xyzt coordinate. The generated 4D fields can be used to render realistic video frames from arbitrary
camera viewpoints. To train the 4D GAN, we use a discriminator that takes two randomly sampled
video frames from the generator (or from real videos) along with their time differences to score
the realism of the motions. Our model is trained with an adversarial loss where the generator is
encouraged, by the discriminator, to render realistic videos across all sampled camera viewpoints.
Our contributions are following: i) We introduce the first 4D GAN which generates 3D-aware videos
supervised only from single-view 2D videos. ii) We develop a framework combining implicit fields
with a time-aware discriminator, that can be continuously rendered for any xyzt coordinate. iii) We


                                                  1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


evaluate the effectiveness of our approach on challenging, unstructured video datasets. We show that
the trained 4D GAN is able to synthesize plausible videos that allows viewpoint changes, whose
visual and motion qualities are competitive against the state-of-the-art 2D video GANs’ outputs.

2    R ELATED W ORK
In this section, we discuss the most relevant literature on image and video synthesis as well as neural
implicit representations in the context of 2D and 3D content generation. See supplementary document
for a more complete list of references.

GAN-based Image Synthesis Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) (Goodfellow et al., 2014)
have demonstrated impressive results on multiple synthesis tasks such as image generation (Brock
et al., 2019; Karras et al., 2019; 2020), image editing (Wang et al., 2018; Shen et al., 2020; Ling et al.,
2021) and image-to-image translation (Isola et al., 2017; Zhu et al., 2017; Choi et al., 2018). To allow
for increased controllability, during the image synthesis process, several recent works have proposed
to disentangle the underlying factors of variation (Reed et al., 2014; Chen et al., 2016; Lee et al.,
2020; Shoshan et al., 2021) or rely on pre-defined templates (Tewari et al., 2020a;b). However, since
most of these methods operate on 2D images, they often lack physically-sound control in terms of
viewpoint manipulation. In this work, we advocate modelling both the image and the video generation
process in 3D in order to ensure controllable generations.

Neural Implicit Representations Neural Implicit Representation (NIR) (Mescheder et al., 2019;
Park et al., 2019; Chen & Zhang, 2019) have been extensively employed in various generation tasks
due to their continuous, efficient, and differentiable nature. These tasks include 3D reconstruction of
objects and scenes, novel-view synthesis of static and dynamic scenes, inverse graphics, and video
representations. (Jiang et al., 2020; Chibane et al., 2020; Sitzmann et al., 2020; Barron et al., 2021;
Sajjadi et al., 2022; Park et al., 2021a; Li et al., 2021; Niemeyer et al., 2020; Chen et al., 2021a).
Among the most widely used NIRs are Neural Radiance Fields (NeRFs) (Mildenhall et al., 2020) that
combine NIRs with volumetric rendering to enforce 3D consistency while performing novel view
synthesis. In this work, we employ a generative variant of NeRF (Gu et al., 2022) and combine it
with a time-aware discriminator to learn a generative model of videos from unstructured videos.
Closely related to our work are recent approaches that try to control the motion and the pose of scenes
(Lin et al., 2022; Liu et al., 2021a; Zhang et al., 2021; Ren et al., 2021). In particular, they focus
on transferring or controlling the motion of their target objects instead of automatically generating
plausible motions. They often use networks overfitted to a single reconstructed scene (Chen et al.,
2021b; Zhang et al., 2021) or rely on pre-defined templates of human faces or bodies (Liu et al.,
2021a; Ren et al., 2021). In our work, we build a 4D generative model that can automatically generate
diverse 3D content along with its plausible motion without using any pre-defined templates.

3D-Aware Image Generations Another line of research investigates how 3D representations can be
incorporated in generative settings for improving the image quality (Park et al., 2017; Nguyen-Phuoc
et al., 2018) and increasing the control over various aspects of the image formation process (Gadelha
et al., 2017; Chan et al., 2021; Henderson & Ferrari, 2019). Towards this goal, several works (Henzler
et al., 2019; Nguyen-Phuoc et al., 2019; 2020) proposed to train 3D-aware GANs from a set of
unstructured images using voxel-based representations. However, due to the low voxel resolution
and the inconsistent view-controls stemming from the use of pseudo-3D structures that rely on
non-physically-based 2D-3D conversions, these methods tend to generate images with artifacts and
struggle to generalize in real-world scenarios. More recent approaches rely on volume rendering to
generate 3D objects (Schwarz et al., 2020; Chan et al., 2021; Niemeyer & Geiger, 2021a). Similarly,
(Zhou et al., 2021; Chan et al., 2021; DeVries et al., 2021) explored the idea of combining NeRF
with GANs for designing 3D-aware image generators. Likewise, StyleSDF (Or-El et al., 2022) and
StyleNeRF (Gu et al., 2022) proposed to combine an MLP-based volume renderer with a style-based
generator (Karras et al., 2020) to produce high-resolution 3D-aware images. Deng et al. (2022)
explored learning a generative radiance field on 2D manifolds and Chan et al. (2022) introduced a
3D-aware architecture that exploits both implicit and explicit representations. In contrast to this line
of research that focuses primarily on 3D-aware image generation, we are interested in 3D-aware
video generation. In particular, we build on top of StyleNeRF (Gu et al., 2022) to allow control on


                                                    2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


the 3D camera pose during the video synthesis. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first work
towards 3D-aware video generation trained from unstructured 2D data.

GAN-based Video Synthesis Inspired by the success of GANs and adversarial training on photore-
alistic image generation, researchers shifted their attention to various video synthesis tasks (Tulyakov
et al., 2018; Holynski et al., 2021; Tian et al., 2021). Several works pose the video synthesis as an
autoregressive video prediction task and seek to generate future frames conditioned on the previous
using either recurrent (Kalchbrenner et al., 2017; Walker et al., 2021) or attention-based (Rakhimov
et al., 2020; Weissenborn et al., 2020; Yan et al., 2021) models. Other approaches (Saito et al., 2017;
Tulyakov et al., 2018; Aich et al., 2020) tried to disentangle the motion from the image generation
during the video synthesis process. To facilitate generating high-quality frames (Tian et al., 2021;
Fox et al., 2021) employed a pre-trained image generator of (Karras et al., 2020). Closely related
to our method are the recent work of DIGAN (Yu et al., 2022) and StlyeGAN-V (Skorokhodov
et al., 2022) that generate videos at continuous time steps, without conditioning on previous frames.
DIGAN (Yu et al., 2022) employs an NIR-based image generator (Skorokhodov et al., 2021) for
learning continuous videos and introduces two discriminators: the first discriminates the realism of
each frame and the second operates on image pairs and seeks to determine the realism of the motion.
Similarly, StyleGAN-V (Skorokhodov et al., 2022) employs a style-based GAN (Karras et al., 2020)
and a single discriminator that operates on sparsely sampled frames. In contrast to (Yu et al., 2022;
Skorokhodov et al., 2022), we focus on 3D-aware video generation. In particular, we build on top of
StyleNeRF (Gu et al., 2022) and DIGAN (Yu et al., 2022) and demonstrate the ability of our model
to render high quality videos from diverse viewpoint angles. Note that this task is not possible for
prior works that do not explicitly model the image formation process in 3D.

3     M ETHOD
The two main components of our 4D GAN framework are a time-conditioned neural scene generator
and a time-aware discriminator. Our generator networks take as input two independent noise vectors,
m and z, that respectively modulate the motion and the content of the 4D fields. To render an
image at a specific time step t, we sample the camera extrinsics according to dataset-dependent
distribution and conduct volume rendering through the time-conditioned radiance and density fields.
Our time-aware discriminator measures the realism of a pair of frames, given their time difference, to
promote plausible 3D video generation. The overview of our pipeline can be found in Fig. 2.

3.1   T IME -C ONDITIONED I MPLICIT F IELDS

We build on top of existing coordinate-based neural generators (Gu et al., 2022; Or-El et al., 2022)
to model continuous implicit fields using a Multi-layer Perceptron (MLP) that outputs a density
σ(x, t; z, m) and appearance feature f (x, t, d; z, m) for a given spatio-temporal query (x, t), and
view direction d. Here, z and m are 3D content and motion latent vectors, respectively.
We process a motion latent vector m sampled from a unit sphere with an MLP conditioned on time
step t ∈ [0, 1], to obtain a final motion vector n(m, t) via multiplicative conditioning:
                                n(m, t) = ψ 3 ◦ ψ 2 ◦ (t · (ψ 1 ◦ m)),                              (1)
        i
where ψ is a fully connected layer. Leaky ReLU activation is applied between the layers. Note that
our use of continuous time variable t allows rendering the video at an arbitrary frame rate, unlike
autoregressive models that can only sample discrete time steps.
The resulting motion vector n(m, t) is then used to control the output of the generator MLP gw (x, n)
along with the modulation parameters w(z) computed from the 3D content vector z:
                    gw (x, n) = ϕkw ◦ ϕk−1
                                       w   ◦ . . . ϕ2w ◦ (n(m, t) + ϕ1w ◦ γ(x)),                    (2)
where ϕiw is a fully connected layer (with Leaky ReLU activations between the layers) whose weights
are modulated by the style vector w, following the style-based generation techniques of (Gu et al.,
2022; Karras et al., 2020). The style vector is produced with a mapping MLP network ζ: w = ζ(z),
where z is sampled from the surface of unit sphere. γ(x) is a positional encoding vector of a spatial
query x that induces sharper appearances, following Mildenhall et al. (2020). We omit positional
encoding on the time step t, as the empirical results did not improve (see Sec. 4.3). Note that the


                                                   3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 2: Model architecture. The generator (left) takes 3D content and motion codes and the query
camera view to render an RGB image. Given a camera pose, we construct a ray image, from which
we sample xyz positions along the rays to be passed to the fourier feature layer. The content code is
transformed into w and modulate the intermediate features of MLP layers. The motion code, along
with the time query t, is processed with the motion generator and added to the generator branch. The
video discriminator takes two random frames from a video and their time difference and outputs
real/fake prediction. The image discriminator takes individual frames and outputs real/fake label.
additive conditioning allows us to easily disable the influence of motion by setting n to be 0, which
promotes training on both image and video data when necessary.
The density value at x is then computed by passing the feature gw (x, n) to a two layer MLP φσ :
                              σ(x, t; z, m) = φσ ◦ gw(z) (x, n(t, m))                          (3)
Image Rendering To render an image from a virtual camera with pose p, we compute an appearance
feature for a ray r(l) = o + ld going through each pixel that emanates from the camera focus o
towards the direction d. Specifically, we approximate the volume rendering process with discrete
point sampling along the rays and process the aggregated ray features with an MLP, denoted hw ,
conditioned on the view direction d :
                                         "                                    #
                                               Z   lf
                f (r, t, d; z, m) = hw ◦ γ(d)           T (l)σ(r(l), t)gw (r(l), n)dl ,           (4)
                                                 li
                     Rl
where T (l) = exp(− li σ(r(s), t)ds). The volume rendering of Eq. 4 involves millions of MLP
queries and thus becomes quickly intractable with high resolution images. To reduce the computa-
tional overhead, we adopt the 2D upsampling CNN of StyleNeRF (Gu et al., 2022) to convert the
low-resolution volume rendering results of f into a high-resolution RGB image I:
                           Ip (t; z, m) = CNNup (f (Rp , t, d; z, m)),                       (5)
where Rp denotes an image composed of rays from camera pose p, with slight abuse of notation.

Background and Foreground Networks Videos consist of static background and moving fore-
ground, hence it would be ineffective to model both foreground and background using one network
and motion code. We follow the inverse sphere parameterization of Zhang et al. (2020) to model the
background with a second MLP network of gw that is modulated only with the content vector.

3.2   T RAINING
We train our 4D generator via adversarial loss, leveraging time-aware discriminators from the video
GAN literature. The key idea of our training is to encourage the generator to render realistic video
frames for all sampled viewpoints and time steps, by scoring their realism with the discriminators.


                                                 4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Time-Aware Discriminator Unlike autoregressive generators, our continuous 4D generator can
render frames at an arbitrary time step without knowing the ’past’ frames. This feature allows
using efficient time-aware discriminators (Skorokhodov et al., 2022; Yu et al., 2022) that only
look at sparsely sampled frames as opposed to the entire video that would require expensive 3D
convolutions to process. We adopt the 2D CNN discriminator Dtime of DIGAN (Yu et al., 2022) to
score the realism of the generated motion from two sampled frames. Specifically, we render a pair of
frames Ip (t1 ; z, m) and Ip (t2 ; z, m) from the same 3D scene and camera pose. The input to the
discriminator Dtime is a concatenation of the two RGB frames along with the time difference between
the frames expanded to the image resolution Irepeat (t2 − t1 ):
             Dtime : [Ip (t1 ; z, m), Ip (t2 ; z, m), Irepeat (t2 − t1 )] → R,   where t2 > t1 .     (6)
For real videos, we similarly pass a random pair of frames along with their time difference to Dtime .

Single Image Discriminator In theory, the time-aware discriminator Dtime should be able to
simultaneously measure the realism of the motion of the input pair and that of the individual frames.
However, we empirically observe that training a separate discriminator that specializes on single
frame discrimination improves quality (see Sec. 4.3). We therefore adopt another discriminator Dimage
that scores realism of individual images: Dtime : Ip (t; z, m) → R. Following 3D GAN approaches
(Gu et al., 2022; Or-El et al., 2022; Chan et al., 2022), we use StyleGAN2 (Karras et al., 2020)
discriminator architecture without modifications.

Loss Functions Our training objectives include the adversarial losses from the two discriminators
along with the R1 (Mescheder et al., 2018) and NeRF-Path regularizations (Gu et al., 2022):
    L(D, G) = Ladv (Dtime , G) + Ladv (Dimage , G) + λ1 LR1 (Dtime , Dimage ) + λ2 LNeRF-path (G),   (7)
where G denotes the entire image generator machinery in Eq. 5, and λ’s are balancing parameters. To
compute the adversarial losses we use the non-saturating objective. Note that our networks are trained
end-to-end without the progressive growing strategy. More details are provided in the supplementary.

Training on Image and Video Datasets The 3D structure of our generator emerges without 3D
supervision by enforcing adversarial loss from sampled camera views. Thus, it is crucial that our
video dataset features a diverse set of view angles. However, we notice that many of the popular
video GAN datasets feature narrow range of viewpoints (e.g., FaceForensics). To address this issue,
we seek to leverage existing 2D image datasets that are typically greater in quantity and diversity.
We explore two options: (1) We pre-train our generator model G on an image dataset and fine-tune
it on a video dataset. During pre-training, we ignore the temporal components and sample the 3D
content only. Such training can be done seamlessly by simply setting the motion vector n(m, t)
of Eq. 2 to be zero. After pre-training, we unfreeze the temporal components and minimize the
whole objective (Eq. 7) on a video dataset. (2) We train our generator on image and video datasets
simultaneously. We refer the reader to Sec. E in our supplementary for more details.

4     E XPERIMENTS
We conduct experiments to demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach in generating 3D-aware
videos, focusing on the new visual effects it enables and the quality of generated imagery. Moreover,
we conduct extensive ablation studies on the design components of our model.
4.1    E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP
Datasets We evaluate our approach on three publicly available, unstructured video datasets: the
FaceForensics (Rössler et al., 2019), the MEAD (Wang et al., 2020a), and the TaiChi (Siarohin et al.,
2019) dataset. FaceForensics contains 704 training videos of human faces sourced from YouTube.
While this dataset containing in-the-wild videos makes it a great testbed for synthesis tasks, many of
its videos are captured from frontal views with limited view diversity. On the other hand, the MEAD
dataset contains shorter videos capturing faces from discrete 7 angles, from which we randomly
subsample 10,000. Note that we ignore the identity correspondences of the videos and treat them
as independent unstructured videos. The TaiChi dataset contains 2942 in-the-wild videos of highly
diverse TaiChi performances sourced from the internet. Following DIGAN (Yu et al., 2022), we use
every fourth frame to make the motion more dynamic. Finally, we provide additional experiments on
the SkyTimelapse dataset (Xiong et al., 2018) in the supplementary.

                                                      5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


        View Angle
                                               Ours                                       DIGAN

 Time


Figure 3: Qualitative results on TaiChi Dataset. We visualize the spatio-temporal renderings of
two scenes sampled from our 4D GAN, where the horizontal axis indicates change of view angles
while the vertical axis indicates progress of time. The rightmost column shows two videos sampled
from DIGAN (Yu et al., 2022) that can only be viewed from a fixed camera angle. Our method
extends DIGAN in the spatial dimension while producing frames of comparable quality.



Metrics Following existing video GAN methods, we use Frechet Video Distance (FVD) (Un-
terthiner et al., 2018) as our main metric for measuring realism of the generated motion sequences.
In particular, we use the FVD protocol of (Skorokhodov et al., 2022) that alleviates the inconsis-
tency issues of the original FVD implementation (Unterthiner et al., 2018). Moreover, we consider
the following additional metrics: Average Content Distance (ACD) (Tulyakov et al., 2018), which
measures temporal consistency of a video and CPBD (Narvekar & Karam, 2011), which measures
the sharpness of an image. We also measure the face identity consistency (ID) across viewpoints by
computing ArcFace (Deng et al., 2019) cosine similarity, following Chan et al. (2022) (computed
only for 3D-aware methods). To provide a common metric to 2D and 3D-aware image generation
methods that cannot synthesize videos, we use the Frechet Image Distance (FID) (Heusel et al., 2017).
The individual frames for FID scores are randomly selected from all generated video frames.

4.2     M AIN R ESULTS
In this section, we provide experimental evidence that our model is able to learn a distribution of
3D-aware videos that permit spatio-temporal control. In particular, in Figures 1, 3, 4, and 5, we
visualize snapshots of sampled 4D scenes rendered from various time steps and camera angles across
various datasets. Moreover, we conduct both qualitative and quantitative comparisons against the


                                                 6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                  Our Spatio-Temporal Renderings                            Existing Video-GANs


Figure 4: Qualitative results on FaceForensics Dataset. The first 6 columns visualize two 4D
fields sampled from of our model trained on FaceForensics rendered from various spatio-temporal
snapshots. Note the high quality visuals and motions across diverse viewpoints. The last three
columns show the video samples of MoCoGAN-HD (Tian et al., 2021), DIGAN (Yu et al., 2022),
and StyleGAN-V (Skorokhodov et al., 2022), in that order.

strongest video GAN baselines on the all datasets. For each method, we use video length of 16 frames
and use image resolution of 2562 for FaceForensics and MEAD, and 1282 for TaiChi dataset.
FaceForensics is one of the most widely used dataset in the video generation literature, and thus we
measure the scores across a wide range of methods, including: 2D image (Karras et al., 2020) and
video generation works (Yu et al., 2022; Skorokhodov et al., 2022; Tulyakov et al., 2018; Tian et al.,
2021; Yan et al., 2021), and a 3D generation method (Gu et al., 2022). The qualitative results in Fig. 4
show our model’s ability to generate 4D visual effects, displaying the spatiotemporal renderings and
the physically-based zoom-in effects. The quantitative results in Table 1 confirm that our generated
imagery are of competitive quality against the strongest 2D and 3D baselines. Note that the metrics
for the 2D image and video methods are copied from the reports of Skorokhodov et al. (2022). We
train StyleNeRF (Gu et al., 2022) on FaceForensics from scratch.
Fig. 3 presents sampled scenes from our TaiChi-trained model with varying time and viewpoints,
showcasing our 4D learning on a challenging setup with complex motions and backgrounds. When
compared with one of the latest 2D video generation methods, DIGAN (Yu et al., 2022) (right-most
column), our method synthesizes frames with competitive visual fidelity while introducing another
degree of freedom. Note that we used the provided pre-trained model to recompute their score
following the FVD protocol used in Skorokhodov et al. (2022).
The MEAD dataset contains videos of faces taken from a wide range of viewpoints. We hypothe-
size that, for the 2D-based methods, a significant amount of expressive power will be wasted for
redundantly modeling the diverse views in 2D, while the 3D approach would only need to learn
a shared representation across views. The results, shown in Fig. 5, indeed suggest higher visual
quality for our 4D approach, while allowing rendering from 7 different viewpoints. Our quanti-
tative analysis in Tab. 4.2 supports our observations – our FVD is noticeably better than that of
StyleGAN-V (Skorokhodov et al., 2022). Note that the pre-trained model provided by Skorokhodov
et al. (2022) was trained only on frontal views, so we included non-frontal faces and re-trained. We
omit comparing against other video methods on MEAD that are already compared in Skorokhodov
et al. (2022). Finally, we demonstrate that the use of two independently sampled latent vectors
to modulate motion and content makes these two components separable. Fig. 6 showcases such
decomposition by applying two different motion codes to the same content code. We refer the reader
to our supplementary for additional results and videos to fully appreciate 4D renderings.


                                                   7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                  Our
                                  Our Results
                                      Results                                         StyleGAN-V
                                                                                      StyleGAN-V


Figure 5: Results on the MEAD Dataset. The first six columns show the spatio-temporal renderings
of our 4D GAN, where the vertical axis indicates the progress in time. The two right-most columns
show generated videos from StyleGAN-V (Skorokhodov et al., 2022). Zoom-in to inspect details.
      Type        Method             FVD (↓)       FID (↓)     ACD (↓)     CPBD (↑)     ID (↑)
      2D Image    StyleGAN2               -             8.4       -              -           -
                  VideoGPT            185.9         22.7           -          -              -
                  MoCoGAN             124.7         24.0           -          -              -
      2D Video    MoCoGAN-HD          111.8          7.1           -          -              -
                  DIGAN                62.5         19.1         1.09       0.171            -
                  StyleGAN-V           47.4          9.4         1.11       0.155            -
      3D Static   StyleNeRF               -         15.3          -         0.181       0.812
      3D Video    Ours                   68.7       13.7        0.965       0.196       0.861

Table 1: Quantitative Results on FaceForensics. We report metrics for all methods at 2562 pixel
resolution. For FVD and FID of 2D image and video methods, we use the numbers reported in
StyleGAN-V. We omit ACD and CPBD metrics for methods whose checkpoints are not publicly
available. View-consistent identity (ID) is only computed for 3D-aware methods.

Method              FVD (↓)     ACD(↓)        CBPD(↑) Method             FVD(↓)      ACD(↓)      CBPD(↑)
StyleGAN-V           109.3       0.136          0.509     DIGAN          151.7       0.537        0.672
Ours                 55.4        0.060          0.469     Ours           158.3       0.552        0.632

         Table 2: Results on MEAD Dataset.                    Table 3: Results on TaiChi Dataset.

4.3     A BLATION

We conduct ablation studies to gauge how the design choices of our algorithm affect the quality of
4D scene generations. We use TaiChi dataset, as its diverse scenes and motions help us identify the
effects of each component. Table 4 summarizes the numerical results, for further details see Sec. F in
the appendix.

Background NeRF We analyze the importance of the background NeRF based on the inverse
sphere parametrization of NeRF++ (Zhang et al., 2020) used for capturing unbounbed scenes. We
observe that using the additional background NeRF is critical for the model to disentangle the dynamic
and static parts in the video, leading to less motion artifacts and more static backgrounds.
Static and Dynamic Separation We forgo the use of the inverse sphere background NeRF of
Zhang et al. (2020) and instead decompose the scene with static and dynamic NeRFs, following Gao
et al. (2021a). We observe that this setup hurts the generation quality, suggesting that the background
parameterization of NeRF++ (Zhang et al., 2020) is critical for training a 4D generative model.


                                                    8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                Time

Motion Code


Figure 6: Motion and content decomposition. The two rows show respective video sequences that
share the same 3D content latent vector applied to different motion vectors. Here we show motions
with four time steps for two different identities. Note the difference in motions while the identities of
the person appear unchanged.

                                                  Method                                     FVD
Motion Generator Here we omit the                 Ours                                      158.3
use of motion vector and its mapping              w/o Background NeRF                       203.7
network, and instead pass the time value          w/ Static and Dynamic Separation          207.6
directly to the foreground NeRF. The use          w/o Motion Generator                      166.3
of motion network improves the output             w/ Positional Time Encoding               175.4
quality and induces useful decomposi-             w/o Image Discriminator                   234.3
tion of motion and 3D content.
                                               Table 4: Ablation studies on TaiChi Dataset.
Positional Time Encoding Our cur-
rent motion mapping MLP is conditioned
on the raw time value. We observe that applying positional encoding on the Fourier features leads to
repetitive and unnatural motions even when tuning the frequencies of the Fourier features. We leave
applying more complicated positional encoding of time as future work.

Image Discriminator Moreover, we demonstrate that adding a discriminator that specializes on
single-frame discrimination improves quality compared to using only a time-aware discriminator.

5             L IMITATIONS & D ISCUSSIONS
Our approach models the entire dynamic foreground with a single latent vector, which limits the
expressive capacity of our generative model. Learning with more number of independent latent
vectors, as tried in (Niemeyer & Geiger, 2021a; Hudson & Zitnick, 2021), could promote handling of
multi-objected scenes with more complex motions. Furthermore, our training scheme assumes static
camera and dynamic scenes, so it cannot handle videos taken from a moving camera. Modeling plau-
sible camera paths is an interesting but less explored problem. Being the first 4D GAN approach, our
method can only generate short video sequences (16 time steps, following Yan et al. (2021); Tian et al.
(2021); Yu et al. (2022)). We leave applying recent progress (Skorokhodov et al., 2022) in generating
longer videos as future work. Finally, we model the scene motion as a purely statistical phenomenon,
without explicitly considering physics, causality, semantics, and entity-to-entity interactions. These
topics remain important challenges, which we continue to explore.

6             C ONCLUSIONS
In this work, we introduced the first 4D generative model that synthesizes realistic 3D-aware videos,
supervised only from a set of unstructured 2D videos. Our proposed model combines the benefits of
video and 3D generative models to enable new visual effects that involve spatio-temporal renderings,
while at the same time maintaining the visual fidelity. The resulting latent space of rich, decomposable
motion and 3D content sets up the foundation to exciting new avenue of research towards interactive
content generation and editing that requires knowledge of underlying 3D structures and motion priors.


                                                   9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


7     E THICS S TATEMENT
7.1   P OTENTIAL M ISUSE

We condemn the use of neural rendering technologies towards generating realistic fake content to
harm specific entities or to spread misinformation, and we support future research on preventing such
unintended applications.
While our method can plausibly synthesize moving human heads and bodies, the technology in the
current form does not pose significant threat in enabling the spread of misinformation. We highlight
that our 4D GAN is an unconditional generative model. This means that the current method can only
generate random identities and motions and thus cannot be used for targeting specific individuals for
misinformation (e.g., creating a video of a particular politician). Similarly, being an unconditional
model, we cannot control a person with an user-desired motion, e.g., following a text prompt.
However, we acknowledge the possible development of future 4D GAN research that trains conditional
models that are able to synthesize videos of given individuals. We note that there are various existing
technologies to spot neural network-generated imagery with surprising level of accuracy (Cozzolino
et al., 2021; Yang et al., 2021; de Lima et al., 2020; Güera & Delp, 2018; Kumar et al., 2020; Wang
et al., 2020b). Among them, Wang et al. (2020b) suggests that the key of training such a detector
is a realistic generator, which can provide ample amount of training data for fake content detection.
In this context, we believe that our unconditional 4D GAN can be effectively used to fight against
the potential misuse of AI-generated videos by generating such training data, because it can sample
realistic videos from diverse identities, motions, and camera viewpoints.

7.2   P RIVACY I SSUES

We note readers that our experiments only used publicly available datasets that contain videos that
belong to public domains. Moreover, we emphasize that all of our figures and videos across the main
paper and the supplementary materials contain synthetic content. Therefore, all of the human faces or
bodies shown in this work do not involve any privacy concerns.

7.3   D IVERSITY AND P OTENTIAL D ISCRIMINATION

We have shown in our main paper and the supplementary that our trained model on the FaceForensics
and MEAD datasets are able to generate diverse human faces across gender and ethnicity. We
acknowledge that our generation results might not cover diversity of some human traits, e.g., weights,
disabilities, etc. Note the TaiChi dataset primarily contains videos of certain ethnicity due to the
skewed popularity of the activity.

8     R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT
We provide detailed implementation-related information of our algorithms in Sec. C of the supple-
mentary document. We will release the source code for training and testing our algorithms upon
acceptance. For experiments. we describe our datasets (along with how we processed them) and
metrics in Sec. 4.1 and provide in-depth details of our experiments in Sec. D of the supplementary
document to further improve the reproducibility.

R EFERENCES
Dinesh Acharya, Zhiwu Huang, Danda Pani Paudel, and Luc Van Gool. Towards high resolution
  video generation with progressive growing of sliced wasserstein gans. arXiv.org, abs/1810.02419,
  2018.
Abhishek Aich, Akash Gupta, Rameswar Panda, Rakib Hyder, M. Salman Asif, and Amit K. Roy-
  Chowdhury. Non-adversarial video synthesis with learned priors. In Proc. IEEE Conf. on Computer
 Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2020.
Matan Atzmon, Niv Haim, Lior Yariv, Ofer Israelov, Haggai Maron, and Yaron Lipman. Controlling
 neural level sets. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2019.


                                                 10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Jonathan T. Barron, Ben Mildenhall, Matthew Tancik, Peter Hedman, Ricardo Martin-Brualla, and
  Pratul P. Srinivasan. Mip-nerf: A multiscale representation for anti-aliasing neural radiance fields.
  In Proc. of the IEEE International Conf. on Computer Vision (ICCV), 2021.
Alexander W. Bergman, Petr Kellnhofer, and Gordon Wetzstein. Fast training of neural lumigraph
  representations using meta learning. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems
  (NeurIPS), 2021.
Andrew Brock, Jeff Donahue, and Karen Simonyan. Large scale GAN training for high fidelity
  natural image synthesis. In Proc. of the International Conf. on Learning Representations (ICLR),
  2019.
Rohan Chabra, Jan Eric Lenssen, Eddy Ilg, Tanner Schmidt, Julian Straub, Steven Lovegrove, and
  Richard A. Newcombe. Deep local shapes: Learning local sdf priors for detailed 3d reconstruction.
  In Andrea Vedaldi, Horst Bischof, Thomas Brox, and Jan-Michael Frahm (eds.), Proc. of the
  European Conf. on Computer Vision (ECCV), 2020.
Eric R Chan, Marco Monteiro, Petr Kellnhofer, Jiajun Wu, and Gordon Wetzstein. Pi-gan: Periodic
  implicit generative adversarial networks for 3d-aware image synthesis. In Proc. IEEE Conf. on
  Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2021.
Eric R Chan, Connor Z Lin, Matthew A Chan, Koki Nagano, Boxiao Pan, Shalini De Mello, Orazio
  Gallo, Leonidas Guibas, Jonathan Tremblay, Sameh Khamis, Tero Karras, and Gordon Wetzstein.
  Efficient geometry-aware 3d generative adversarial networks. In Proc. IEEE Conf. on Computer
  Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2022.
Hao Chen, Bo He, Hanyu Wang, Yixuan Ren, Ser Nam Lim, and Abhinav Shrivastava. Nerv: Neural
  representations for videos. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS),
  2021a.
Jianchuan Chen, Ying Zhang, Di Kang, Xuefei Zhe, Linchao Bao, Xu Jia, and Huchuan Lu. Animat-
   able neural radiance fields from monocular rgb videos. arXiv.org, abs/2012.05903, 2021b.
Xi Chen, Yan Duan, Rein Houthooft, John Schulman, Ilya Sutskever, and Pieter Abbeel. Infogan:
  Interpretable representation learning by information maximizing generative adversarial nets. In
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS), 2016.
Zhiqin Chen and Hao Zhang. Learning implicit fields for generative shape modeling. Proc. IEEE
  Conf. on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2019.
Julian Chibane, Thiemo Alldieck, and Gerard Pons-Moll. Implicit functions in feature space for
  3d shape reconstruction and completion. In Proc. IEEE Conf. on Computer Vision and Pattern
  Recognition (CVPR), 2020.
Yunjey Choi, Min-Je Choi, Munyoung Kim, Jung-Woo Ha, Sunghun Kim, and Jaegul Choo. Stargan:
  Unified generative adversarial networks for multi-domain image-to-image translation. In Proc.
  IEEE Conf. on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2018.
Aidan Clark, Jeff Donahue, and Karen Simonyan. Adversarial video generation on complex datasets.
  arXiv.org, abs/1907.06571, 2019.
Davide Cozzolino, Andreas Rössler, Justus Thies, Matthias Nießner, and Luisa Verdoliva. Id-reveal:
  Identity-aware deepfake video detection. In Proc. IEEE Conf. on Computer Vision and Pattern
  Recognition (CVPR), 2021.
Oscar de Lima, Sean Franklin, Shreshtha Basu, Blake Karwoski, and Annet George. Deepfake
  detection using spatiotemporal convolutional networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.14749, 2020.
Jiankang Deng, Jia Guo, Niannan Xue, and Stefanos Zafeiriou. Arcface: Additive angular margin
   loss for deep face recognition. In Proc. IEEE Conf. on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
   (CVPR), 2019.


                                                 11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Yu Deng, Jiaolong Yang, Jianfeng Xiang, and Xin Tong. Gram: Generative radiance manifolds for
  3d-aware image generation. In Proc. IEEE Conf. on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
  (CVPR), 2022.
Terrance DeVries, Miguel Ángel Bautista, Nitish Srivastava, Graham W. Taylor, and Joshua M.
  Susskind. Unconstrained scene generation with locally conditioned radiance fields. In Proc. of the
  IEEE International Conf. on Computer Vision (ICCV), 2021.
Gereon Fox, Ayush Tewari, Mohamed Elgharib, and Christian Theobalt. Stylevideogan: A temporal
  generative model using a pretrained stylegan. In Proc. of the British Machine Vision Conf. (BMVC),
  2021.
Matheus Gadelha, Subhransu Maji, and Rui Wang. 3d shape induction from 2d views of multiple
 objects. In Proc. of the International Conf. on 3D Vision (3DV), 2017.
Guy Gafni, Justus Thies, Michael Zollhofer, and Matthias Nießner. Dynamic neural radiance fields
  for monocular 4d facial avatar reconstruction. In CVPR, pp. 8649–8658, 2021.
Chen Gao, Yi-Chang Shih, Wei-Sheng Lai, Chia-Kai Liang, and Jia-Bin Huang. Portrait neural
  radiance fields from a single image. arXiv.org, abs/2012.05903, 2020.
Chen Gao, Ayush Saraf, Johannes Kopf, and Jia-Bin Huang. Dynamic view synthesis from dynamic
  monocular video. In Proc. of the IEEE International Conf. on Computer Vision (ICCV), 2021a.
Chen Gao, Ayush Saraf, Johannes Kopf, and Jia-Bin Huang. Dynamic view synthesis from dynamic
  monocular video. In ICCV, pp. 5712–5721, 2021b.
Ian J. Goodfellow, Jean Pouget-Abadie, Mehdi Mirza, Bing Xu, David Warde-Farley, Sherjil Ozair,
  Aaron C. Courville, and Yoshua Bengio. Generative adversarial nets. In Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems (NIPS), 2014.
Cade Gordon and Natalie Parde. Latent neural differential equations for video generation. In
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) Workshops, 2020.
Amos Gropp, Lior Yariv, Niv Haim, Matan Atzmon, and Yaron Lipman. Implicit geometric regu-
 larization for learning shapes. In Proc. of the International Conf. on Machine learning (ICML),
 2020.
Jiatao Gu, Lingjie Liu, Peng Wang, and Christian Theobalt. Stylenerf: A style-based 3d-aware
   generator for high-resolution image synthesis. In Proc. of the International Conf. on Learning
   Representations (ICLR), 2022.
David Güera and Edward J Delp. Deepfake video detection using recurrent neural networks. In IEEE
  International Conference on Advanced Video and Signal-Based Surveillance (AVSS), 2018.
Zekun Hao, Arun Mallya, Serge J. Belongie, and Ming-Yu Liu. Gancraft: Unsupervised 3d neural
  rendering of minecraft worlds. In Proc. of the IEEE International Conf. on Computer Vision
  (ICCV), 2021.
Paul Henderson and Vittorio Ferrari. Learning single-image 3d reconstruction by generative modelling
  of shape, pose and shading. International Journal of Computer Vision (IJCV), 2019.
Paul Henderson and Christoph H. Lampert. Unsupervised object-centric video generation and
  decomposition in 3d. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2020.
Philipp Henzler, Niloy J Mitra, , and Tobias Ritschel. Escaping plato’s cave: 3d shape from adversarial
  rendering. In Proc. of the IEEE International Conf. on Computer Vision (ICCV), 2019.
Martin Heusel, Hubert Ramsauer, Thomas Unterthiner, Bernhard Nessler, and Sepp Hochreiter. Gans
 trained by a two time-scale update rule converge to a local nash equilibrium. In Advances in Neural
 Information Processing Systems (NIPS), 2017.
Aleksander Holynski, Brian L Curless, Steven M Seitz, and Richard Szeliski. Animating pictures
  with eulerian motion fields. In Proc. IEEE Conf. on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
  (CVPR), 2021.


                                                  12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Drew A Hudson and Larry Zitnick. Generative adversarial transformers. In Proc. of the International
  Conf. on Machine learning (ICML), 2021.
Sangeek Hyun, Jihwan Kim, and Jae-Pil Heo. Self-supervised video gans: Learning for appear-
  ance consistency and motion coherency. In Proc. IEEE Conf. on Computer Vision and Pattern
  Recognition (CVPR), 2021.
Phillip Isola, Jun-Yan Zhu, Tinghui Zhou, and Alexei A. Efros. Image-to-image translation with
  conditional adversarial networks. In Proc. IEEE Conf. on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
  (CVPR), 2017.
Chiyu Jiang, Avneesh Sud, Ameesh Makadia, Jingwei Huang, Matthias Nießner, and Thomas
  Funkhouser. Local implicit grid representations for 3d scenes. In Proc. IEEE Conf. on Computer
  Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2020.
Emmanuel Kahembwe and Subramanian Ramamoorthy. Lower dimensional kernels for video
 discriminators. arXiv.org, abs/1912.08860, 2019.
Nal Kalchbrenner, Aäron van den Oord, Karen Simonyan, Ivo Danihelka, Oriol Vinyals, Alex Graves,
  and Koray Kavukcuoglu. Video pixel networks. In Proc. of the International Conf. on Machine
  learning (ICML), 2017.
Tero Karras, Timo Aila, Samuli Laine, and Jaakko Lehtinen. Progressive growing of gans for
  improved quality, stability, and variation. In Proc. of the International Conf. on Learning Repre-
  sentations (ICLR), 2018.
Tero Karras, Samuli Laine, and Timo Aila. A style-based generator architecture for generative
  adversarial networks. In Proc. IEEE Conf. on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR),
  2019.
Tero Karras, Samuli Laine, Miika Aittala, Janne Hellsten, Jaakko Lehtinen, and Timo Aila. Analyzing
  and improving the image quality of stylegan. In Proc. IEEE Conf. on Computer Vision and Pattern
  Recognition (CVPR), 2020.
Tero Karras, Miika Aittala, Samuli Laine, Erik Härkönen, Janne Hellsten, Jaakko Lehtinen, and Timo
  Aila. Alias-free generative adversarial networks. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems (NeurIPS), 2021.
Diederik P Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. In Proc. of the
  International Conf. on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2015.
Akash Kumar, Arnav Bhavsar, and Rajesh Verma. Detecting deepfakes with metric learning. In IEEE
  International Workshop on Biometrics and Forensics (IWBF), 2020.
Wonkwang Lee, Donggyun Kim, Seunghoon Hong, and Honglak Lee. High-fidelity synthesis with
 disentangled representation. In Proc. of the European Conf. on Computer Vision (ECCV), 2020.
Tianye Li, Mira Slavcheva, Michael Zollhoefer, Simon Green, Christoph Lassner, Changil Kim,
  Tanner Schmidt, Steven Lovegrove, Michael Goesele, Richard Newcombe, and Zhaoyang Lv.
  Neural 3d video synthesis from multi-view video. In CVPR, 2022.
Zhengqi Li, Simon Niklaus, Noah Snavely, and Oliver Wang. Neural scene flow fields for space-
  time view synthesis of dynamic scenes. In Proc. IEEE Conf. on Computer Vision and Pattern
  Recognition (CVPR), 2021.
Yiyi Liao, Katja Schwarz, Lars Mescheder, and Andreas Geiger. Towards unsupervised learning of
  generative models for 3d controllable image synthesis. In Proc. IEEE Conf. on Computer Vision
  and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2020.
Chen-Hsuan Lin, Chaoyang Wang, and Simon Lucey. Sdf-srn: Learning signed distance 3d object re-
  construction from static images. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS),
  2020.



                                                13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Connor Z. Lin, David B. Lindell, Eric Chan, and Gordon Wetzstein. 3d gan inversion for controllable
  portrait image animation. arXiv.org, abs/2203.13441, 2022.
David B Lindell, Dave Van Veen, Jeong Joon Park, and Gordon Wetzstein. Bacon: Band-limited
  coordinate networks for multiscale scene representation. In Proc. IEEE Conf. on Computer Vision
  and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2022.
Huan Ling, Karsten Kreis, Daiqing Li, Seung Wook Kim, Antonio Torralba, and Sanja Fidler. Editgan:
  High-precision semantic image editing. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems
 (NeurIPS), 2021.
Lingjie Liu, Jiatao Gu, Kyaw Zaw Lin, Tat-Seng Chua, and Christian Theobalt. Neural sparse voxel
  fields. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2020.
Lingjie Liu, Marc Habermann, Viktor Rudnev, Kripasindhu Sarkar, Jiatao Gu, and Christian Theobalt.
  Neural actor: Neural free-view synthesis of human actors with pose control. In ACM Trans. on
  Graphics, 2021a.
Lingjie Liu, Marc Habermann, Viktor Rudnev, Kripasindhu Sarkar, Jiatao Gu, and Christian Theobalt.
  Neural actor: Neural free-view synthesis of human actors with pose control. ACM Transactions on
  Graphics (TOG), 40(6):1–16, 2021b.
Stephen Lombardi, Tomas Simon, Jason Saragih, Gabriel Schwartz, Andreas Lehrmann, and Yaser
  Sheikh. Neural volumes: Learning dynamic renderable volumes from images. In ACM Trans. on
  Graphics, 2019a.
Stephen Lombardi, Tomas Simon, Jason Saragih, Gabriel Schwartz, Andreas Lehrmann, and Yaser
  Sheikh. Neural volumes: Learning dynamic renderable volumes from images. ACM Trans. Graph.,
  2019b.
Sebastian Lunz, Yingzhen Li, Andrew W. Fitzgibbon, and Nate Kushman. Inverse graphics gan:
  Learning to generate 3d shapes from unstructured 2d data. arXiv.org, abs/2002.12674, 2020.
Ricardo Martin-Brualla, Noha Radwan, Mehdi S. M. Sajjadi, Jonathan T. Barron, Alexey Dosovitskiy,
  and Daniel Duckworth. Nerf in the wild: Neural radiance fields for unconstrained photo collections.
  In Proc. IEEE Conf. on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2021.
Quan Meng, Anpei Chen, Haimin Luo, Minye Wu, Hao Su, Lan Xu, Xuming He, and Jingyi Yu.
  Gnerf: Gan-based neural radiance field without posed camera. In Proc. of the IEEE International
 Conf. on Computer Vision (ICCV), 2021.
Lars Mescheder, Andreas Geiger, and Sebastian Nowozin. Which training methods for gans do
  actually converge? In Proc. of the International Conf. on Machine learning (ICML), 2018.
Lars Mescheder, Michael Oechsle, Michael Niemeyer, Sebastian Nowozin, and Andreas Geiger.
  Occupancy networks: Learning 3d reconstruction in function space. In Proc. IEEE Conf. on
  Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2019.
Mateusz Michalkiewicz, Jhony K Pontes, Dominic Jack, Mahsa Baktashmotlagh, and Anders Eriks-
 son. Implicit surface representations as layers in neural networks. In Proc. of the IEEE International
 Conf. on Computer Vision (ICCV), 2019.
Ben Mildenhall, Pratul P Srinivasan, Matthew Tancik, Jonathan T Barron, Ravi Ramamoorthi, and
  Ren Ng. Nerf: Representing scenes as neural radiance fields for view synthesis. In Proc. of the
  European Conf. on Computer Vision (ECCV), 2020.
Andrés Muñoz, Mohammadreza Zolfaghari, Max Argus, and Thomas Brox. Temporal shift gan for
  large scale video generation. In Proc. of the IEEE Winter Conference on Applications of Computer
 Vision (WACV), 2021.
Niranjan D Narvekar and Lina J Karam. A no-reference image blur metric based on the cumulative
  probability of blur detection (cpbd). IEEE Transactions on Image Processing, 2011.



                                                 14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Thu Nguyen-Phuoc, Chuan Li, Stephen Balaban, and Yong-Liang Yang. Rendernet: A deep convolu-
  tional network for differentiable rendering from 3d shapes. In Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems (NIPS), 2018.
Thu Nguyen-Phuoc, Chuan Li, Lucas Theis, Christian Richardt, and Yong-Liang Yang. Hologan:
  Unsupervised learning of 3d representations from natural images. In Proc. of the IEEE International
  Conf. on Computer Vision (ICCV), 2019.
Thu Nguyen-Phuoc, Christian Richardt, Long Mai, Yong-Liang Yang, and Niloy Mitra. Blockgan:
  Learning 3d object-aware scene representations from unlabelled images. In Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2020.
Michael Niemeyer and Andreas Geiger. Giraffe: Representing scenes as compositional generative
 neural feature fields. In Proc. IEEE Conf. on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR),
 2021a.
Michael Niemeyer and Andreas Geiger. Campari: Camera-aware decomposed generative neural
 radiance fields. In Proc. of the International Conf. on 3D Vision (3DV), 2021b.
Michael Niemeyer, Lars M. Mescheder, Michael Oechsle, and Andreas Geiger. Differentiable
 volumetric rendering: Learning implicit 3d representations without 3d supervision. In Proc. IEEE
 Conf. on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2020.
Atsuhiro Noguchi, Xiao Sun, Stephen Lin, and Tatsuya Harada. Neural articulated radiance field. In
  ICCV, pp. 5762–5772, 2021.
Michael Oechsle, Songyou Peng, and Andreas Geiger. Unisurf: Unifying neural implicit surfaces
 and radiance fields for multi-view reconstruction. In Proc. of the IEEE International Conf. on
 Computer Vision (ICCV), 2021.
Roy Or-El, Xuan Luo, Mengyi Shan, Eli Shechtman, Jeong Joon Park, and Ira Kemelmacher-
  Shlizerman. Stylesdf: High-resolution 3d-consistent image and geometry generation. In Proc.
  IEEE Conf. on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2022.
Xingang Pan, Xudong Xu, Chen Change Loy, Christian Theobalt, and Bo Dai. A shading-guided
  generative implicit model for shape-accurate 3d-aware image synthesis. In Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2021.
Eunbyung Park, Jimei Yang, Ersin Yumer, Duygu Ceylan, and Alexander C. Berg. Transformation-
  grounded image generation network for novel 3d view synthesis. In Proc. IEEE Conf. on Computer
  Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2017.
Jeong Joon Park, Peter Florence, Julian Straub, Richard Newcombe, and Steven Lovegrove. Deepsdf:
  Learning continuous signed distance functions for shape representation. In Proc. IEEE Conf. on
  Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2019.
Keunhong Park, Utkarsh Sinha, Jonathan T. Barron, Sofien Bouaziz, Dan B. Goldman, Steven M.
  Seitz, and Ricardo Martin-Brualla. Nerfies: Deformable neural radiance fields. In Proc. of the
  IEEE International Conf. on Computer Vision (ICCV), 2021a.
Keunhong Park, Utkarsh Sinha, Jonathan T Barron, Sofien Bouaziz, Dan B Goldman, Steven M Seitz,
  and Ricardo Martin-Brualla. Nerfies: Deformable neural radiance fields. In ICCV, pp. 5865–5874,
  2021b.
Keunhong Park, Utkarsh Sinha, Peter Hedman, Jonathan T. Barron, Sofien Bouaziz, Dan B. Goldman,
  Ricardo Martin-Brualla, and Steven M. Seitz. Hypernerf: a higher-dimensional representation for
  topologically varying neural radiance fields. ACM Trans. on Graphics, 2021c.
Keunhong Park, Utkarsh Sinha, Peter Hedman, Jonathan T Barron, Sofien Bouaziz, Dan B Goldman,
  Ricardo Martin-Brualla, and Steven M Seitz. Hypernerf: A higher-dimensional representation for
  topologically varying neural radiance fields. SIGGRAPH Asia, 2021d.


                                                15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Sida Peng, Yuanqing Zhang, Yinghao Xu, Qianqian Wang, Qing Shuai, Hujun Bao, and Xiaowei
  Zhou. Neural body: Implicit neural representations with structured latent codes for novel view
  synthesis of dynamic humans. In CVPR, pp. 9054–9063, 2021.
Songyou Peng, Michael Niemeyer, Lars Mescheder, Marc Pollefeys, and Andreas Geiger. Con-
  volutional occupancy networks. In Proc. of the European Conf. on Computer Vision (ECCV),
  2020.
Martin Piala and Ronald Clark. Terminerf: Ray termination prediction for efficient neural rendering.
 In Proc. of the International Conf. on 3D Vision (3DV), 2021.
Albert Pumarola, Enric Corona, Gerard Pons-Moll, and Francesc Moreno-Noguer. D-nerf: Neural ra-
  diance fields for dynamic scenes. In Proc. IEEE Conf. on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
  (CVPR), 2021a.
Albert Pumarola, Enric Corona, Gerard Pons-Moll, and Francesc Moreno-Noguer. D-nerf: Neural
  radiance fields for dynamic scenes. In CVPR, pp. 10318–10327, 2021b.
Ruslan Rakhimov, Denis Volkhonskiy, Alexey Artemov, Denis Zorin, and Evgeny Burnaev. Latent
  video transformer. arXiv.org, abs/2006.10704, 2020.
Scott E. Reed, Kihyuk Sohn, Yuting Zhang, and Honglak Lee. Learning to disentangle factors of
  variation with manifold interaction. In Proc. of the International Conf. on Machine learning
  (ICML), 2014.
Yurui Ren, Ge Li, Yuanqi Chen, Thomas H Li, and Shan Liu. Pirenderer: Controllable portrait image
  generation via semantic neural rendering. In Proc. of the IEEE International Conf. on Computer
  Vision (ICCV), 2021.
Andreas Rössler, Davide Cozzolino, Luisa Verdoliva, Christian Riess, Justus Thies, and Matthias
  Nießner. Faceforensics++: Learning to detect manipulated facial images. In Proc. of the IEEE
 International Conf. on Computer Vision (ICCV), 2019.
Masaki Saito, Eiichi Matsumoto, and Shunta Saito. Temporal generative adversarial nets with singular
 value clipping. In Proc. of the IEEE International Conf. on Computer Vision (ICCV), 2017.
Masaki Saito, Shunta Saito, Masanori Koyama, and Sosuke Kobayashi. Train sparsely, generate
 densely: Memory-efficient unsupervised training of high-resolution temporal GAN. International
 Journal of Computer Vision (IJCV), 2020.
Shunsuke Saito, Zeng Huang, Ryota Natsume, Shigeo Morishima, Angjoo Kanazawa, and Hao Li.
  Pifu: Pixel-aligned implicit function for high-resolution clothed human digitization. In Proc. of
  the IEEE International Conf. on Computer Vision (ICCV), 2019.
Mehdi S. M. Sajjadi, Henning Meyer, Etienne Pot, Urs Bergmann, Klaus Greff, Noha Radwan,
 Suhani Vora, Mario Lucic, Daniel Duckworth, Alexey Dosovitskiy, Jakob Uszkoreit, Thomas A.
 Funkhouser, and Andrea Tagliasacchi. Scene representation transformer: Geometry-free novel
 view synthesis through set-latent scene representations. In Proc. IEEE Conf. on Computer Vision
 and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2022.
Katja Schwarz, Yiyi Liao, Michael Niemeyer, and Andreas Geiger. Graf: Generative radiance fields
  for 3d-aware image synthesis. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS),
  2020.
Yujun Shen, Jinjin Gu, Xiaoou Tang, and Bolei Zhou. Interpreting the latent space of gans for
  semantic face editing. In Proc. IEEE Conf. on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR),
  2020.
Alon Shoshan, Nadav Bhonker, Igor Kviatkovsky, and Gerard Medioni. Gan-control: Explicitly
  controllable gans. In Proc. of the IEEE International Conf. on Computer Vision (ICCV), 2021.
Aliaksandr Siarohin, Stéphane Lathuilière, Sergey Tulyakov, Elisa Ricci, and Nicu Sebe. First
  order motion model for image animation. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems
  (NeurIPS), 2019.


                                                16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Vincent Sitzmann, Michael Zollhöfer, and Gordon Wetzstein. Scene representation networks: Con-
  tinuous 3d-structure-aware neural scene representations. In Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2019.
Vincent Sitzmann, Julien N. P. Martel, Alexander W. Bergman, David B. Lindell, and Gordon
  Wetzstein. Implicit neural representations with periodic activation functions. In Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2020.
Ivan Skorokhodov, Savva Ignatyev, and Mohamed Elhoseiny. Adversarial generation of continuous
  images. In Proc. IEEE Conf. on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2021.
Ivan Skorokhodov, Sergey Tulyakov, and Mohamed Elhoseiny. Stylegan-v: A continuous video
  generator with the price, image quality and perks of stylegan2. In Proc. IEEE Conf. on Computer
  Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2022.
Pratul P. Srinivasan, Boyang Deng, Xiuming Zhang, Matthew Tancik, Ben Mildenhall, and Jonathan T.
  Barron. Nerv: Neural reflectance and visibility fields for relighting and view synthesis. In Proc.
  IEEE Conf. on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2021.
Ayush Tewari, Mohamed Elgharib, Florian Bernard, Hans-Peter Seidel, Patrick Pérez, Michael
  Zollhöfer, and Christian Theobalt. Pie: Portrait image embedding for semantic control. In ACM
  Trans. on Graphics, 2020a.
Ayush Tewari, Mohamed Elgharib, Gaurav Bharaj, Florian Bernard, Hans-Peter Seidel, Patrick Pérez,
  Michael Zollhofer, and Christian Theobalt. Stylerig: Rigging stylegan for 3d control over portrait
  images. In Proc. IEEE Conf. on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2020b.
Ayush Tewari, Justus Thies, Ben Mildenhall, Pratul P. Srinivasan, Edgar Tretschk, Yifan Wang,
  Christoph Lassner, Vincent Sitzmann, Ricardo Martin-Brualla, Stephen Lombardi, Tomas Simon,
  Christian Theobalt, Matthias Nießner, Jonathan T. Barron, Gordon Wetzstein, Michael Zollhöfer,
  and Vladislav Golyanik. Advances in neural rendering. arXiv.org, abs/2111.05849, 2021.
Yu Tian, Jian Ren, Menglei Chai, Kyle Olszewski, Xi Peng, Dimitris N. Metaxas, and Sergey
  Tulyakov. A good image generator is what you need for high-resolution video synthesis. In Proc.
  of the International Conf. on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2021.
Edgar Tretschk, Ayush Tewari, Vladislav Golyanik, Michael Zollhöfer, Christoph Lassner, and
  Christian Theobalt. Non-rigid neural radiance fields: Reconstruction and novel view synthesis of
  a dynamic scene from monocular video. In Proc. of the IEEE International Conf. on Computer
  Vision (ICCV), 2021a.
Edgar Tretschk, Ayush Tewari, Vladislav Golyanik, Michael Zollhöfer, Christoph Lassner, and
  Christian Theobalt. Non-rigid neural radiance fields: Reconstruction and novel view synthesis of a
  dynamic scene from monocular video. In ICCV, pp. 12959–12970, 2021b.
Sergey Tulyakov, Ming-Yu Liu, Xiaodong Yang, and Jan Kautz. Mocogan: Decomposing motion and
  content for video generation. In Proc. IEEE Conf. on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
  (CVPR), 2018.
Thomas Unterthiner, Sjoerd van Steenkiste, Karol Kurach, Raphael Marinier, Marcin Michalski,
  and Sylvain Gelly. Towards accurate generative models of video: A new metric & challenges.
  arXiv.org, abs/1812.01717, 2018.
Jacob Walker, Ali Razavi, and Aäron van den Oord. Predicting video with VQVAE. arXiv.org,
  abs/2103.01950, 2021.
Kaisiyuan Wang, Qianyi Wu, Linsen Song, Zhuoqian Yang, Wayne Wu, Chen Qian, Ran He, Yu Qiao,
  and Chen Change Loy. Mead: A large-scale audio-visual dataset for emotional talking-face
  generation. In Proc. of the European Conf. on Computer Vision (ECCV), 2020a.
Sheng-Yu Wang, Oliver Wang, Richard Zhang, Andrew Owens, and Alexei A Efros. Cnn-generated
  images are surprisingly easy to spot... for now. In Proc. IEEE Conf. on Computer Vision and
  Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2020b.


                                                17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Ting-Chun Wang, Ming-Yu Liu, Jun-Yan Zhu, Andrew Tao, Jan Kautz, and Bryan Catanzaro. High-
  resolution image synthesis and semantic manipulation with conditional gans. In Proc. IEEE Conf.
  on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2018.
Dirk Weissenborn, Oscar Täckström, and Jakob Uszkoreit. Scaling autoregressive video models. In
  Proc. of the International Conf. on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2020.
Wenqi Xian, Jia-Bin Huang, Johannes Kopf, and Changil Kim. Space-time neural irradiance fields for
 free-viewpoint video. In Proc. IEEE Conf. on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR),
 2021.
Wei Xiong, Wenhan Luo, Lin Ma, Wei Liu, and Jiebo Luo. Learning to generate time-lapse videos
 using multi-stage dynamic generative adversarial networks. In Proc. IEEE Conf. on Computer
 Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2018.
Xudong Xu, Xingang Pan, Dahua Lin, and Bo Dai. Generative occupancy fields for 3d surface-aware
  image synthesis. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2021.
Yinghao Xu, Sida Peng, Ceyuan Yang, Yujun Shen, and Bolei Zhou. 3d-aware image synthesis via
  learning structural and textural representations. In Proc. IEEE Conf. on Computer Vision and
  Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2022.
Wilson Yan, Yunzhi Zhang, Pieter Abbeel, and Aravind Srinivas. Videogpt: Video generation using
 VQ-VAE and transformers. arXiv.org, abs/2104.10157, 2021.
Jiachen Yang, Aiyun Li, Shuai Xiao, Wen Lu, and Xinbo Gao. Mtd-net: learning to detect deepfakes
   images by multi-scale texture difference. IEEE Transactions on Information Forensics and Security,
   2021.
Lior Yariv, Yoni Kasten, Dror Moran, Meirav Galun, Matan Atzmon, Ronen Basri, and Yaron Lipman.
  Multiview neural surface reconstruction by disentangling geometry and appearance. In Advances
  in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2020.
Sihyun Yu, Jihoon Tack, Sangwoo Mo, Hyunsu Kim, Junho Kim, Jung-Woo Ha, and Jinwoo Shin.
  Generating videos with dynamics-aware implicit generative adversarial networks. In Proc. of the
  International Conf. on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2022.
Wentao Yuan, Zhaoyang Lv, Tanner Schmidt, and Steven Lovegrove. Star: Self-supervised tracking
 and reconstruction of rigid objects in motion with neural rendering. In Proc. IEEE Conf. on
 Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2021a.
Wentao Yuan, Zhaoyang Lv, Tanner Schmidt, and Steven Lovegrove. Star: Self-supervised tracking
 and reconstruction of rigid objects in motion with neural rendering. In CVPR, pp. 13144–13152,
 2021b.
Vladyslav Yushchenko, Nikita Araslanov, and Stefan Roth. Markov decision process for video
  generation. In Proc. of the IEEE International Conf. on Computer Vision (ICCV) Workshops, 2019.
Jiakai Zhang, Xinhang Liu, Xinyi Ye, Fuqiang Zhao, Yanshun Zhang, Minye Wu, Yingliang Zhang,
   Lan Xu, and Jingyi Yu. Editable free-viewpoint video using a layered neural representation. ACM
   Trans. on Graphics, 2021.
Kai Zhang, Gernot Riegler, Noah Snavely, and Vladlen Koltun. Nerf++: Analyzing and improving
  neural radiance fields. arXiv.org, abs/2010.07492, 2020.
Shengyu Zhao, Zhijian Liu, Ji Lin, Jun-Yan Zhu, and Song Han. Differentiable augmentation for
  data-efficient gan training. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS),
  2020.
Peng Zhou, Lingxi Xie, Bingbing Ni, and Qi Tian. Cips-3d: A 3d-aware generator of gans based on
  conditionally-independent pixel synthesis. arXiv.org, abs/2110.09788, 2021.
Jun-Yan Zhu, Taesung Park, Phillip Isola, and Alexei A. Efros. Unpaired image-to-image translation
  using cycle-consistent adversarial networks. In Proc. of the IEEE International Conf. on Computer
  Vision (ICCV), 2017.


                                                18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A PPENDIX

A    V IDEO R ESULTS
We urge readers to view our video results by opening supp.html on an internet browser. We
provide video results on the FaceForensics (Rössler et al., 2019), MEAD (Wang et al., 2020a), TaiChi
(Siarohin et al., 2019), and SkyTimelapse (Xiong et al., 2018). In particular, we show the generated
videos for all datasets from various camera viewpoints in order to showcase the ability of our model
to learn a distribution of 3D-aware videos, which we highly encourage readers to view.
Specifically, for the case of FaceForensics, we show generated videos with a forward-facing camera
(see Ours with Forward-facing Camera), with a camera that rotates along the yaw-axis (see Ours with
Rotating Camera) and with a forward-facing camera that moves away from the depicted individual,
thus creating a zoom-out effect, (see Ours with Forward-facing Camera and Zoom Effect). Moreover,
we also provide generated videos using a variant of our model that uses a pre-trained generator
on FFHQ (Karras et al., 2019), as discussed in the main submission and in Sec. ??. This variant
of our model allows a wider range of viewpoint control than our original model. Particularly, for
this variant of our model, we also show examples of generated videos, while we rotate the camera
along both yaw and pitch axes, where the fine-tuned model generates realistically looking videos.
In addition, we show "Motion and Content Decomposition" examples, where we show the ability
of our approach to control shape and motion separately; i.e., we can create videos illustrating the
same human performing different motions, and vice versa. We also provide example videos of
prior work including MoCoGAN-HD (Tian et al., 2021), DIGAN (Yu et al., 2022) and StyleGAN-V
(Skorokhodov et al., 2022). We note that our generated videos are of comparable quality against
those of the state-of-the-art video generation methods (Yu et al., 2022; Skorokhodov et al., 2022),
while at the same time permitting control on the camera viewpoint, e.g., zoom-out to reveal new
content or rotate the camera around, which is not possible for the latest 2D video methods.
Similarly, we also showcase examples of our generated videos on the MEAD (Wang et al., 2020a)
dataset using a similar setup. We observe that in comparison to StyleGAN-V (Skorokhodov et al.,
2022) our generations have significantly fewer visual artifacts (the faces of Skorokhodov et al. (2022)
appear uncanny), while at the same time our generated videos from different camera viewpoints (see
Ours with Different Camera Positions) are consistently plausible.
We also show examples of generated videos on the TaiChi (Siarohin et al., 2019) dataset using a
similar setup. In addition, we also consider two more setups, where we rotate the camera along the
yaw-axis while having a static human (see Ours with Rotating Camera and Static Motion) and a
moving human (see Ours with Rotating Camera and Dynamic Motion). Also for these scenarios, the
quality of our generated videos are comparable to that of DIGAN (Yu et al., 2022) that does not allow
viewpoint control.
Finally, we show samples for the SkyTimelapse (Xiong et al., 2018) dataset. The dataset is in contrast
with the other three datasets, as its videos often contain multiple objects or entities. We provide
videos rendered from a fixed camera, and a rotating camera along the yaw-axis with and without
scene dynamics (Ours with Rotating Camera along First Axis and Static Motion, and Ours with
Rotating Camera along First Axis and Dynamic Motion). Similarly, we rotate the camera along the
pitch-axis with and without scene motions (Ours with Rotating Camera along Second Axis and Static
Motion, and Ours with Rotating Camera along Second Axis and Dynamic Motion). Note that we
only model rotation of a camera located at the origin. A careful modeling of camera distribution for
such a large-scale scene dataset is out of scope of this work, and thus we omit an in-depth analysis.

B    V ISUALIZING L ATENT I NTERPOLATIONS AND D EPTH M APS
Our 4D GAN with decomposed content and motion latent spaces allow interpolation of content with
fixed motion and vice versa. Moreover, our sampled neural fields can be used to obtain depth maps
given the 3D nature of our representation.
As shown in Fig. 7, linearly interpolating between two sampled content vectors maps to smooth,
plausible interpolation of content appearance in the 4D fields. Similarly, we fix the content vector and
apply interpolated motion vectors. Such visualization is best viewed as videos, so we refer readers


                                                  19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 7: Interpolation in the content latent space. We visualize, for each row, examples of linearly
interpolating between two sampled latents in the content space with fixed motion vectors and camera
viewpoints. Note the smooth and plausible transition of face appearances.


Figure 8: Depth visualizations. We show depth maps (second row) obtained by volume rendering
the sampled 4D fields at a given time step. The first row shows the corresponding RGB rendering of
the same 4D fields. Here the depth is defined as the expected ray termination distance.


to the supplementary website supp.html (see Ours with Motion Interpolation). The video results
show that the interpolation in the motion latent space leads to smooth transition of motions. Finally,
in Fig. 8, we visualize example depth maps obtained via volume-rendering our sampled neural fields.

C     I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS
C.1   A RCHITECTURE AND T RAINING D ETAILS

The 3D content code, motion code and style vector dimensions are all set to 512. Our motion
generator (see Fig. 2) is implemented as an MLP with three fully connected (FC) layers and Leaky
ReLU activations. The time step is repeated across the channel dimension and multiplied with
the output of the first fully connected layer of the motion generator. We set the motion code and
hidden dimension of the motion generator to 512, while the output dimension is 128. The output
of the motion generator is then added to the output of the first FG NeRF Block, which also is a
128-dimensional representation.
Our foreground and background NeRF are modeled as MLPs (with Leaky ReLU activations) with 8
and 4 FC layers that each contain 128 and 64 hidden units, respectively. We use 10 frequency bands
to map the positional input of the foreground background NeRF to the fourier features (Mildenhall
et al., 2020). We do not apply positional encoding to the time input. We follow the implementation
of StyleNeRF (Gu et al., 2022) for the the 2D ray aggregation and upsampling block (see Fig. 2)
and the volume rendering process. Both the image and video discriminator follow the architecture
of StyleGAN2 (Karras et al., 2020) with hidden dimensions of 512, and the input channels being 3
and 7, respectively. We apply the Differentiable Augmentation technique (Zhao et al., 2020) with all
augmentations except CutOut, to prevent the discriminators from overfitting to the relatively small
video datasets. In contrast to StyleNeRF (Gu et al., 2022), we do not use progressive-growing training
(Karras et al., 2018) but directly train on the final image resolution, as we did not observe any change
in visual quality.



                                                  20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 9: StyleNeRF results. We show qualitative results of StyleNeRF model trained on FaceForen-
sics, rendered from five different cameras (columns) for three identities (rows).


For both the generator and discriminator, we use the Adam optimizer (Kingma & Ba, 2015) with
a learning rate of 0.0025, β1 = 0, β2 = 0.99 and ϵ = 10−8 . We follow the setup of StyleGAN2
(Karras et al., 2020) to use 8 fully connected layer content mapping network and apply 100× lower
learning rate compared to that of the main generator layers. For our objective function (Eq. 7), we set
λ1 = 0.5 and λ2 = 0.2. We use 16 samples for the NeRF path regularization (Gu et al., 2022).

C.2   V IRTUAL C AMERA S ETUP

For the three main datasets we empirically set the virtual camera on the surface of unit sphere and
parameterize the camera viewpoint distribution with pitch and yaw angles. The standard deviation for
pitch sampling is 0.15 for all three datasets. For yaw sampling the standard deviation is 0.3, 0.3, and
0.8 for FaceForensics, MEAD, TaiChi. The field-of-view of the camera is set to be 18 degrees.
For the SkyTimelapse dataset we do not sample on a sphere, but place the camera at the origin and
make the camera look outwards. We uniformly sample a point on a hemisphere and set the camera to
look towards the direction. The field-of-view is set to be 80 degrees. Note that this setup only models
rotation of the camera. We leave a more complicated camera sampling method as future work.

D     E XPERIMENT D ETAILS
D.1   E VALUATIONS

We used the code and evaluation protocol of StyleGAN-V (Skorokhodov et al., 2022) for computing
FVD (Unterthiner et al., 2018) and FID (Heusel et al., 2017). The FVD protocol requires 2048
16-frame videos, while the FID score uses 50K images. For MEAD dataset (Wang et al., 2020a),
we re-trained StyleGAN-V (Skorokhodov et al., 2022) using their official code as the authors only
provided results on the front view videos of MEAD at 10242 resolution. We randomly choose 10,000
videos across all viewpoints, including non-frontal views and follow the identical training setup
provided by Skorokhodov et al. (2022) to process 25,000K images with batch size 64. For TaiChi
dataset, we use the officially provided checkpoint of DIGAN (Yu et al., 2022) to evaluate their
model with the new FVD protocol (Skorokhodov et al., 2022). For FaceForensics dataset, we use the
reported numbers provided by the StyleGAN-V (Skorokhodov et al., 2022) authors for all models in
Table 1, except for StyleNeRF (Gu et al., 2022) and our model, which we train from scratch. We
provide sampled 3D models of StyleNeRF trained on FaceForensics, rendered from a horizontally
moving camera, as shown in Fig. 9.
We train our model and StyleNeRF using 4 NVIDIA V100 GPUs. For our approach we train for a
maximum of 3,000K images, which takes two days at 2562 resolution. For StyleNeRF we abort the
training after 15,000K images due to the FID diverging after 11,400K images. It is generally true that
2D models like StyleGAN-V (Skorokhodov et al., 2022) have a significantly faster throughput, as
there is no costly volume rendering. However, we observe that our 4D model converges at much lower


                                                  21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                    Dataset                     FVD Relative Standard Deviation
                    FaceForensics                             2.62%
                    TaiChi                                    1.65%
                    MEAD                                      2.17%

Table 5: Relative standard deviation for the FVD metric on FaceForensics, TaiChi, and MEAD
datasets, computed as percentage of standard deviation with respect to the mean.

        Pitch Angles


Figure 10: Comparing the range of pitch control. We show that our 4D model trained solely on the
FaceForensics (Rössler et al., 2019) dataset (top row) has a narrow range of pitch where high quality
renderings can be produced, likely due to the lack of diverse training views. Note that the upper and
bottom parts of the head becomes unnaturally large at both extremes. Fine-tuning a model pre-trained
on FFHQ (Karras et al., 2019) image dataset (bottom row), which features more diverse view angles,
results in a wider range of views that generate plausible images.


iterations, already converging after 2,500K processed images, while some of the 2D video models
such as VideoGPT (Yan et al., 2021) does not converge even at 25,000K processed images. We
hypothesize that the extraordinary fast convergence of our model is due to the explicit disentanglement
of 3D content, camera viewpoints, and motions.

D.2    S TATISTICAL R EPRODUCIBILITY

For computing the FVD, we follow the protocol of StyleGAN-V (Skorokhodov et al., 2022), which
aims to reduce the score variations significantly compared to the original protocol (Unterthiner et al.,
2018). Nevertheless, in Table 5 we report the relative standard deviations after evaluating our three
main dataset results for 10 rounds with the FVD protocol (Skorokhodov et al., 2022). We observe that
the standard deviation is rather small across all three datasets, as reported in the extensive analysis of
Skorokhodov et al. (2022).

E     T RAINING ON I MAGE AND V IDEO DATASETS
E.1   T RAINING S ETUP

In this section we discuss the use of an auxiliary 2D image dataset for training our 4D GANs, as
described in Sec. 3.2 in the main paper. As motivated in the main paper, the lack of diversity of the
provided videos could diminish the 3D accuracy of 4D GANs. In fact, we observe that the model
trained only on the FaceForensics dataset (Rössler et al., 2019) exhibits narrow range of camera
angles that generates view-consistent renderings.
As described in the main paper, we explored two options to leverage an image dataset to complement
the video dataset: (i) pre-training on the image dataset, and (ii) simultaneously training both on image
and video datasets. For both options, we follow the training setup of StyleNeRF (Gu et al., 2022) on
computing and backpropagating the image losses.



                                                   22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 11: Qualitative results for pre-training on FFHQ before training on FaceForensics.
We show qualitative results of our model pre-trained on FFHQ and then trained on FaceForensics,
rendered from five different cameras (columns) for three identities (rows). We observe high view-
consistency and high quality results.


Figure 12: FFHQ and FaceForensics simultaneous training results. We show qualitative results of
our model simultaneously trained on FFHQ and FaceForensics, rendered from five different cameras
(columns) for three identities (rows). We observe lower view-consistency compared to our model
only pre-trained on FFHQ.


In early experiments we also explored pre-training and simultaneous training for MEAD to better
interpolate between the discrete poses in the data distribution. However, combining MEAD with
FFHQ does not lead to any improvement in neither quality nor 3D behavior. We hypothesize that
training on the image dataset mainly leads to improvements when the camera poses of the video
dataset are already diverse but narrow as in FaceForensics. MEAD provides a wide but extremely
sparse range of camera poses, which can not be interpolated by the image dataset distribution. We
did not leverage image datasets for TaiChi as the viewpoint distribution is already diverse. For a fair
comparison to previous works, we only used our vanilla approach for both qualitative and quantitative
comparisons in our main paper.

E.2   Q UALITATIVE R ESULTS

The model pre-trained on the FFHQ image dataset and fine-tuned on the video dataset generates high
quality, 3D-aware renderings, as can be seen on the supplementary videos. We generally observe
sharper and higher quality renderings compared to our default model. Moreover, we notice that the
range of allowed view angles increases, which is most obvious for the pitch (or elevation) angles, as
described in Fig. 10. We note, however, that the colors seem less vivid compared to the pure-video
model.


                                                  23
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


              Method              FVD (↓)     FID (↓)    ACD (↓)      CPBD (↑)     ID (↑)
              Pre-trained          127.2       17.2       0.819        0.2084      0.982
              Simultaneously       62.1        18.2       0.945        0.2077      0.893
              Vanilla              68.7        13.7       0.965         0.196      0.861

Table 6: Quantitative Results on FaceForensics in combination with FFHQ. We report metrics
for pre-training on FFHQ before training on FaceForensics, simultaneously training on FFHQ and
FaceForensics, and only training on FaceForensics (vanilla).

                               Method                          FVD (↓)
                               w/ Positional Time Encoding        175.4
                               w/ Concatenation                   164.7
                               w/ Multiplication                  158.3

Table 7: Ablation of time incorporation in motion generator on TaiChi Dataset. We choose
simple multiplication for our default model due to its low FVD score in comparison to positional
time encoding and and concatenation.

We further provide qualitative results for pre-training and simultaneous training in Fig. 11 and Fig. 12,
respectively. For the case of simultaneous image and video training, the resulting model fails to
output view-consistent videos. We hypothesize that training the generators to fit two different data
distributions does not lead to consistent 4D models. However, only pre-training on FFHQ leads to
view-consistent renderings while maintaining high quality.
E.3   Q UANTITATIVE R ESULTS

In Table 6 we provide a quantitative comparison between i) pre-training on FFHQ before training
on FaceForensics, ii) simultaneously training on FFHQ and FaceForensics, and iii) only training on
FaceForensics as a vanilla approach. Generally, it is difficult to interpret FVD and FID when using
two training datasets as these scores compare real and fake data distributions. Due to the usage of
the FFHQ dataset the latent space of the model is manipulated with a dataset that is not used as part
of the evaluation process. We still provide these two scores for completeness. For our pre-trained
model, we observe that the FVD gap is significantly higher than the FID gap in comparison to our
vanilla approach. We hypothesize that due to the model converging to a static dataset in the first
training phase, namely FFHQ, the model has difficulties in learning motion in the second training
phase with FaceForensics. However, we observe a significantly improved ID, which confirms the
better multi-view consistency in our videos. Simultaneous training results in similar scores as our
vanilla approach, however the multi-view consistency is significantly worse than using pre-training,
which aligns with the lower ID score.


F     A BLATIONS
We provide further details for the ablations conducted in Sec. 4.3.


F.1   M OTION V ECTOR

Generally, there are different ways to incorporate time into the motion generator. We use a simple
multiplication due to our empirical results on TaiChi showing the best FVD score of 158.3 for this
setup, as shown in Table 7. As explained in Sec. 4.3, using positional encoding leads to a worse
FVD with 175.4. Furthermore, we experimented with concatenation of time, which also results in a
slightly worse FVD with 164.7. We leave more complex incorporation of time, like acyclic positional
encoding (Skorokhodov et al., 2022), for future work.


                                                   24
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                          Method                                      FVD (↓)
                          w/o Image Discriminator                 234.3
                          w/ Deterioration of Video Discriminator 190.9
                          w/ Separate Image Discriminator         158.3

                   Table 8: Ablation of image discriminator on TaiChi Dataset.

F.2   I MAGE D ISCRIMINATOR

Theoretically, our video discriminator should suffice for the model to learn from videos. However,
we observe that using a separate image discriminator significantly boosts the quality of our results, as
shown in Table 8. Removing the image discriminator leads to a FVD score of 234.3. Another option
is to use a deterioration of our video discriminator as an image discriminator. For this, we repeat every
image along the channel dimension to form a 6 channel tensor and set the time difference to zero,
which we further concatenate to obtain a 7 channel tensor for our video discriminator. This leads
to a FVD score of 190.9, which is substantially better than just removing the image discriminator,
however worse than using a separate image discriminator (158.3). Consequently, we observe that
using two discriminators with disentangled weights significantly boosts the quality.

G     R ELATED W ORKS WITH C OMPLETE R EFERENCES
In this section, we discuss, in more detail, relevant prior works that was omitted in our main paper
due to space constraints.

Neural Implicit Representations Neural Implicit Representation (NIR) (Mescheder et al., 2019;
Park et al., 2019; Chen & Zhang, 2019; Michalkiewicz et al., 2019) have demonstrated impressive
results on various tasks due to their continuous, efficient, and differentiable representation. Among
the most widely utilized coordinate-based representations are Neural Radiance Fields (NeRFs)
(Mildenhall et al., 2020) that combine an implicit neural network with volumetric rendering to enforce
3D consistency, while performing the novel view synthesis task. Implicit-based representations have
been proven beneficial for other tasks including but not limited to 3D reconstruction of objects
(Mescheder et al., 2019; Park et al., 2019; Chen & Zhang, 2019; Michalkiewicz et al., 2019; Oechsle
et al., 2021; Gropp et al., 2020; Saito et al., 2019; Atzmon et al., 2019; Sitzmann et al., 2019) and
scenes (Jiang et al., 2020; Chibane et al., 2020; Peng et al., 2020; Chabra et al., 2020; Sitzmann
et al., 2020), novel-view synthesis of static (Barron et al., 2021; Bergman et al., 2021; Gao et al.,
2020; Jiang et al., 2020; Liu et al., 2020; Lindell et al., 2022; Srinivasan et al., 2021; Piala & Clark,
2021; Martin-Brualla et al., 2021; Oechsle et al., 2021; Sajjadi et al., 2022) and dynamic (Lombardi
et al., 2019a; Li et al., 2021; Pumarola et al., 2021a; Park et al., 2021a; Xian et al., 2021; Yuan et al.,
2021a; Park et al., 2021c; Tretschk et al., 2021a; Tewari et al., 2021) environments, inverse graphics
(Niemeyer et al., 2020; Yariv et al., 2020; Lin et al., 2020) as well as for representing videos (Chen
et al., 2021a; Yu et al., 2022).

3D-Aware Image Generations Many recent models investigate how 3D representations can be
incorporated in generative settings for improving the image quality (Park et al., 2017; Nguyen-Phuoc
et al., 2018) and increasing the controllability over various aspects of the image formation process
(Gadelha et al., 2017; Chan et al., 2021; Henderson & Ferrari, 2019; Henzler et al., 2019; Henderson
& Lampert, 2020; Liao et al., 2020; Lunz et al., 2020; Nguyen-Phuoc et al., 2019; 2020; Schwarz
et al., 2020; Gu et al., 2022; DeVries et al., 2021; Hao et al., 2021; Meng et al., 2021; Niemeyer &
Geiger, 2021b; Zhou et al., 2021). Towards this goal, Henzler et al. (2019) proposed a GAN-based
architecture that combines voxel-based representations with differentiable rendering. However, due
to the low voxel resolution, their generated images suffered from various artifacts. Concurrently,
HoloGAN (Nguyen-Phuoc et al., 2019) demonstrated that adding inductive biases about the 3D
structure of the world allows control over the pose of the generated objects. Nguyen-Phuoc et al.
(2020) extend this by also considering the compositional structure of the world into objects. While
both Nguyen-Phuoc et al. (2019; 2020) demonstrated impressive results, their performance was
less consistent in higher resolutions. Another line of work Liao et al. (2020) propose to combine a
3D generator with a differentiable renderer and a 2D image generator to enable 3D controllability.
Despite their promising results in synthetically generated environments, their model struggles to


                                                    25
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


generalize in real-world scenarios. More recent approaches propose generative models using MLP-
based radiance fields. These methods use volume rendering to obtain images from the 3D fields to
model single (Schwarz et al., 2020; Chan et al., 2021) or multiple (Niemeyer & Geiger, 2021a) objects.
Likewise, (Zhou et al., 2021; Chan et al., 2021; DeVries et al., 2021) explored the idea of combining
NeRF with GANs for designing 3D-aware image generators. Xu et al. (2021) propose a transition
from cumulative rendering to rendering with only the surface points. ShadeGAN (Pan et al., 2021)
introduces a multi-lighting constraint to improve the 3D representation. More recently, StyleSDF
(Or-El et al., 2022) and StyleNeRF (Gu et al., 2022) proposed to combine an MLP-based volume
renderer with a style-based generator (Karras et al., 2020) to produce high-resolution 3D-aware
images. Concurrently developed, VolumeGAN (Xu et al., 2022) characterizes the underlying 3D
structure with a feature volume. (Deng et al., 2022) explored learning a generative radiance field on
2D manifolds and (Chan et al., 2022) introduced a 3D-aware architecture that exploits both implicit
and explicit representations.

GAN-based Video Synthesis Inspired by the success of GANs and adversarial training on photore-
alistic image generation, researchers shifted their attention to various video synthesis tasks (Saito
et al., 2017; Tulyakov et al., 2018; Acharya et al., 2018; Clark et al., 2019; Yushchenko et al., 2019;
Kahembwe & Ramamoorthy, 2019; Aich et al., 2020; Saito et al., 2020; Gordon & Parde, 2020;
Holynski et al., 2021; Muñoz et al., 2021; Tian et al., 2021; Fox et al., 2021; Yan et al., 2021; Hyun
et al., 2021; Yu et al., 2022; Skorokhodov et al., 2022). Several recent works pose the video synthesis
as an autoregressive video prediction task and seek to generate discrete future frames conditioned
on the previous using either recurrent (Kalchbrenner et al., 2017; Walker et al., 2021) or attention-
based (Rakhimov et al., 2020; Weissenborn et al., 2020; Yan et al., 2021) models. Other works on
video generation (Saito et al., 2017; Tulyakov et al., 2018; Aich et al., 2020; Saito et al., 2020) tried
to disentangle the motion from the image generation during the video synthesis process. While this
paradigm has been widely adopted, these approaches typically struggle to generate realistic videos.
To facilitate generating high-quality frames, (Tian et al., 2021; Fox et al., 2021) propose to employ
a pre-trained image generator of (Karras et al., 2020). Closely related to our method are the recent
and concurrent work of DIGAN (Yu et al., 2022) and StlyeGAN-V (Skorokhodov et al., 2022) that
generate videos at continuous time step, without conditioning on previous frames. DIGAN (Yu et al.,
2022) employs an NIR-based image generator (Skorokhodov et al., 2021) for learning continuous
video synthesis and introduces two discriminators: the first discriminates the realism of each frame
and the second operates on image pairs and seeks to determine the realism of the motion. Similarly,
StyleGAN-V (Skorokhodov et al., 2022) employs a style-based GAN (Karras et al., 2020) and a
single discriminator that operates on sparsely sampled frames.

Dynamic View Synthesis Given a video of a dynamic scene, dynamic view synthesis methods
create novel views at arbitrary viewpoints and time steps. Neural Volumes (Lombardi et al., 2019b)
uses an encoder-decoder network with ray marching to render dynamic objects with a multi-view
capture system. STaR (Yuan et al., 2021b) trains on multi-view videos to reconstruct rigid object
motion by complementing a static NeRF with a dynamic NeRF. Similarly, (Gao et al., 2021b)
introduce a dynamic network, which predicts scene flow to create a warped radiance field from
monocular videos. Inspired by level set methods, HyperNeRF (Park et al., 2021d) models each frame
as a nonplanar slice through a hyperdimensional NeRF. Another line of works (Gafni et al., 2021;
Liu et al., 2021b; Noguchi et al., 2021; Peng et al., 2021) model dynamic humans from videos based
on radiance fields. Other approaches (Tretschk et al., 2021b; Pumarola et al., 2021b; Park et al.,
2021b) encode the scene into a canonical space to then deform the canonical radiance field. Recently,
DyNeRF (Li et al., 2022) uses multi-view videos and proposes a novel hierarchical training scheme
in combination with ray importance sampling. In contrast to our method, the aforementioned works
require videos with different viewpoints to train a single network per scene, hence are not able to
generate novel scenes. Instead, we learn a generative model from unstructured single-view video
collections.

H    L IMITATIONS & D ISCUSSIONS ( CONTINUED )
As mentioned in the main paper, we inherit the features of existing 3D-aware GANs that typically
work the best when there is a single target object at the center of the scenes, e.g., human faces. A
possible way of modeling multi-object scenes is to add in compositionality to scene distribution


                                                  26
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


modeling (as in (Niemeyer & Geiger, 2021a; Hudson & Zitnick, 2021)). Another factor that limits
the modeling of larger and more complex scene is sampling of virtual cameras. Training of GANs
involves approximating the input data distribution with the generators. For the case of 3D GANs,
image generation requires sampling virtual viewpoints from a plausible viewpoint distribution, which
could be designed manually for single-object scenes with outside-inward looking cameras. However,
for larger scenes, obtaining or designing the plausible viewpoint distribution becomes challenging,
due to lack of correspondences across scenes and high structural variability. An interesting future
direction would be to model the camera viewpoint distribution using neural networks.
While our 4D GAN compares competitively in terms of training time until convergence, we note that
the volume rendering process or our approach leaves huge memory footprints. In fact, training of our
model consumes “2.4 GB / batch size," while the 2D video method of StyleGAN-V (Skorokhodov
et al., 2022) only consumes “0.8 GB / batch size." This relatively high memory consumption
prevents us from using larger models with the highest generation qualities and limits the resolution of
output renderings. We leave exploration of more efficient implicit representations, such as tri-plane
representations (Chan et al., 2022), as future work to improve the efficiency and quality 4D GANs.


                                                  27
