Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


H UMAN -G UIDED FAIR C LASSIFICATION FOR
NATURAL L ANGUAGE P ROCESSING
 Florian E. Dorner1,2 , Momchil Peychev1 , Nikola Konstantinov1 , Naman Goel3 ,
 Elliott Ash1 , Martin Vechev1
 1
   ETH Zurich, 2 MPI for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen, 3 University of Oxford
 Correspondence to: florian.dorner@tuebingen.mpg.de



                                             A BSTRACT
         Text classifiers have promising applications in high-stake tasks such as resume
         screening and content moderation. These classifiers must be fair and avoid discrim-
         inatory decisions by being invariant to perturbations of sensitive attributes such
         as gender or ethnicity. However, there is a gap between human intuition about
         these perturbations and the formal similarity specifications capturing them. While
         existing research has started to address this gap, current methods are based on
         hardcoded word replacements, resulting in specifications with limited expressivity
         or ones that fail to fully align with human intuition (e.g., in cases of asymmet-
         ric counterfactuals). This work proposes novel methods for bridging this gap by
         discovering expressive and intuitive individual fairness specifications. We show
         how to leverage unsupervised style transfer and GPT-3’s zero-shot capabilities to
         automatically generate expressive candidate pairs of semantically similar sentences
         that differ along sensitive attributes. We then validate the generated pairs via an
         extensive crowdsourcing study, which confirms that a lot of these pairs align with
         human intuition about fairness in the context of toxicity classification. Finally, we
         show how limited amounts of human feedback can be leveraged to learn a similarity
         specification that can be used to train downstream fairness-aware models.


1    I NTRODUCTION
With the rise of pretrained large language models (Sun et al., 2019), text classifiers can now be
employed in tasks related to automated hiring (Bhatia et al., 2019), content moderation (Rieder &
Skop, 2021) and social science research (Widmer et al., 2020). They are also part of machine learning
pipelines for unsupervised style transfer (Reid & Zhong, 2021) or reducing the toxicity of language
model outputs (Welbl et al., 2021). However, text classifiers have been shown to often exhibit bias
based on sensitive attributes such as gender (De-Arteaga et al., 2019) or demographics (Garg et al.,
2019), even for tasks in which these dimensions should be irrelevant. This can lead to unfair and
discriminatory decisions, distort analyses based on these classifiers, or propagate undesirable demo-
graphic stereotypes to downstream applications. The intuition that certain demographic indicators
should not influence decisions can be formalized in terms of the concept of individual fairness (Dwork
et al., 2012), which posits that similar inputs should be treated similarly by machine learning systems.
While in a classification setting similar treatment for two inputs can naturally be defined in terms of
both inputs being labeled the same, the notion of input similarity should capture the intuition that
certain input characteristics should not influence model decisions.

Key challenge: generating valid, intuitive and diverse fairness constraints A key challenge
when applying the individual fairness framework is defining the similarity notion φ. Indeed, the
definition is often contentious, as fairness is a subjective concept: what counts as a valid demographic
indicator, as opposed to a problematic stereotype? Counterfactual definitions of similarity (Kusner
et al., 2017) offer a principled solution, but they shift the burden towards the underlying causal
model, whose definition can often be similarly contentious. While many other definitions have been
proposed, it is widely recognized that the similarity of inputs can often be highly task dependent
(Dwork et al., 2012; Barocas et al., 2019), e.g., two biographies that are identical except for indicators
of gender may be considered similar in a professional context, but not in the context of online dating.


                                                    1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


        : Word Replacement pairs                          : Expanded set of pairs                                   : Filtered pairs

      "I don't like this movie. It is so old"         "I don't like this movie. It is so old"            "I don't like this movie. It is so old"
      "I don't like this movie. It is so gay"        "I don't like this movie. It is so gay"             "I don't like this movie. It is so gay"

          "She was a great muslim"                        "She was a great muslim"                            "She was a great muslim"
          "She was a great christian"                     "She was a great christian"                        "She was a great christian"

                                                    "He is an ugly, old, white, racist man"             "He is an ugly, old, white, racist man"
                                                              "He is a black man"                                "He is a black man"

                                                "The left-wing platform is quite questionable"    "The left-wing platform is quite questionable"
                                                "The right-wing platform is quite questionable"   "The right-wing platform is quite questionable"


                             Word                                           Style Transfer
                                                                                                                                Active Learning
                          Replacement                                          + GPT-3

     "I don't like this movie. It is so old"         "He is an ugly, old, white, racist man"
                                                                                                                                    Crowdworkers
                                                        "The left-wing platform is quite
         "She was a great muslim"
                                                                  questionable"


Figure 1: Workflow overview. We begin by generating sentence pairs using word replacement, and
then add pairs of sentences leveraging style transfer and GPT-3. Then, we use active learning and
crowdworker judgments to identify pairs that deserve similar treatment according to human intuition.


In the context of text classification, most existing works have cast similarity in terms of word
replacement (Dixon et al., 2018; Garg et al., 2019; Yurochkin & Sun, 2021; Liang et al., 2020). Given
a sentence s, a similar sentence s0 is generated by replacing each word in s, that belongs to a list
of words Aj indicative of a demographic group j, by a word from list Aj 0 , indicative of another
demographic group j 0 6= j. This approach has several limitations: (i) it relies on having exhaustively
curated word lists Aj of sensitive terms, (ii) perturbations that cannot be represented by replacing
single sensitive terms are not covered, and (iii) many terms are only indicative of demographic groups
in specific contexts, hence directly replacing them with other terms will not always result in a similar
pair (s, s0 ) according to human intuition. Indeed, word replacement rules can often produce sentence
pairs that only differ in an axis not relevant to fairness (e.g., by replacing “white house” with “black
house”). In addition, they can generate so-called asymmetric counterfactuals (Garg et al., 2019):
sentence pairs (s, s0 ) that look similar but clearly do not warrant similar treatment. For example,
in the context of toxicity classification, the text “I don’t like this movie. It is so old” may not be
considered toxic while “I don’t like this movie. It is so gay” clearly is.

This work: generating fairness specifications for text classification The central challenge we
consider in this work is how to generate a diverse set of input pairs that aligns with human intuition
about which inputs should be treated similarly in the context of a fixed text classification task. These
pairs then induce fairness constraints that collectively define an implict fairness specification on a
downstream classifier, as individual fairness postulates that they should be classified in the same way.
We address this challenge via a three-stage pipeline, summarized in Fig. 1. First, we start from
a training dataset D for the text classification task under consideration and generate a set C w of
candidate pairs (s, s0 ) by applying word replacement to sentences s ∈ D. Second, to improve
diversity and expand on word replacement rules, we extend C w to a larger set of pairs C e by
borrowing unsupervised style transfer ideas. We change markers of demographic groups, e.g.,
“women”, “black people” or “Christians”, in sentences s ∈ D by replacing the style classifier used
by modern unsupervised style transfer methods (Reid & Zhong, 2021; Lee, 2020) with a classifier
trained to identify mentions of demographic groups. In addition, we add pairs from GPT-3 (Brown
et al., 2020), prompted to change markers of demographic groups for sentences in D in a zero-shot
fashion. Third, to identify which of the generated pairs align with human intuition about fairness in
the context of the considered classification task, we design a crowdsourcing experiment in which
workers are presented with candidate pairs and indicate if the pairs should be treated similarly for the
considered task or not. Since obtaining human feedback is expensive, we label a small subset of the
generated pool and train a BERT-based (Devlin et al., 2019) classifier ϕ̂ to recognize pairs that should
be treated similarly, yielding a final set of filtered pairs Ĉ r ⊆ C e . To further reduce labeling costs,
we use active learning similar to (Grießhaber et al., 2020) to decide which pairs to label. We also
demonstrate that the final set of constraints Ĉ r can be used for training fairness-aware downstream
classifiers, by adopting the Counterfactual Logit Pairing (CLP) regularizer of (Garg et al., 2019).


                                                                        2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


While our pipeline can in principle be used in the context of most text classification tasks, we
instantiate it in the context of toxicity classification. Our experimental results, based on a large
dataset for online content moderation, show that in this context our pipeline effectively generates a
set of candidate pairs that covers more diverse perturbations than existing word replacement based
approaches and successfully leverages human feedback to verify and filter these candidate pairs.

Main contributions We make the following contributions:
       • We introduce a method for generating datasets of diverse candidate pairs for individual
         fairness specifications. Towards that, we leverage GPT-3 and unsupervised style transfer to
         modify demographic attributes mentioned in sentences.
       • We show that human feedback can be used for training a classifier that automatically
         identifies pairs that align with human fairness intuitions for a considered downstream task.
       • We instantiate our framework in the context of toxicity classification. We experimentally
         show that the proposed pairs cover more diverse perturbations than word replacement, that
         crowdworkers agree with more than 75% of proposed pairs and that our learned approximate
         specification can effectively be used to train fairness-aware downstream classifiers.

2    R ELATED W ORK

Bias in NLP Early work on bias in Natural Language Processing has focused on unwanted correla-
tions between the word embeddings of identifiers for protected demographic groups and unrelated
categories such as occupations (Bolukbasi et al., 2016; Caliskan et al., 2017). More recently, genera-
tive language models have been found to harbor stereotypical biases (Liang et al., 2020; Nadeem et al.,
2021; Vig et al., 2020; Smith et al., 2022). Specific to text classification, identity terms such as “gay”
and explicit indicators of gender have been shown to significantly impact the outputs of classifiers
trained to identify toxic comments (Dixon et al., 2018) or to predict a person’s occupation from their
biography (De-Arteaga et al., 2019). Olteanu et al. (2017) demonstrate that human perceptions of
the quality of a toxicity classifier can depend on the precise nature of errors made by the classifier,
as well as the annotators’ previous experiences with hate speech. Similarly, Blodgett et al. (2020)
recommend authors to explictly consider why, how and to whom the biases they identify are harmful.

Language models for data augmentation Perez et al. (2022) use a language model to automat-
ically generate test cases for another language model and Ross et al. (2022) automatically create
contrast sets (Gardner et al., 2020) with a language model perturbing sentences based on control codes.
Rios (2020) use style transfer to change the dialect of African-American Vernacular English tweets
to Standard American English in order to evaluate the sensitivity to dialect of offensive language
detectors, but do not extend style transfer to mentions of demographic groups. Hartvigsen et al. (2022)
use language models to generate a balanced dataset of benign and toxic comments about minority
groups and demonstrate that finetuning a toxicity classifier on this dataset can substantially limit
its reliance on spurious correlations between identity terms and toxicity. However, their dataset is
non-parallel, hence it cannot be used for evaluating individual fairness. Meanwhile, Qian et al. (2022)
train a perturber model to imitate human rewrites s0 of comments s that aim to modify mentions of
demographic groups, and demonstrate that finetuning language models on the modified comments
reduces demographic biases. Although this approach creates parallel data, it is limited by its reliance
on large amounts of expensive human rewrites, which is likely why the authors only use it for
perturbations along given demographic axes such as gender. In contrast, we allow for perturbations
across axes and only require human annotations rather than rewrites.

Learning fairness notions from data Ilvento (2020) provides an algorithm to approximate arbi-
trary individual fairness metrics for N datapoints in O(N log N ) queries, which can be practically
infeasible. Meanwhile, Mukherjee et al. (2020) suggest training a classifier to predict binary fairness
judgments on pairs (s, s0 ) in order to learn a fairness metric φ, but restrict themselves to Mahalanobis
distances on top of a feature representation ξ(s), limiting their expressive power. In contrast to
our work, these works do not validate their learned fairness notions with human feedback. To that
end, Cheng et al. (2021) present an interface to holistically elicit stakeholders’ fairness judgments,
whereas Wang et al. (2019) aim to learn a bilinear fairness metric for tabular data based on clustering
human annotations. Another strain of work aims to directly learn fair classifiers without an explicit


                                                    3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


fairness metric: given access to similarity queries, Jung et al. (2021) propose an algorithm with gener-
alization bounds for fairness and accuracy that requires polynomially many queries to cost-sensitive
classification oracle, while other work (Gillen et al., 2018; Bechavod et al., 2020) focuses on online
learning of individually fair models. Lastly, Lahoti et al. (2019) use examples of similar pairs (s, s0 )
to directly learn a representation that aims to ensure geometric similarity for similar pairs while
preserving nearest neighbors in the input space. This approach is difficult to use for non-tabular
data, in which nearest neighbor relations do not necessarily carry semantic meaning. In contrast to
these works, we are not only interested in training fair classifiers, but also aim to learn the similarity
function which approximates human intuitions about fairness for the task.

Enforcing fairness constraints Garg et al. (2019) suggest enforcing fairness constraints via cen-
soring terms indicative of demographic groups, and by extending logit pairing (Kannan et al., 2018)
to counterfactual logit pairing (CLP): during training, a classifier f with logits l is regularized by the
term λ||l(s) − l(s0 )||2 for similar datapoints s and s0 . Yurochkin et al. (2019) and Yurochkin & Sun
(2021) use distributionally robust optimization and transport-based regularization respectively to train
a toxicity classifier with distributional fairness guarantees for bilinear fairness metric similar to the
ones from (Mukherjee et al., 2020). (Ruoss et al., 2020; Yeom & Fredrikson, 2021; Peychev et al.,
2022) not only enforce, but also certify the adherence to individual fairness constraints expressed in
logical formulas, weighted Lp metrics or similarity sets defined in the latent space of a generative
model. However, except for CLP and censoring, all of these methods require a known similarity
metric with a specific functional form, which is not always available in practice.

3     M ETHOD
This section presents our end-to-end framework for generating candidate pairs for individual fairness
specifications for a given text classification task, identifying candidates that indeed represent fairness
constraints for that task and using them for training individually fair downstream classifiers. In Sec. 3.1
we expand on existing word replacement definitions of individual fairness in text classification by
generating further candidate constraints. Next, in Sec. 3.2 we leverage human feedback to learn
an approximate similarity function ϕ̂ to identify a set of relevant constraints Ĉ r ⊆ C e . Finally,
in Sec. 3.3 we train a fairness-aware classifier f using CLP on the filtered constraint set Ĉ r .

3.1   E XPANDING FAIRNESS CONSTRAINTS

We expand the word replacement based constraint set from (Garg et al., 2019) by implementing three
different ways to modify markers of demographic groups mentioned in a sentence s: an extended
word replacement list, unsupervised style transfer, and zero-shot modification using GPT-3.

Word Replacement First, we enrich the word replacement method by using the extensive lists of
words associated with different protected demographic groups presented in (Smith et al., 2022). The
pool of terms is substantially larger than the 50 identity terms from (Garg et al., 2019). We modify
markers of group j in a comment s by replacing all words on the respective list of words associated
with group j with words from the list associated with the target group j 0 .

Unsupervised Style Transfer Second, we use an unsupervised style transfer approach based on
prototype editing (see (Jin et al., 2022) for an extensive review on style transfer) to transform markers
of a demographic group j in a sentence s to markers of another demographic group j 0 , creating a
new sentence s0 . Prototype editing identifies markers a of a source style A in a text s, and substitutes
them by markers a0 of a target style A0 . It can achieve unsupervised style transfer with minimal
modifications to a source sentence s. Importantly, modern prototype editing algorithms rely solely on
a style classifier to define their notion of style, so that they can transfer mentions of demographic
groups when used with a classifier trained to identify such mentions.
Our approach consists of three phases. First, we train a multi-headed RoBERTa-based (Liu et al.,
2019) classifier c to predict the presence of mentions of demographic groups j in a sentence s. Second,
following (Reid & Zhong, 2021), we train a BART-based (Lewis et al., 2020) group-conditioned
generator g(st , j): given a sentence s consisting of n tokens that mentions group j, we remove
mentions of demographic groups from s by masking tokens at positions k with above-average


                                                    4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


attention weights ak ≥ ā, where ak represents the maximum attention weight at position k in the
penultimate layer of c and the average is taken over all token positions for the sentence s. After
merging consecutive masks, this yields a template st on which g(st , j) is trained to reconstruct s.
Third, we modify sentences s that mention group j to instead mention group j 0 by first creating a
template s0t as in (Lee, 2020): we iteratively mask the tokens in s for which masking most reduces
the likelihood pc (j|s0t ) of j according to the group-presence classifier c, until it falls below a fixed
threshold T . Then, we generate s0 as g(s0t , j 0 ) using beam search with width 5 and selecting according
to pc (j 0 |s0 ) − pc (j|s0 ), the difference in likelihoods assigned to j 0 and j for s0 by c.
We use this approach rather than the attention-based masking from (Reid & Zhong, 2021) for the third
step because the attention values ak are shared between the prediction heads of c for all groups j. This
means that attention-based masking might mask tokens related to a third group j 00 instead of tokens
related to j for sentences s in which multiple demographic groups are mentioned. While unlikely
to be very detrimental during the training of the class-conditioned generator g, using attention for
creating templates st for g can thus cause group transfer to target the wrong source group j.
The unsupervised style transfer approach promises multiple advantages. First, style transfer is likely
to reproduce terms encountered during training, helping it to pick up on rare demographic terms that
are particular to its training distribution which can be chosen to equal the training distribution for
downstream tasks. In addition, unlike concurrent work by Qian et al. (2022), unsupervised style
transfer only requires labels yj (s) indicating the mention of demographic group j in a sentence s
rather than large amount of expensive human-produced examples of demographic group transfer.
This allows us to modify mentions of demographic groups across axes like gender, religion and race,
rather than restricting ourselves to changes within each of these axes.

GPT-3 Lastly, we make use of GPT-3 (Brown et al., 2020) to transform markers of protected
demographic groups in a zero-shot fashion. We use three methods for generating pairs based on
GPT-3. First, we prepend an example s mentioning group j with the prompt "Please rewrite the
following sentence to be about j 0 rather than j". Second, we use GPT-3’s edit mode1 with a similar
prompt. Lastly, we generate candidate modifications s0 by word replacement, and postprocess them
using GPT-3’s edit mode with the prompt "Fix grammatical errors and logical inconsistencies".
While the GPT-3 approach does not automatically adapt to the relevant distribution of demographic
terms, it does not require any additional data, or training of language models. To ensure that mentions
of demographic group j were indeed replaced by j 0 going from s to s0 , we use the same group-
presence classifier c as for the unsupervised style transfer approach to heuristically identify successful
group transfer and discard pairs (s, s0 ) for which group transfer failed, for all three of our approaches.
Implementation details are described in App. B and App. E contains examples of generated sentences.

3.2      L EARNING THE SIMILARITY FUNCTION

In order to evaluate to what extent the proposed similarity criteria align with human intuition, we
leverage human feedback, via a crowdsourcing study described in more detail in Sec. 4, to obtain
labels ϕ(s, s0 ) which indicate whether the pair (s, s0 ) should be treated similarly for the sake of
individual fairness (ϕ(s, s0 ) = 0) or not (ϕ(s, s0 ) = 1). In particular, identifying which pairs align
with human labelers’ intuition about fairness can help detect asymmetric counterfactuals, as well as
failed attempts at style transfer for which s0 cannot be interpreted as a meaningful modification of s.
Since labeling all of C e can be prohibitively expensive, we train a probabilistic model pϕ̂ (s, s0 ) on
a labeled subset of C e and use it to predict ϕ(s, s0 ) for the remaining pairs (s, s0 ). The similarity
function ϕ that specifies individual fairness is then approximated as ϕ̂(s, s0 ) := 1 ⇔ pϕ̂ (s, s0 ) > t
for a given classification threshold t. Instead of using bilinear logits based on features for both
s and s0 (Mukherjee et al., 2020), we tokenize s and s0 and train a BERT-based classifier on the
concatenated tokens. This allows for a more holistic comparison between s and s0 as attention heads
can directly attend to differences between s and s0 in earlier layers (see App. C for more details).

Active Learning from human fairness judgments To make optimal use of costly human queries,
we employ active learning when training the classifier ϕ̂. We use the variation ratios 1 − maxy p(y|x)
to select the data points with the largest uncertainty about the correct label, an approach that is often
   1
       https://openai.com/blog/gpt-3-edit-insert/


                                                    5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


dubbed Least Confidence (LC) and estimate p using a Dropout-based Monte-Carlo estimate (Gal
& Ghahramani, 2016; Gal et al., 2017). As in (Grießhaber et al., 2020), we aim to save resources
by precomputing features for the BERT-part of ϕ̂ and performing Monte-Carlo dropout on the
classification head of ϕ̂ only. Concretely, after training ϕ̂ on an initial randomly selectedSdataset
D0 ⊂ C e with labels ϕ(s, s0 ), we iteratively select new unlabeled training data Di ⊂ C e \ j<i Dj
with |Di | = 1000, based on the variation ratios, query labels for Di , and retrain ϕ̂ on Di . As different
annotators can disagree about whether or not two sentences s and s0 should be treated similarly, we
use a majority vote for evaluation. Inspired by Chen et al. (2022)’s approach for dealing with noise
in crowdsourcing, we use a single human query per pair (s, s0 ) during active learning, and relabel
pairs that are especially likely to be mislabeled after active learning has concluded.

3.3       T RAINING A FAIR ( ER ) CLASSIFIER

Finally, we train a fairness-aware classifier by accounting for the constraints defined by the learned sim-
ilarity function. Specifically, we define the filtered constraint set Ĉ r = {(s, s0 ) ∈ C e : ϕ̂(s, s0 ) = 0}.
We then train a RoBERTa-based (Liu et al., 2019) downstream classifier f , empirically enforc-
                                      r
  Pthe constraints implied 0by Ĉ by using the Counterfactual Logit Pairing (CLP) regularizer
ing
λ s,s0 :φ(s,s0 )=0 ||l(s) − l(s )||2 of Garg et al. (2019). Here, l represents the logits of the classifier f .
If ϕ̂ accurately approximates human fairness intuitions, this approach avoids enforcing constraints
implied by asymmetric counterfactuals (s, s0 ) (pairs with ϕ(s, s0 ) = 1) while properly enforcing
actual constraints (pairs with ϕ(s, s0 ) = 0). Further training details can be found in App. D.


4       E XPERIMENTS

In this section, we experimentally evaluate our framework in the context of toxicity classification.
Our key findings are: (i) the pairs generated by our method cover a wider range of perturbations
compared to word replacement pairs only (Sec. 4.2), while mostly aligning with human intuition
about individual fairness in toxicity classification (Sec. 4.3); (ii) the underlying similarity function ϕ
can be approximated by active learning from human judgements (Sec. 4.4), and (iii) the produced
constraints can be used to enforce individual fairness on a downstream toxicity classifier (Sec. 4.5).

4.1       DATASET AND SETUP

We focus on toxicity classification on the Jigsaw Civil Comments dataset2 . The dataset contains
around 2 million online comments s, as well as labels toxic(s) indicating the fraction of human
labelers that considered comment s toxic. We define binary classification labels y(s) := toxic(s) >
0.5. A subset D of the Civil Comments dataset also contains labels Aj (s) that indicate the fraction
of human labelers that think comment s mentions the demographic group j. We again define binary
classification labels as yj (s) := Aj (s) > 0.5 for these comments, and use them to train our group-
presence classifier c. We only consider the subset D0 ⊂ D for which no nan-values are contained
in the dataset, and the RoBERTa-tokenized version of s does not exceed a length of 64 tokens. We
furthermore split D0 into a training set containing 75% of D0 and a test set containing the other 25%.
To build the pool C e of candidate pairs, for word replacement and style transfer, we attempt to
produce modified comments s0j 0 mentioning group j 0 for each s ∈ D0 for all demographic groups j
with yj (s) = 1 and all possible target groups j 0 . For GPT-3, we use a subset of D0 due to limited
resources. We then combine 42,500 randomly selected pairs (s, s0 ) with s in the training part of D0
for word replacement and style transfer each and a total of 15,000 pairs (s, s0 ) for our three GPT-3
approaches, to form the set of candidate constraints C e . We similarly construct a set of test constraints
of a fourth of C e ’s size from the test portion of D0 . More technical details can be found in App. B.
Throughout this paper, whenever we report individual fairness for a classifier, we refer to the
proportion of pairs (s, s0 ) in a test pool of similar pairs for which f (s) = f (s0 ) rather than f (s) 6=
f (s0 ). This metric captures that every instance of treating similar pairs differently is harmful. It is
also a natural upper bound for certified individual fairness (Ruoss et al., 2020; Peychev et al., 2022)

    2
        https://www.kaggle.com/competitions/jigsaw-unintended-bias-in-toxicity-classification/data


                                                        6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


and prediction consistency (Yurochkin & Sun, 2021) which consider equal predictions across all
comments s0 similar to a given comment s for simpler formal specifications of similarity.

4.2      C OVERAGE OF GENERATED FAIRNESS CONSTRAINTS

To validate that our approach covers a wider range of perturbations than word replacement, we train
4 different toxicity classifiers, using CLP with different constraint sets: our full constraint set C e , as
well as C1 , C2 , C3 of the same size as C e . The pairs in C1 , also referred to as WR50 , were generated
by word replacement based on the 50 identity terms from (Garg et al., 2019) 3 ; the pairs in C2 , also
referred to as WR, were generated by word replacement by using the larger list of terms of (Smith
et al., 2022); and the pairs in C3 , also referred to as ST, were created by the style transfer method.
We cross-evaluate the performance of 4 classifiers trained with CLP with λ = 5, using each of the
constraint sets Ci in terms of test-time individual fairness measured as the proportion of similar pairs
(s, s0 ) for which f (s) = f (s0 ) in C e and each of the 4 constraint sets Ci , and balanced accuracy.
Table 1 reports these numbers and the performance of a “baseline” model, trained without CLP.
The results in Table 1 indicate that each classifier achieves high individual fairness when evaluated on
test constraint pairs corresponding to the constraints used during its training (in italics) but performs
worse when evaluated on other constraint pairs. This indicates that enforcing the similarity notions
corresponding to different pair-generation methods can produce substantially different classifiers and
that the adherence to individual fairness does not perfectly generalize across our generation methods.
We note that training with CLP on C e or our style transfer pairs C3 does not just yield significantly
improved constraint adherence on C3 , but also generalizes well to C1 and C2 (see the numbers in
bold), without losing much downstream accuracy. More details can be found in App. B and D.

  Training/Evaluation              BA           WR50 (C1 )        WR (C2 )        ST (C3 )       Full C e
  Baseline (no CLP)            88.4 ± 0.1       78.4 ± 1.4       81.3 ± 1.5     76.7 ± 1.8     78.5 ± 1.5
  CLP WR50 (C1 )               87.0 ± 0.3      98 .3 ± 0 .1       89.1 ± 1.9     86.3 ± 1.9     87.3 ± 1.8
  CLP WR (C2 )                 87.2 ± 0.1       93.1 ± 1.2       98 .2 ± 0 .4    90.5 ± 1.7     92.9 ± 1.2
  CLP ST (C3 )                 85.9 ± 0.1      95.3 ± 0.4        97.1 ± 0.3     95 .4 ± 0 .4    95.5 ± 0.3
  CLP Full C e                 85.0 ± 3.4      95.5 ± 0.9        97.8 ± 0.6      94.9 ± 0.9    95 .7 ± 0 .8

Table 1: Balanced accuracy and individual fairness evaluated on different Ci (proportion of pairs
(s, s0 ) ∈ Ci for which f (s) = f (s0 )) for a RoBERTa-based toxicity classifier f trained with CLP
using different constraint sets Ci in each row. Results are averaged over 5 runs and ± indicates the
difference from the bounds of a naive 95% confidence interval assuming normally distributed errors.


4.3      R ELEVANCE OF GENERATED FAIRNESS CONSTRAINTS

To validate that the fairness constraints we generated are relevant and intuitive, we conducted a human
evaluation using Amazon’s MechanicalTurk. Workers were presented with a pair (s, s0 ) consisting
of a comment s from the Civil Comments dataset, as well as a modified version s0 and asked about
whether they believe that the two comments should be treated similarly. Treatment was framed in
terms of toxicity classification for content moderation, ensuring that we verify the relevance of the
learned notions relevant to this specific task. Workers were also asked whether the demographic
group was transferred correctly from a given j to a given j 0 and whether the content of s has been
preserved in s0 apart from the demographic group transfer. Further details can be found in App. A.
We collected human feedback for a set S containing a total of 720 pairs (s, s0 ) with 240 each
produced by our style transfer approach, GPT-3 in a zero-shot fashion, and word replacement using
the list from (Garg et al., 2019)4 . The 240 pairs per method were split into 80 pairs for each of the
axes male↔female, christian↔muslim and black↔white, half of which with s mentioning the first
demographic group and half of them with s mentioning the second group. Each pair (s, s0 ) was shown
to nine workers and responses aggregated by a majority vote. Table 2 reports how often workers
affirmatively answered the three questions from the previous paragraph for different methods.
   3
       We did not discard any pairs based on a classifier for C1 .
   4
       We again did not discard pairs based on a classifier for these pairs.


                                                          7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


   Generation Method       Different Treatment Unfair         Group Transfer    Content Preservation
   Word replacement                85.9 (97.5)                 89.3 (95.0)          88.1 (100)
   Style Transfer                  85.2 (96.2)                 79.2 (85.4)          79.2 (91.2)
   GPT-3                           83.2 (93.7)                 81.9 (89.5)          78.4 (87.9)

Table 2: Crowdsourced answers to questions about comment pairs (s, s0 ) for different methods for
demographic group transfer: do the two comments deserve similar treatment, was the demographic
group successfully transferred, and was content preserved apart from that? The first number represents
the percentage of the answer across all queries, while the second number (in brackets) represents the
percentage of comment pairs for which the answer was the majority vote across 9 queries.


The results in Table 2 demonstrate that all three methods produce relevant fairness constraints,
according to a majority of annotators. At the same time, the workers’ feedback indicates that the
methods were mostly successful at modifying the mentioned demographic group, and at preserving
content. While word replacement generally performs better in terms of group transfer and content
preservation, this only translates to a small advantage in terms of producing pairs that represent actual
fairness constraints (ϕ(s, s0 ) = 0). See Tables A.1 and A.2 for more detailed results.

4.4   L EARNING THE SIMILARITY FUNCTION

Since labeling pairs through human feedback is costly, obtaining labels for all candidate pairs in C e
can be prohibitively expensive. Therefore, we employed our active learning approach to efficiently
train our classifier ϕ̂ from relatively few human judgments, with the goal of using it to identify pairs
that represent actual fairness constraints on the remaining pool of candidates. We conducted 6 steps
of active learning with 1000 queries each, selected by the LC criterion. Failed queries were discarded,
so that we ended up with 5490 labeled pairs ((s, s0 ), ϕ(s, s0 )). Details can be found in App. C.
We evaluate our learned classifier on a test set T consisting of 500 randomly selected pairs from
C e for which five annotators were asked to predict the American’s fairness judgment. We labeled
pairs based on whether the majority thought they should be treated similarly (ϕ(s, s0 ) = 0), or not
(ϕ(s, s0 ) = 1). Because 78.8% of the pairs (s, s0 ) in T represented fairness constraints (ϕ(s, s0 ) = 0),
we report Balanced Accuracy (BA), in addition to standard accuracy (ACC) and the true positive and
negative rates (TPR and TNR). Table 3 displays these metrics for classifiers resulting from our active
learning method for different classification thresholds t and with and without subsequent relabeling.

        Method                                     ACC             TNR            TPR         BA
        Constant Baseline                          78.8            100.0          0.0        50.0
        Active Learning t=0.5                  79.8 ± 0.3        97.2 ± 0.3    15.1 ± 1.2    56.1
        Active Learning + Relabel t=0.5        81.1 ± 0.3        95.5 ± 0.7    28.6 ± 2.2    62.0
        Active Learning t=0.1                    80.0 ± 0.5      95.2 ± 0.7    23.7 ± 3.5    59.4
        Active Learning + Relabel t=0.1          80.7 ± 0.6      93.0 ± 0.9    35.0 ± 1.3    64.0
        Active Learning t=0.01                   78.7 ± 1.1      87.5 ± 2.1    45.7 ± 1.8    66.6
        Active Learning + Relabel t=0.01         78.3 ± 0.7      86.8 ± 1.5    46.6 ± 2.5    66.7

Table 3: Performance (in terms of accuracy, true negative/positive rate and balanced accuracy) for
similarity classifiers ϕ̂ trained on human fairness judgments with and without relabeling, evaluated
on the test set T with different decision thresholds t. Results are averaged over 10 repetitions of
training on the data labeled in the last step/the relabeled data. ± indicates the difference from the
upper/lower bound of a naive 95% confidence interval assuming normally distributed errors.

We observe that ϕ̂ performs substantially better than random, achieving BA of 66.7% when used with
an aggressive classifier threshold t. Table 3 also validates our relabeling approach: after observing that
our classifier was biased towards predicting ϕ̂(s, s0 ) = 0 on a held-out validation set, we collected
two additional labels for 500 pairs (s, s0 ) for which both the human and the predicted label were


                                                     8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


equal to zero, selected based on the LC criterion. The majority vote over all three annotators was
ϕ(s, s0 ) = 1 for 47% of these pairs, showing that our approach correctly identified pairs that were
likely to be mislabeled. Retraining our classifier on the updated majority votes also substantially
increased TPR at little costs to TNR, especially for balanced classification thresholds t close to
0.5. According to a qualitative evaluation, many sentence pairs (s, s0 ) predicted to not represent
fairness constraints (ϕ̂(s, s0 ) = 1) had the words "boy" or "man" replaced by terms denoting identity
membership. Such sentence pairs, like "You boys don’t go fishing when you go on those vacations,
do you?" and "You Hindus don’t go fishing when you go on those vacations, do you?" were often
not seen as fairness constraints by human annotators, as the use of the identity term can be read as
mocking. ϕ̂ also identified sentence pairs (s, s0 ) for which s0 was unrelated to s, that were sometimes
produced by GPT-3, as not representing fairness constraints. Further results can be found in App. C.

4.5   T RAINING A FAIRER DOWNSTREAM CLASSIFIER

Lastly, we evaluate whether the pairs Ĉ r obtainted by filtering C e with ϕ̂ (trained with relabeling,
threshold t = 0.5) can help with learning an individually fair downstream classifier, by training a
RoBERTa-based toxicity classifier f using CLP with λ = 5. More details can be found in App. D.
We train toxicity classifiers with CLP using constraint sets defined by word replacement (C1 and C2
as in Sec. 4.2) and using all of C e , or the filtered version Ĉ r . Additionally, we train on a challenging
                     e
set of constraints, Cadverse  that consists of C e and 10,000 adversarially selected pairs (s, s0 ) created
by randomly selecting comments s with toxicity label y(s) = 1 and randomly selecting comments s0
                                                           r             e
with label y(s) = 0 from D, and a filtered version Ĉadverse         of Cadverse using threshold t = 0.5.
We then evaluate these classifiers in terms of Balanced Accuracy (BA) and individual fairness on the
resulting classifiers on the test set T . Table 4 shows that compared to word replacement our expanded
constraint set C e consistently yields better adherence to human-validated fairness constraints at the
cost of a small drop in BA. However, we do not find a clear improvement from using the filtered
constraint set Ĉ r over the full set of constraints C e . We hypothesize that this is due to our classifier
ϕ̂’s limited True Positive Rate combined with ϕ(s, s0 ) equalling zero for most pairs (s, s0 ) ∈ C e
according to human annotators, such that even filtering with a perfect classifier ϕ̂ might be of limited
utility as most constraints in C e are indeed relevant. This is supported by our results for Cadverse
                                                                                                    e
                                                                                                            ,
where filtering substantially improves BA. Further experiments can be found in App. D.

                    Method                                    BA         Fairness (T )
                    Baseline no CLP                        88.2 ± 0.4     82.1 ± 2.1
                    CLP WR50 (C1 )                         87.1 ± 2.0    92.8 ± 0.9
                    CLP WR (C2 )                           87.2 ± 0.2    95.8 ± 0.9
                    CLP Full constraint set C e            85.9 ± 0.3    96.5 ± 1.4
                    CLP Filtered constraint set Ĉ r       85.9 ± 0.5    97.4 ± 1.1
                          e
                    CLP Cadverse                           71.1 ± 17.4    97.8 ± 2.2
                                   r
                    CLP Filtered Ĉadverse                  79.3 ± 2.2    98.7 ± 0.6

Table 4: Balanced accuracy and individual fairness (proportion of human-validated similar pairs
(s, s0 ) ∈ T with φ(s, s0 ) = 0, for which f (s) = f (s0 )) for toxicity classifiers f trained with CLP and
different sets of similar pairs. Results are averaged over 5 training runs. ± indicates the difference
from the upper/lower bound of a naive 95% confidence interval assuming normally distributed errors.


5     C ONCLUSION
We proposed a framework for producing expressive and intuitive specifications for individual fairness
in text classification. We experimentally demonstrated that our pairs are more expressive than
word replacement pairs and that most of the generated pairs were relevant in the context of toxicity
classification according to human annotators. We also trained a classifier that automatically identifies
relevant pairs and showed that our approach can improve the fairness of a toxicity classifier.
Our dataset of fairness judgments is available at https://github.com/eth-sri/fairness-feedback-nlp


                                                       9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


6    E THICS S TATEMENT
Our human evaluation experiments involving workers from Mechanical Turk were reviewed and
approved by the ETH Zurich Ethics Commission as proposal EK 2022-N-117. Workers on Mechanical
Turk were warned that they might be shown offensive comments as part of our study and were able to
opt out of participating in our study at any time. We also made sure that the per-task compensation
was sufficiently high to result in a hourly compensation exceeding the US federal minimum wage.
More details on our human evaluation experiments can be found in App. A.
While we believe that our results show that learning more precise fairness notions by involving human
feedback is a very promising area of research, we caution against directly using the labels from our
human evaluation study φ for evaluating fairness in high-stakes real-world applications of toxicity
classification. First, our results show that there is substantial disagreement between different survey
participants about which pairs (s, s0 ) require equal treatment by a fair classifier. While resolving
these disagreements via a majority vote is a natural choice, other approaches may be desired in
some contexts, for example enforcing equal treatment whenever at least one participant believes it
is required or explicitly accounting for distributional information via jury learning (Gordon et al.,
2022) or multi-annotator architecture (Davani et al., 2022). Second, our survey participants are
geographically biased to the US and are neither direct stakeholders, nor experts in discrimination law
and hate speech.
Given that our learning approach shows promising signs of being able to improve upon existing
approaches to quantifying individual fairness despite large amounts of disagreement, which is likely
to be less common for actual stakeholders and experts, we recommend using it in conjunction
with fairness judgments provided by application-specific experts and stakeholders. The collection
of additional application-specific fairness labels φ is especially important when our framework is
applied to downstream tasks other than toxicity classification, for which human agreement with the
relevance of generated pairs to individual fairness could theoretically be substantially lower than
indicated by our study. In addition, the validity of collected labels should be reassessed periodically
in order to account for shifts in linguistic, cultural and social contexts (Aroyo et al., 2019).
In addition, our generated pairs only cover perturbations along a fixed list of demographic groups
such that fulfilling individual fairness on these pairs does not guarantee invariance to other forms of
perturbations. Correspondingly, evaluation on these pairs can help to provide better evidence about
the extent of demographic biases but not necessarily other forms of bias present in a text classifier.
We believe that it is exceedingly difficult to capture human intuitions about individual fairness in
complex domains like text using simple rules. Hence, our work implicitly defines similarity based on
human-labeled data, which can be difficult to interpret. To instill further in the derived specifications,
future work could aim to extract more interpretable specifications from the human feedback, for
example using techniques from explainable machine learning.

7    R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT
We provide code to reproduce our generation pipeline and our experiments on synthetic
data, as well as our dataset of human fairness judgments at https://github.com/eth-sri/
fairness-feedback-nlp. All of our experiments involving transformer language models use the
huggingface transformers library (Wolf et al., 2020). Additional details on our human evaluation are
provided in App. A.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We would like to thank Dan Hendrycks, Mislav Balunović, Afra Amini and Dominik Stammbach for
helpful comments and discussions during early stages of this work. We also thank the anonymous
reviewers for their insightful comments and constructive feedback that helped to improve this paper.
Florian Dorner is grateful for financial support from the Max Planck ETH Center for Learning Systems
(CLS) received during part of this work. Nikola Konstantinov’s contributions to this publication were
made possible by an ETH AI Center postdoctoral fellowship.


                                                   10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


R EFERENCES
Lora Aroyo, Lucas Dixon, Nithum Thain, Olivia Redfield, and Rachel Rosen. Crowdsourcing
  subjective tasks: the case study of understanding toxicity in online discussions. In Companion
  proceedings of the 2019 world wide web conference, pp. 1100–1105, 2019.
Solon Barocas, Moritz Hardt, and Arvind Narayanan. Fairness and Machine Learning: Limitations
  and Opportunities. fairmlbook.org, 2019. http://www.fairmlbook.org.
Jasmijn Bastings and Katja Filippova. The elephant in the interpretability room: Why use attention as
  explanation when we have saliency methods? In Proceedings of the Third BlackboxNLP Workshop
  on Analyzing and Interpreting Neural Networks for NLP, pp. 149–155, 2020.
Yahav Bechavod, Christopher Jung, and Steven Z Wu. Metric-free individual fairness in online
  learning. Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:11214–11225, 2020.
Vedant Bhatia, Prateek Rawat, Ajit Kumar, and Rajiv Ratn Shah. End-to-end resume parsing and
  finding candidates for a job description using bert. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.03089, 2019.
Su Lin Blodgett, Solon Barocas, Hal Daumé III, and Hanna Wallach. Language (technology) is power:
  A critical survey of “bias” in nlp. In Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association
  for Computational Linguistics, pp. 5454–5476, 2020.
Tolga Bolukbasi, Kai-Wei Chang, James Y Zou, Venkatesh Saligrama, and Adam T Kalai. Man is
  to computer programmer as woman is to homemaker? debiasing word embeddings. Advances in
  neural information processing systems, 29, 2016.
Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
  Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. Language models are
  few-shot learners. Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:1877–1901, 2020.
Aylin Caliskan, Joanna J Bryson, and Arvind Narayanan. Semantics derived automatically from
  language corpora contain human-like biases. Science, 356(6334):183–186, 2017.
Derek Chen, Zhou Yu, and Samuel R Bowman. Clean or annotate: How to spend a limited data
  collection budget. In Proceedings of the Third Workshop on Deep Learning for Low-Resource
  Natural Language Processing, pp. 152–168, 2022.
Hao-Fei Cheng, Logan Stapleton, Ruiqi Wang, Paige Bullock, Alexandra Chouldechova, Zhiwei
  Steven Steven Wu, and Haiyi Zhu. Soliciting stakeholders’ fairness notions in child maltreatment
  predictive systems. In Proceedings of the 2021 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing
  Systems, pp. 1–17, 2021.
Aida Mostafazadeh Davani, Mark Díaz, and Vinodkumar Prabhakaran. Dealing with disagreements:
  Looking beyond the majority vote in subjective annotations. Transactions of the Association for
  Computational Linguistics, 10:92–110, 2022.
Maria De-Arteaga, Alexey Romanov, Hanna Wallach, Jennifer Chayes, Christian Borgs, Alexandra
 Chouldechova, Sahin Geyik, Krishnaram Kenthapadi, and Adam Tauman Kalai. Bias in bios: A
 case study of semantic representation bias in a high-stakes setting. In proceedings of the Conference
 on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency, pp. 120–128, 2019.
Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Lee Kention, and Kristina Toutanova. Bert: Pre-training of deep
  bidirectional transformers for language understanding. In Proceedings of NAACL-HLT, pp. 4171–
  4186, 2019.
Lucas Dixon, John Li, Jeffrey Sorensen, Nithum Thain, and Lucy Vasserman. Measuring and
  mitigating unintended bias in text classification. In Proceedings of the 2018 AAAI/ACM Conference
  on AI, Ethics, and Society, pp. 67–73, 2018.
Cynthia Dwork, Moritz Hardt, Toniann Pitassi, Omer Reingold, and Richard Zemel. Fairness through
  awareness. In Proceedings of the 3rd innovations in theoretical computer science conference, pp.
  214–226, 2012.


                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Yarin Gal and Zoubin Ghahramani. Dropout as a bayesian approximation: Representing model
  uncertainty in deep learning. In international conference on machine learning, pp. 1050–1059.
  PMLR, 2016.
Yarin Gal, Riashat Islam, and Zoubin Ghahramani. Deep bayesian active learning with image data.
  In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 1183–1192. PMLR, 2017.
Matt Gardner, Yoav Artzi, Victoria Basmov, Jonathan Berant, Ben Bogin, Sihao Chen, Pradeep
 Dasigi, Dheeru Dua, Yanai Elazar, Ananth Gottumukkala, et al. Evaluating models’ local decision
 boundaries via contrast sets. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP
 2020, pp. 1307–1323, 2020.
Sahaj Garg, Vincent Perot, Nicole Limtiaco, Ankur Taly, Ed H Chi, and Alex Beutel. Counterfactual
  fairness in text classification through robustness. In Proceedings of the 2019 AAAI/ACM Conference
  on AI, Ethics, and Society, pp. 219–226, 2019.
Stephen Gillen, Christopher Jung, Michael Kearns, and Aaron Roth. Online learning with an unknown
  fairness metric. Advances in neural information processing systems, 31, 2018.
Mitchell L Gordon, Michelle S Lam, Joon Sung Park, Kayur Patel, Jeff Hancock, Tatsunori
 Hashimoto, and Michael S Bernstein. Jury learning: Integrating dissenting voices into ma-
 chine learning models. In CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, pp. 1–19,
 2022.
Daniel Grießhaber, Johannes Maucher, and Ngoc Thang Vu. Fine-tuning bert for low-resource natural
  language understanding via active learning. In Proceedings of the 28th International Conference
  on Computational Linguistics, pp. 1158–1171, 2020.
Thomas Hartvigsen, Saadia Gabriel, Hamid Palangi, Maarten Sap, Dipankar Ray, and Ece Kamar.
  Toxigen: A large-scale machine-generated dataset for adversarial and implicit hate speech detection.
  In Proceedings of the 60th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics
  (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 3309–3326, 2022.
Pengcheng He, Xiaodong Liu, Jianfeng Gao, and Weizhu Chen. Deberta: Decoding-enhanced bert
  with disentangled attention. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2021. URL
  https://openreview.net/forum?id=XPZIaotutsD.

Neil Houlsby, Ferenc Huszár, Zoubin Ghahramani, and Máté Lengyel. Bayesian active learning for
  classification and preference learning. stat, 1050:24, 2011.
Christina Ilvento. Metric learning for individual fairness. In 1st Symposium on Foundations of
  Responsible Computing, 2020.
Di Jin, Zhijing Jin, Zhiting Hu, Olga Vechtomova, and Rada Mihalcea. Deep learning for text style
  transfer: A survey. Computational Linguistics, 48(1):155–205, 2022.
Christopher Jung, Michael Kearns, Seth Neel, Aaron Roth, Logan Stapleton, and Zhiwei Steven
  Wu. An algorithmic framework for fairness elicitation. In 2nd Symposium on Foundations of
  Responsible Computing, volume 31, pp. 21, 2021.
Harini Kannan, Alexey Kurakin, and Ian Goodfellow. Adversarial logit pairing. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1803.06373, 2018.
Diederik P Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. In ICLR (Poster),
  2015.
Matt J Kusner, Joshua Loftus, Chris Russell, and Ricardo Silva. Counterfactual fairness. Advances in
 neural information processing systems, 30, 2017.
Preethi Lahoti, Krishna P Gummadi, and Gerhard Weikum. Operationalizing individual fairness with
  pairwise fair representations. Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment, 13(4):506–518, 2019.
Joosung Lee. Stable style transformer: Delete and generate approach with encoder-decoder for
  text style transfer. In Proceedings of the 13th International Conference on Natural Language
  Generation, pp. 195–204, 2020.


                                                 12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Mike Lewis, Yinhan Liu, Naman Goyal, Marjan Ghazvininejad, Abdelrahman Mohamed, Omer Levy,
 Veselin Stoyanov, and Luke Zettlemoyer. Bart: Denoising sequence-to-sequence pre-training for
 natural language generation, translation, and comprehension. In Proceedings of the 58th Annual
 Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 7871–7880, 2020.

Paul Pu Liang, Irene Mengze Li, Emily Zheng, Yao Chong Lim, Ruslan Salakhutdinov, and Louis-
  Philippe Morency. Towards debiasing sentence representations. In Proceedings of the 58th Annual
  Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 5502–5515, 2020.

Yinhan Liu, Myle Ott, Naman Goyal, Jingfei Du, Mandar Joshi, Danqi Chen, Omer Levy, Mike
  Lewis, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Veselin Stoyanov. Roberta: A robustly optimized bert pretraining
  approach. arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.11692, 2019.

Debarghya Mukherjee, Mikhail Yurochkin, Moulinath Banerjee, and Yuekai Sun. Two simple ways
  to learn individual fairness metrics from data. In International Conference on Machine Learning,
  pp. 7097–7107. PMLR, 2020.

Moin Nadeem, Anna Bethke, and Siva Reddy. Stereoset: Measuring stereotypical bias in pretrained
 language models. In Proceedings of the 59th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
 Linguistics and the 11th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (Volume
 1: Long Papers), pp. 5356–5371, 2021.

Alexandra Olteanu, Kartik Talamadupula, and Kush R Varshney. The limits of abstract evaluation
  metrics: The case of hate speech detection. In Proceedings of the 2017 ACM on web science
  conference, pp. 405–406, 2017.

Ethan Perez, Saffron Huang, Francis Song, Trevor Cai, Roman Ring, John Aslanides, Amelia Glaese,
  Nat McAleese, and Geoffrey Irving. Red teaming language models with language models. In
  Proceedings of the 2022 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pp.
  3419–3448, Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates, December 2022. Association for Computational
  Linguistics. URL https://aclanthology.org/2022.emnlp-main.225.

Momchil Peychev, Anian Ruoss, Mislav Balunović, Maximilian Baader, and Martin Vechev. Latent
 space smoothing for individually fair representations. In European Conference on Computer Vision,
 pp. 535–554. Springer, 2022.

Rebecca Qian, Candace Ross, Jude Fernandes, Eric Michael Smith, Douwe Kiela, and Adina Williams.
  Perturbation augmentation for fairer NLP. In Proceedings of the 2022 Conference on Empirical
  Methods in Natural Language Processing, pp. 9496–9521, Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates,
  December 2022. Association for Computational Linguistics. URL https://aclanthology.org/
  2022.emnlp-main.646.

Machel Reid and Victor Zhong. Lewis: Levenshtein editing for unsupervised text style transfer. In
 Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL-IJCNLP 2021, pp. 3932–3944,
 2021.

Bernhard Rieder and Yarden Skop. The fabrics of machine moderation: Studying the technical, norma-
  tive, and organizational structure of perspective api. Big Data & Society, 8(2):20539517211046181,
  2021.

Anthony Rios. Fuzze: Fuzzy fairness evaluation of offensive language classifiers on african-american
  english. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 34, pp. 881–889,
  2020.

Alexis Ross, Tongshuang Wu, Hao Peng, Matthew E Peters, and Matt Gardner. Tailor: Generating
  and perturbing text with semantic controls. In Proceedings of the 60th Annual Meeting of the
  Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 3194–3213, 2022.

Anian Ruoss, Mislav Balunovic, Marc Fischer, and Martin Vechev. Learning certified individually
  fair representations. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:7584–7596, 2020.


                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Eric Michael Smith, Melissa Hall, Melanie Kambadur, Eleonora Presani, and Adina Williams. “I’m
  sorry to hear that”: Finding new biases in language models with a holistic descriptor dataset. In
  Proceedings of the 2022 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pp.
  9180–9211, Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates, December 2022. Association for Computational
  Linguistics. URL https://aclanthology.org/2022.emnlp-main.625.
Chi Sun, Xipeng Qiu, Yige Xu, and Xuanjing Huang. How to fine-tune bert for text classification? In
  China national conference on Chinese computational linguistics, pp. 194–206. Springer, 2019.
Jesse Vig, Sebastian Gehrmann, Yonatan Belinkov, Sharon Qian, Daniel Nevo, Yaron Singer, and
  Stuart Shieber. Investigating gender bias in language models using causal mediation analysis.
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:12388–12401, 2020.
Hanchen Wang, Nina Grgic-Hlaca, Preethi Lahoti, Krishna P. Gummadi, and Adrian Weller. An
  empirical study on learning fairness metrics for compas data with human supervision. CoRR,
  abs/1910.10255, 2019. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1910.10255.
Johannes Welbl, Amelia Glaese, Jonathan Uesato, Sumanth Dathathri, John Mellor, Lisa Anne
  Hendricks, Kirsty Anderson, Pushmeet Kohli, Ben Coppin, and Po-Sen Huang. Challenges in
  detoxifying language models. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics:
  EMNLP 2021, pp. 2447–2469, 2021.
Philine Widmer, Sergio Galletta, and Elliott Ash. Media slant is contagious. Center for Law &
  Economics Working Paper Series, 14, 2020.
Thomas Wolf, Lysandre Debut, Victor Sanh, Julien Chaumond, Clement Delangue, Anthony Moi,
  Pierric Cistac, Tim Rault, Rémi Louf, Morgan Funtowicz, et al. Transformers: State-of-the-art
  natural language processing. In Proceedings of the 2020 conference on empirical methods in
  natural language processing: system demonstrations, pp. 38–45, 2020.
Samuel Yeom and Matt Fredrikson. Individual fairness revisited: transferring techniques from adver-
  sarial robustness. In Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth International Conference on International
  Joint Conferences on Artificial Intelligence, pp. 437–443, 2021.
Mikhail Yurochkin and Yuekai Sun. Sensei: Sensitive set invariance for enforcing individual fairness.
 In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2021. URL https://openreview.net/
 forum?id=DktZb97_Fx.

Mikhail Yurochkin, Amanda Bower, and Yuekai Sun. Training individually fair ml models with
 sensitive subspace robustness. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2019.


                                                14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A        F URTHER D ETAILS ON H UMAN EVALUATION
In order to participate, workers had to live in the US and be above 18 years old in addition to being
experienced with MechanicalTurk (having completed more than 5000 HITs5 and having a good
reputation (97% acceptance rate across all of the worker’s HITs). Workers were warned about the
potentially offensive content of some of the comments show in the study by the following statement:
"Please note that this study contains offensive content. If you do not wish to see such content, please
withdraw from the study by leaving this website." and were also told that they could withdraw from
the study at any later point: "You may withdraw your participation at any time without specifying
reasons and without any disadvantages (however, you will not get paid for the current HIT in case
you withdraw before completing it)".
After encountering a high prevalence of bots, malicious workers or workers that fundamentally
misunderstood our task instructions during pilot experiments, we had workers pass a qualification
test by providing correct answers for nine out of ten queries ϕ(s, s0 ) for pairs that were hand-
designed to have a relatively obvious correct answer. We validated these hand-designed pairs in a
separate experiment, querying workers about ϕ(s, s0 ) for 11 pairs (s, s0 ), and asking them to verbally
explain each of their decisions, paying a total of $1.83. We only included hand-designed pairs in
the qualification test if at least eight out of ten workers produced the intended answer during this
experiment, and no worker brought forward convincing arguments against this answer being correct.
Workers were paid $0.83 for a battery of 11 queries ϕ(s, s0 ) for the Active learning and the test set
T and first $1.20, later $1.30 for 11 queries about all questions presented in Table 2. In both cases,
workers had to explain one of their answers verbally, and one of the queries was a attention check pair
(s, s0 ) with a relatively obvious correct answer constructed in the same way as for the qualification
tests.
Blocks of queries with wrong answers to the attention check question or (partially) incoherent verbal
explanations were manually reviewed, and thrown out in case we were not able to find evidence
that the worker had correctly understood the task in which case the worker was not paid. Workers
were made aware of this by the following statement in the task description: "To ensure workers pay
attention, we include pairs of comments for which there is a clear correct answer at random positions.
Please make sure to carefully read every comment and answer diligently, as your HIT will be rejected
if your answer for one of these pairs of comments is wrong, in which case you will not receive a
payment for the HIT. We will also ask you to produce an explanation for one of your answers. Please
write at least one sentence and make sure your explanation is coherent with the answer you gave, as
your HIT might be rejected otherwise in which case you will not receive a payment for the HIT.".
According to https://turkerview.com, a tool used by many professional workers on MechanicalTurk,
we paid workers an average hourly rate of $16.17, clearly exceeding the US minimum wage. While
this is likely an overestimate, as not all workers use turkerview, the hourly rate is so high, that we still
exceed the minimum wage for workers taking twice as long as the average worker using turkerview.
Workers were introduced to the task as follows: "We are investigating fairness in toxic comment
classification and are looking for pairs of comments with similar content that should be treated the
same by a content moderator (if one of them was removed, the other one should be removed too).
You will be shown pairs of comments and be asked whether the comments are similar in various ways
and whether you would consider it unfair for a content moderator to remove one of the comments in
each pair but not the other.". The queries read as follows for the first task:
          • Without further context, would the average american consider it unfair or acceptable for a
            content moderator to delete one of the shown comments but not the other?
              – It would be unfair for one of the two comments but not the other to be deleted (Both
                 comments ought to be treated the same way, no matter what)
              – If comment a) was deleted, comment b) should be deleted as well, but not the other
                 way around. (Deleting comment b) would be more justifiable)
              – If comment b) was deleted, comment a) should be deleted as well, but not the other
                 way around. (Deleting comment a) would be more justifiable)
              – It would be acceptable to delete either of the comments without deleting the other.
                 (Treating the comments differently either way would be fine)
    5
        Bundled tasks on MechanicalTurk for which a remuneration is received on completion


                                                      15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


and as follows for the second one (Placeholders for group terms are presented in Italics. The answer
summarized in Table 2 is highlighted in bold):

       • Without further context, would you consider it unfair or acceptable for a content moderator
         to delete one of the shown comments but not the other?
            – It would be unfair for one of the two comments but not the other to be deleted
              (Both comments ought to be treated the same way, no matter what)
            – If comment a) was deleted, comment b) should be deleted as well, but not the other
              way around. (Deleting comment b) would be more justifiable)
            – If comment b) was deleted, comment a) should be deleted as well, but not the other
              way around. (Deleting comment a) would be more justifiable)
            – It would be acceptable to delete either of the comments without deleting the other.
              (Treating the comments differently either way would be fine)
       • What do you expect the average American to answer to the previous question?
            – It would be unfair for one of the two comments but not the other to be deleted
              (Both comments ought to be treated the same way, no matter what)
            – If comment a) was deleted, comment b) should be deleted as well, but not the other
              way around. (Deleting comment b) would be more justifiable)
            – If comment b) was deleted, comment a) should be deleted as well, but not the other
              way around. (Deleting comment a) would be more justifiable)
            – It would be acceptable to delete either of the comments without deleting the other.
              (Treating the comments differently either way would be fine)
       • Do you consider one of the two comments to be more factually correct than the other?
            – Comment a
            – Comment b
            – Neither comment / too little context to tell
       • Do you consider one of the two comments to be more grammatically correct than the other?
            – Comment a
            – Comment b
            – Neither comment
       • Is comment a) about group a and comment b) about group b?
            – Yes
            – No, comment a) is not about group a
            – No, comment b) is not about group b
            – No, neither
       • Apart from differences related to group a and group b, are both comments similar in terms
         of content?
            – Yes, they are almost the same.
            – They are somewhat similar, but differ in some additional details.
            – There is an important additional difference between the comments’ content

Table A.1 shows an extended version of Table 2 and includes human annotator’s answers to additional
questions. It shows that the reason why the advantages of word replacement in terms of group
transfer and content preservation do not fully translate to producing pairs that represent actual fairness
constraints could be due to its worse performance in terms of preserving factuality. Indeed, we
found examples in which word replacement transformed "white house" to "black house"; or Obama
is referred to as "white" rather than "black" in a modified comment. These pairs were not seen
as fairness constraints by most annotators, while also being judged badly in terms of preserving
factuality.
Table A.2 shows the results of the human evaluation on our test set S split along the axis of attribute
transfer, rather than generation method as in 2. Along with the results in Table 2 they show that
despite the general agreement about the relevance of the generated fairness constraints, there is


                                                   16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


         Metric/Method                  Word replacement     Style Transfer       GPT-3
         Unfair: Average American          84.9 (97.5)         84.6 (95.8)      83.4 (95.0)
         Unfair: Own Opinion               85.9 (97.5)         85.2 (96.2)      83.2 (93.7)
         Group Transfer                    89.3 (95.0)         79.2 (85.4)      81.9 (89.5)
         Content preservation              88.1 (100)          79.2 (91.2)      78.4 (87.9)
         Same Factuality                   73.0 (84.1)         76.2 (87.5)      78.5 (89.1)
         Same Grammaticality               91.2 (99.1)         92.9 (97.9)      92.9 (98.3)

Table A.1: Human evaluation: Answers to questions about comment pairs (s, s0 ) grouped by different
methods for demographic group transfer. The first number represents the fraction of the answer
across all queries, while the second number (in brackets) represents the fraction of comment pairs for
which the answer was the majority vote across 9 queries.


substantial disagreement between annotators when it comes to deviations from the most common
answer across all comments. In all cases, the fraction of comments with majority vote equal to
that answer is substantially higher than the overall fraction of these votes across all comments and
annotators. The same is true for our set T of 500 randomly selected pairs from C e for which we only
asked about the average American’s fairness judgment: 70.9% of the annotations were ϕ(s, s0 ) = 0,
while the same was true for 78.8% of the per-comment pair majority votes.

        Metric/Method                 male↔female        black↔white     christian↔muslim
        Unfair: Average American        83.5 (96.6)      82.2 (94.5)          87.2 (97.0)
        Unfair: Own Opinion             83.5 (96.6)      82.4 (92.9)          88.4 (97.9)
        Group Transfer                  82.6 (91.6)      81.6 (86.6)          86.2 (91.6)
        Content preservation            84.9 (95.4)      79.5 (92.0)          81.3 (91.6)
        Same Factuality                 75.3 (82.9)      73.6 (85.0)          78.8 (92.9)
        Same Grammaticality             90.5 (97.5)      92.2 (98.3)          94.3 (99.5)

Table A.2: Human evaluation: Answers to questions about comment pairs (s, s0 ) grouped along
demographic group transfers along different axes. The first number represents the fraction of the
answer across all queries, while the second number (in the brackets) represents the fraction of
comment pairs for which the answer was the majority vote across 9 queries.

Our dataset including the pairs generated by our approach and aggregate human fairness judgments
can be accessed at https://github.com/eth-sri/fairness-feedback-nlp.


                                                 17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


B    F URTHER DETAILS ON STYLE TRANSFER
All of our experiments involving transformer language models use the huggingface transformers
library Wolf et al. (2020).

Unsupervised style transfer To transform markers of demographic groups in sentences, we first
finetune a Multi-headed RoBERTa-based (Liu et al., 2019) classifier c to predict labels yj indicating
the presence of markers of a demographic group j from a list of protected demographic groups J
in a sentence s. We use the population labels ("Black", "Male", "Heterosexual", "Muslim", etc.)
that are provided for a subset of the Civil comments dataset. The group-presence classifier c is
based on the roberta-base model, followed by a linear layer with 768 neurons applied to the output
embedding of the first token only, a Tanh layer, another linear layer mapping to a single dimension,
and a Sigmoid layer. We train c for 3 epochs with a batch size of 16 and use the Adam optimizer
Kingma & Ba (2015) with learning rate 0.00001 to optimize the binary Cross Entropy loss, reweighed
by relative label frequency in the dataset. Table B.1 shows the balanced accuracy on the test set for
all demographic groups in the dataset. For our downstream applications of c, we restrict ourselves to
the demographic groups for which the classifier c’s balanced accuracy is above 90%. Furthermore,
we also exclude the group labeled "mental illness" because the word replacement lists we used lack a
clear analogon.
Then, we finetune a BART-based (Lewis et al., 2020) generator g on a mask-filling task on the same
data: For every data point s, we sample a group from the set of demographic groups j mentioned in
s, i.e. {j : yj (s) = 1}, skipping sentences s for which no group j meets this criterion. Inspired by
(Reid & Zhong, 2021) we mask all of s’s tokens that have an above-average attention value for the
11th layer of the classifier c, merge consecutive mask tokens into one, and prepend the name of the
sampled group j to the masked sentence before fedding it to the generator g. The generator g is then
finetuned to reconstruct s using token-wise Cross Entropy.
The BART-based generator g is trained starting from the pretrained facebook/bart-large model for
a single epoch with batch size 4, again using Adam and a learning rate of 0.00001. For filling in
masked sentences, we pick the completion with the largest difference in the classifier c’s pre-sigmoid
activation for the target and source demographic groups j 0 and j among candidate sentences produced
by a beam search generation using the generator g with width 5.
To transfer an example s from mentioning group j to mentioning group j 0 , we follow (Lee, 2020) and
iteratively mask the token for which masking reduces pc (yj |x) the most, until we reach a threshold
of pc (yj |x) < 0.25. We use this approach rather than the attention-based masking from (Reid &
Zhong, 2021) because of the lack of theoretical motivation for using attention to identify important
features (Bastings & Filippova, 2020), and because attention scores are the same for all of our model’s
group-presence prediction heads, rather than specific to a particular group j.6 Then, we prepend a
verbal representation of label j 0 to s to form a prompt p, and generate a sentence s0 as g(p).

         Category             BA         Category        BA            Category            BA
         Male                96.5       Christian        96.6     Physical disability      54.9
         Female              97.8        Jewish          98.9    Intellectual disability   54.3
         Transgender         99.3       Muslim           98.9        Mental illness        98.3
         Other gender        50.0        Hindu           98.2            Black             99.2
         Heterosexual        98.1       Buddhist         99.2            White             99.5
         Homosexual          99.3        Atheist         99.6            Asian             98.3
         Bisexual            65.4    Other religion      50.0            Latino            96.6
         Other sexuality     50.0    Other disability    50.0          Other race          55.5

        Table B.1: Balanced accuracies of the group-presence classifier c for different labels

Word replacement Our word replacement approach is based on the list of words provided in Smith
et al. (2022): Given a sentence s mentioning demographic group j and a target attribute j 0 , we replace
   6
     We used attention during the training of g, for which dropping out some tokens unrelated to j is less
problematic, in order to save resources.


                                                    18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


all words in s that are on the list associated with j with random words from the list associated with
j 0 , replacing nouns with nouns and descriptors with descriptors whenever possible, and nouns with
descriptors otherwise. The full list of words we used for word replacement is displayed in Table E.1.

GPT-3 We accessed GPT-3 using OpenAI’s API7 . For our first approach, we used the "text-davinci-
001" version of GPT3 in a zero-shot manner with the prompt: "Please rewrite the following sentence
to be about j 0 rather than j:" followed by a new line and the targeted sentence s. The second approach
was based on the beta-version of GPT-3’s editing mode 8 . Here, s0 is produced using the model
"text-davinci-edit-001" with the instruction "Rewrite the text to be about j 0 rather than j". Lastly, we
used to same model in conjunction with word replacement: First, we generated a candidate sentence
s00 using the procedure described in the word replacement section. Then, in order to fix issues caused
by the context-blindness of the word replacement approach, we postprocessed s00 using "text-davinci-
edit-001" with the instruction "Fix grammatical errors and logical inconsistencies" to produce s0 .
We used temperature = 0.7 and top_p= 1 in all our approaches and used max_tokens= 64 for
"text-davinci-001" to control the length of the modified sentence s0 .
Please refer to the most up-to-date version of OpenAI’s usage policy9 regarding content generation
using GPT-3.

Post-filtering For all three approaches, we performed a post-filtering step to reduce the prevalence
of unsuccesful attempts at demographic group transfer in our set of constraints C e . Given a pair
(s, s0 ) of an original sentence and a modified version, we only include it in our set of constraints C e ,
if the classifier probability pc (yj 0 |s0 ) for label j 0 is below 0.5 and the classifier probability pc (yj |s0 )
for label j is above 0.5.
As mentioned in Sec. 4.1, we attempt to produce modified comments s0j 0 mentioning group j 0 for
each s in D0 for all demographic groups j with yj (s) = 1 and all possible target groups j 0 for word
replacement and style transfer. For GPT-3, we attempted a total of 75 generations for each of our three
generation modes per axis pair of demographic groups (j, j 0 ) and direction of group transfer, with the
source sentences s randomly selected among the sentences with label j in D0 . For constructing the
secondary test set S, we attempted more generations for the axes male↔female, christian↔muslim
and black↔white, homosexual↔heterosexual. The latter axis was left out of S because we found
that the rate of successful generations was too limited. We generated a maximum of 2250 attempts
up until a total of 250 successful generations (post-filtering step passed) for GPT-3’s zero-shot mode,
a maximum of 750 until to a total of 100 successful generations for GPT-3’s edit mode, and up until
a total of 100 successful generations for GPT-3 based postprocessing of word replacement. Table B.2
shows the overall amount of generated pairs per method.

         Generation Method            Total (Train)     Total (Test)    In C e (Train)     In C e (Test)
         Word Replacement               980667            331490           42500              10625
         Style Transfer                 681111            229883           42500              10625
         GPT-3 Zero-Shot                  6322             2139             6200               1550
         GPT-3 Edit Mode                  3704             1199             3500                875
         GPT-3 Postprocessing             5330             1831             5300               1325

                  Table B.2: Amount of generated pairs (s, s0 ) per generation method.

As an additional experiment to validate the increased diversity of our constraint set C e we train a
similarity classifier10 ϕ̂, on C e to distinguish pairs (s, s0 ) generated by word replacement from pairs
generated by style transfer or GPT-3. Training on 100000 examples without label noise, we are able
to achieve over 91.6% test accuracy on a balanced test set, suggesting that there is a meaningful
difference between pairs generated by word replacement and the rest of the constraint candidates C e .



   7
      https://openai.com/api/
   8
      https://openai.com/blog/gpt-3-edit-insert/
    9
      (https://platform.openai.com/docs/usage-policies
   10
      Using the same architecture as for our active learning experiments described in App. C


                                                       19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


C    F URTHER DETAILS ON LEARNING SIMILARITY FUNCTIONS

First, Proposition C.1 below establishes that robustness with respect to a binary similarity function
ϕ, i.e. ϕ(s, s0 ) = 0 ⇒ f (s) = f (s0 ), can fully capture the definition of individual fairness as
Lipschitz-Continuity proposed by Dwork et al. (2012) for deterministic classifiers f .
Proposition C.1. Given a metric d : X × X → R, a binary metric db : Y × Y → {0, 1} and a
constant L > 0, there exists a similarity function ϕ : X × X → {0, 1} such that a function f :
(X, d) → (Y, db ) is Lipschitz-Continuous with constant L if and only if ϕ(x, x0 ) ≥ db (f (x), f (x0 ))
for all x, x0 ∈ X.

Proof. Define ϕ(x, x0 ) := 1 {Ld(x, x0 ) ≥ 1}. Then whenever db (f (x), f (x0 )) = 1, we
have db (f (x), f (x0 )) = 1 ≤ ϕ(x, x0 ) if and only if db (f (x), f (x0 )) ≤ Ld(x, x0 ). But if
db (f (x), f (x0 )) = 0, the Lipschitz inequality is allways true. Now, assume that f is not Lip-
schitz: Then, there exist x, x0 ∈ X such that 1 = db (f (x), f (x0 )) > Ld(x, x0 ), implying
0 = ϕ(x, x0 ) < db (f (x), f (x0 )) = 1

We use a BERT-based classifier that acts on a pair (s, s0 ) by first tokenizing both s and s0 and padding
the token representation to a length of 64, concatenating these tokens and feeding the concatenated
token representation into a pretrained bert-uncased-base model. We then apply a linear layer with
dropout (p = 0.1) followed by a Tanh layer and a second linear layer with dropout (p = 0.1) to
obtain single dimensional logits, to which a sigmoid layer is applied before computing the binary
Cross Entropy loss. We use BERT rather than more modern models such as RoBERTa (Liu et al.,
2019) and Deberta (He et al., 2021), as we have found it to clearly outperform them for our task,
plausibly because BERT uses a next-sentence-prediction task during pretraining, which is structurally
similar to our task of comparing two sentences. Table C.1 demonstrates the advantage of using BERT,
as well as concatenating token representations rather than learning based on the difference between
separately produced BERT features for both s and s0 . Unless stated otherwise, our Active Learning
approach trains for five epochs on each queried block Di before selecting new data Di+1 to label.
Example generations for our different methods can be found in App. E.

                                  Model                         BA
                                  BERT-Concat                  86.7
                                  BERT-Merge                   79.9
                                  BERT-Featurediff             67.8
                                  DeBERTa-Concat               54.7
                                  DeBERTa-Merge                53.2
                                  DeBERTa-Featurediff          50.8
                                  RoBERTa-Concat               52.1
                                  RoBERTa-Merge                50.3
                                  RoBERTa-Featurediff          51.1
                                  BERT-Large-Concat            84.4
                                  BERT-Large-Merge             84.1
                                  BERT-Large-Featurediff       59.2
                                  BERT-Bilinear                50.7

Table C.1: Different architectures trained for one epoch on 5000 samples from a set of pairs (s, s0 )
generated using word replacement to distinguish demograpghic group transfer within the same
category of gender and sexuality, race and religion vs across categories (ϕ2 ). "Featurediff" uses
a linear model applied to the difference of model features produced for the respective first tokens
in s and s0 . "Bilinear" uses a bilinear model on top of these feature differences instead. "Merge"
appends s0 to s before tokenization and learns a linear model on top of the model features for this
combined input. "Concat" operates similarly, but first tokenizes s and s0 and pads both to 64 tokens
before feeding the concatenated tokens into the model. No dropout was used in the post-BERT layers
for these experiments. All results averaged over 10 runs and ± indicates the difference from the
upper/lower bound of a naive 95% confidence interval assuming normally distributed errors.



                                                   20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


C.1    S YNTHETIC DATA

For active learning, we freeze the underlying BERT model during the active learning selection and
only apply MC-Dropout on the level of the classifier head, similar to (Grießhaber et al., 2020),
but unlike them we do not use BALD (Houlsby et al., 2011) and instead approximate p(y|s, s0 )
averaging the models’ predicted probabilities pϕ̂ (y|s, s0 , w) for 50 sampled dropout masks w. We
call this approach LC-UNC and experimented with various alternative selection criteria. Unlike
LC-UNC, LC directly approximates 1 − maxy p(y|s, s0 ) using a single forward pass through the ϕ̂
with deactivated dropout. BALD is the approach from Grießhaber et al. (2020), while VARRA and
Majority approximate 1 − maxy p(y|s, s0 ) using MC-Dropout differently than LC-UNC: In Majority,
p(y|s, s0 ) is approximated as the fraction of dropout samples w for which ϕ̂ = 1, while VARRA
averages 1 − maxy pϕ̂ (y|s, s0 , w) over dropout samples w instead of averaging pϕ̂ (y|s, s0 , w) before
applying the maximum operator. In addition, the table contains the "automatic relabeling" condition
                                                e
in which DS   i is selected from the whole of C rather than just the previously unlabeled examples
Di ⊂ C e \ j<i Dj . During training, pairs (s, s0 ) that have been queried multiple times are labelled
according to the majority vote of all queries, and as 0.5 in case of a tie.
We validate the efficacy of our active learning approach for learning the similarity function ϕ(s, s0 )
with a limited amount of noisy queries. For this, we define two synthetic similarity functions
ϕi : i ∈ {1, 2}. The first, ϕ1 is equal to zero, whenever a pair (s, s0 ) was generated via word
replacement and equal to one otherwise, as in the first experiment from the previous section. The
second, ϕ2 is equal to zero, whenever the group j of s that was removed and the added group j 0 in s0
are within the same category of gender and sexuality, race, or religion, and equal to one otherwise. For
example, a pair (s, s0 ) for which markers of "White people" in s were modified to markers of "Black
people" in s0 would have ϕ2 (s, s0 ) = 0, while ϕ2 (s, s0 ) would be one if the group was modified
to "muslim" in s0 instead. We simulate the label noise introduced by annotators’ disagreement by
independently flipping each label with probability p = 0.3 during training the similarity classifier ϕ̂.
For training with 3 instead of one query per data point, we reduce the overall amount of training data
from 10000 samples in C e to 3333 samples and reduce the probability of flipping labels to p = 0.216,
simulating a majority vote. In turn, the active learning approach selects 333 instead of 1000 data
points for labeling in each of its ten steps in that scenario. Table C.2 shows that active learning
noticeably outperforms randomly sampling data points for our task, that there is no clear direct benefit
from employing multiple queries per pair (s, s0 ) ∈ C e over obtaining labels for previously unseen
pairs, an that the LC-UNC setup is usually performing as well as or better than alternative selection
criteria in the one-query per data point setting.

C.2    H UMAN E VALUATION

Tables C.3 and C.4 show additional results on the active learning from human feedback. As above,
we tested our approach using different filtering thresholds t on the two test sets T (Table C.3) and S
(Table C.4).SIn the Retrain condition, the classifier ϕ̂ was trained for a single epoch on all labeled
datapoints i<n Di in order to combat potential issues with catastrophic forgetting. In the Retrain
+ Reweigh condition, the same S was done, but the Cross Entropy loss was reweighed to balance the
empirical
S          label frequencies in   i<n Di . In the From Scratch setting, we train a new classifier on
  i<n iD  for 5 epochs from  scratch without first training itSseparately on any Di . Again, datapoints
are reweighed according to their empirical frequency in i<n Di in the From Scratch + Reweigh
setting.


                                                  21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


          Method/Dataset                    ϕ2 (Same category)      ϕ1 (Word replacement)
          Random sampling, 1 query               75.1 ± 3.6                74.8 ± 1.8
          Random sampling, 3 queries             71.6 ± 3.9                72.5 ± 1.5
          Random sampling, 5 queries             70.7 ± 2.7                73.4 ± 1.8
          BALD 1 query                           75.9 ± 4.0                77.9 ± 2.1
          BALD 3 queries                         73.8 ± 6.5                78.1 ± 1.7
          BALD automatic relabeling              76.1 ± 4.5                77.6 ± 2.6
          LC 1 query                             79.1 ± 4.4                78.5 ± 1.8
          LC 3 queries                           74.6 ± 2.4                79.5 ± 1.8
          LC automatic relabeling                73.4 ± 5.9                78.2 ± 1.3
          LC-UNC 1 query                         79.0 ± 4.9                79.7 ± 1.5
          LC-UNC 3 queries                       75.8 ± 5.4                78.7 ± 2.6
          LC-UNC automatic relabeling            76.6 ± 3.9                76.7 ± 1.5
          VARRA 1 query                          77.3 ± 7.4                78.9 ± 2.1
          VARRA 3 queries                        73.1 ± 5.7                79.8 ± 1.6
          VARRA automatic relabeling             77.7 ± 2.9                78.0 ± 1.3
          Majority 1 query                       74.9 ± 3.5                76.8 ± 2.4
          Majority 3 queries                     78.7 ± 5.2                79.6 ± 0.9
          Majority automatic relabeling          74.4 ± 6.2                77.9 ± 1.8

Table C.2: Balanced accuracy for BERT classifier trained using a constant amount of 50k gradient
steps and a constant amount of 10k queries. All results are averaged over 10 runs and ± indicates
the difference from the upper/lower bound of a naive 95% confidence interval assuming normally
distributed errors.


      Method                                              ACC            TNR            TPR
      Baseline: Constant 0                                78.8          100.0            0.0
      AL t=0.5                                         79.8 ± 0.3     97.2 ± 0.3     15.1 ± 1.2
      AL + Relabel t=0.5                               81.1 ± 0.3     95.5 ± 0.7     28.6 ± 2.2
      AL + Relabel + Retrain t=0.5                     79.6 ± 0.4     95.3 ± 1.4     21.5 ± 3.9
      AL + Relabel + Retrain + Reweigh t=0.5           79.6 ± 0.8     93.9 ± 1.6     26.6 ± 3.4
      From Scratch t=0.5                               77.5 ± 1.3     90.8 ± 3.3     28.1 ± 7.1
      From Scratch + Reweigh t=0.5                     77.7 ± 1.4     91.0 ± 2.7     28.3 ± 5.0
      AL t=0.1                                         80.0 ± 0.5     95.2 ± 0.7     23.7 ± 3.5
      AL + Relabel t=0.1                               80.7 ± 0.6     93.0 ± 0.9     35.0 ± 1.3
      AL + Relabel + Retrain t=0.1                     62.1 ± 5.6     61.5 ± 8.9     64.0 ± 7.0
      AL + Relabeling + Retrain + Reweigh t=0.1        52.8 ± 6.2     46.8 ± 7.7     75.0 ± 4.6
      From Scratch t=0.1                               53.4 ± 7.9    48.6 ± 14.3     71.1 ± 9.2
      From Scratch + Reweighed t=0.1                   54.8 ± 6.7    51.2 ± 10.5     67.9 ± 9.1
      AL t=0.01                                        78.7 ± 1.1     87.5 ± 2.1    45, 7 ± 1.8
      AL + Relabel t=0.01                              78.3 ± 0.7     86.8 ± 1.5    46.6 ± 2.5
      AL + Relabel + Retrain t=0.01                    21.2 ± 0.1      0.0 ± 0.0    100 ± 0.0
      AL + Relabel + Retrain + Reweigh t=0.01          21.1 ± 0.0      0.0 ± 0.0    100 ± 0.0
      From Scratch t=0.01                              21.7 ± 0.5      0.0 ± 0.0    99.5 ± 0.6
      From Scratch + Reweigh t=0.01                    21.8 ± 1.5     1.5 ± 3.6     98.3 ± 1.7

Table C.3: Results for active learning to predict human fairness judgments, on test data T . Active
learning classifiers are retrained 10 times on the last batch D6 . Results are averaged and ± indicates
the difference from the upper/lower bound of a naive 95% confidence interval assuming normally
distributed errors.



                                                  22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


      Method                                              ACC            TNR            TPR
      Baseline: Constant 0                                96.1          100.0            0.0
      AL t=0.5                                         93.8 ± 0.5     97.0 ± 0.6     14.6 ± 2.2
      AL + Relabel t=0.5                               92.1 ± 0.6     95.1 ± 0.7     18.9 ± 2.7
      AL + Relabel + Retrain t=0.5                     90.7 ± 1.7     93.8 ± 1.9     12.8 ± 4.0
      AL + Relabel + Retrain + Reweigh t=0.5           89.0 ± 1.3     92.0 ± 1.4     16.4 ± 3.4
      From Scratch t=0.5                               89.2 ± 2.6     91.8 ± 2.5     25.7 ± 5.5
      From Scratch + Reweigh t=0.5                     89.2 ± 2.5     91.8 ± 2.7     25.7 ± 4.4
      AL t=0.1                                          90.4 ± 1.3    93.3 ± 1.3      21.0 ± 2.3
      AL + Relabel t=0.1                                89.6 ± 0.8    92.2 ± 0.8      24.6 ± 1.4
      AL + Relabel + Retrain t=0.1                      60.0 ± 8.1    59.5 ± 8.8     72.8 ± 11.9
      AL + Relabel + Retrain + Reweigh t=0.1            46.7 ± 7.4    45.2 ± 8.0      83.9 ± 7.6
      From Scratch t=0.1                               50.6 ± 10.4   49.8 ± 11.2      69.6 ± 9.3
      From Scratch + Reweigh t=0.1                      55.0 ± 9.4   54.5 ± 10.0      66.7 ± 6.6
      AL t=0.01                                        80.6 ± 2.3     82.3 ± 2.7      38.2 ± 6.8
      AL + Relabel t=0.01                              80.2 ± 1.3     85.5 ± 1.4      30.0 ± 2.7
      AL + Relabel + Retrain t=0.01                    3.9 ± 0.0       0.0 ± 0.0     100.0 ± 0.0
      AL + Relabel + Retrain + Reweigh t=0.01          3.9 ± 0.0       0.0 ± 0.0     100.0 ± 0.0
      From Scratch t=0.01                              4.6 ± 0.9       0.0 ± 0.1      99.6 ± 0.4
      From Scratch + Reweigh t=0.01                    5.4 ± 3.9       1.6 ± 3.2      50.8 ± 1.6

Table C.4: Results for active learning to predict human fairness judgments, using the separate test data
S. Active learning classifiers are retrained 10 times on the last batch D6 . Results are averaged and ±
indicates the difference from the upper/lower bound of a naive 95% confidence interval assuming
normally distributed errors.


                                                  23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


D         F URTHER D ETAILS ON T RAINING D OWNSTREAM CLASSIFIERS
The downstream classifier f consists of a pretrained roberta-base model followed by a linear layer
with 768 neurons applied to the output embedding of the first token, a Tanh layer, another linear
layer mapping to a single dimension, and a Sigmoid layer. We train f using binary Cross Entropy
reweighed to balance the empirical label frequencies in D for 3 epochs using a batch size of 32 and
the Adam optimizer with a learning rate of 0.00001.
Table D.1 extends Table 1 and shows that censoring words yields very strong constraint adherence
for the respective word list 11 . However, we find it to generalize worse than CLP trained with the
same word list, both to our style transfer pairs, and even to the respective other word list. Similarly,
we find that training with CLP on C e or our style transfer pairs C3 does not just yield significantly
improved constraint adherence on C3 , but also generalizes better to C1 and C2 than the respective
other of the two word replacement constraint sets without losing much downstream accuracy. Lastly,
the table also shows that the better generalization from style transfer to word replacement persists for
large values of λ in CLP and that these values can provide strong improvements in terms of fairness,
albeit at a larger cost in terms of balanced accuracy.

    Training/Evaluation                   BA         WR50 (C1 )       WR (C2 )        ST (C3 )       Full C e
    Baseline                          88.4 ± 0.1      78.4 ± 1.4     81.3 ± 1.5     76.7 ± 1.8      78.5 ± 1.5
    Censoring WR50                    87.0 ± 0.3      99.8 ± 0.0     88.4 ± 1.2     84.7 ± 1.1      85.9 ± 1.2
    Censoring WR                      86.1 ± 0.4      91.4 ± 1.2     99.3 ± 0.2     89.0 ± 1.5      92.8 ± 1.0
    Censoring Both WR                 86.2 ± 0.3      99.7 ± 0.2     99.1 ± 0.1     89.3 ± 0.4      92.8 ± 0.3
    CLP(λ =5) WR50 (C1 )              87.0 ± 0.3      98.3 ± 0.1     89.1 ± 1.9     86.3 ± 1.9      87.3 ± 1.8
    CLP(λ =5) WR (C2 )                87.2 ± 0.1      93.1 ± 1.2     98.2 ± 0.4     90.5 ± 1.7      92.9 ± 1.2
    CLP(λ =5) ST (C3 )                85.9 ± 0.1      95.3 ± 0.4     97.1 ± 0.3     95.4 ± 0.4      95.5 ± 0.3
    CLP(λ =5) Full C e                85.0 ± 3.4      95.5 ± 0.9     97.8 ± 0.6     94.9 ± 0.9      95.7 ± 0.8
    CLP(λ =125) WR50 (C1 )            82.5 ± 1.3      98.3 ± 0.6     94.3 ± 0.8     90.9 ± 1.1      92.1 ± 0.9
    CLP(λ =125) WR (C2 )              81.8 ± 1.5      95.9 ± 2.2     98.6 ± 0.5     92.5 ± 2.2      94.7 ± 1.5
    CLP(λ =125) ST (C3 )              80.3 ± 2.8      97.6 ± 0.8     98.4 ± 0.6     97.2 ± 0.9      97.2 ± 0.9
    CLP(λ =125) Full C e              79.3 ± 6.1      97.8 ± 1.3     98.6 ± 0.9     97.1 ± 1.6      97.4 ± 1.4

Table D.1: Balanced accuracy and individual fairness (proportion of similar pairs (s, s0 ) ∈ Ci for
which f (s) = f (s0 )) for a Roberta-based classifier f trained with CLP using different constraint sets
for training. Results reported with ± are averaged over 5 runs and ± indicates the difference from
the upper/lower bound of a naive 95% confidence interval assuming normally distributed errors.


D.1        E XPERIMENTS WITH FILTERING ON SYNTHETIC DATA

The filtering process for CLP is implemented as follows: for each batch B of labeled training examples
(s, y(s)) used to train a downstream classifier f , we evaluate pϕ̂ (s, s0 ) for all (s, s0 ) ∈ C e with s ∈ B.
Then, for every s ∈ B we randomly select a pair (s, s0 ) among the pairs with pϕ̂ (s, s0 ) > t for a
filtering threshold t to use in the CLP regularizer λ||l(s) − l(s0 )||2 with l representing the logits of
the downstream classifier f , using (s, s) if no such pair exists. To allow for more precise control
over the statistical properties of ϕ̂, we constructed additional ϕ̂ using a look-up table using ϕi and
flip the labels of randomly selected pairs (s, s0 ) with either ϕi (s, s0 ) = 1 or ϕi (s, s0 ) = 0 in order
to achieve specific True positive rates (TPR) and true negative rates (TNR). Table D.2 shows that
there are consistent benefits from filtering for the synthetic similarity function ϕ1 from App. C across
different values of λ, even when an imperfect ϕ̂ with a TPR and TNR of 75% is used.
D.3 shows that unlike for ϕ1 (Table D.2), there is little gain from filtering constraints for ϕ2 , most
likely because some of the constraint candidates generated by GPT-3 and our style transfer approach
are difficult to enforce while maintaining high level of accuracy. While all of these constraints are
inactive for ϕ1 and are therefore not enforced with sufficiently accurate filtering, many of them
remain active with ϕ2 such that filtering yields no clear benefits.
    11
         Artifacts like word replacement lists that contain both a word s and substrings of s keep this below 100%


                                                          24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


           Method                                         Balanced Accuracy        Fairness
           Baseline                                            88.2 ± 0.4        82.0 ± 2.2
           Full C e λ = 5.0                                   85.6 ± 0.4         98.2 ± 0.2
           Full C e λ = 125.0                                 73.9 ± 16.8        98.6 ± 1.0
           Filtering with 75% TNR/TPR, λ = 5.0                 86.3 ± 0.6        97.9 ± 0.3
           Filtering with 75% TNR/TPR, λ = 125.0               77.2 ± 6.1        99.1 ± 0.3
           Perfect filtering λ = 5.0                           87.5 ± 0.1        98.2 ± 0.2
           Perfect filtering λ = 125.0                         86.1 ± 0.4        99.3 ± 0.1

Table D.2: Balanced accuracy and individual fairness (proportion of similar pairs (s, s0 ) according to
ϕ1 for which f (s) = f (s0 )) CLP training after filtering C e using approximations of ϕ1 with varying
error profiles. All results are averaged over 5 runs and ± indicates the difference from the upper/lower
bound of a naive 95% confidence interval assuming normally distributed errors.

                   Method                         Balanced Accuracy         Fairness
                   Baseline                             87.9 ± 1.2        76.5 ± 1.5
                   Full C e λ = 5.0                     85.6 ± 0.4        96.6 ± 0.4
                   Full C e λ = 125.0                   78.9 ± 2.7        97.5 ± 1.2
                   Perfect filtering λ = 5.0            86.6 ± 0.3        95.7 ± 0.6
                   Perfect filtering λ = 125.0          80.7 ± 2.2        97.3 ± 0.6

Table D.3: Balanced accuracy and indvidual fairness (proportion of similar pairs (s, s0 ) according
to ϕ2 for which f (s) = f (s0 )) for CLP training after filtering C e using approximations of ϕ2 with
varying error profiles. All results are averaged over 5 runs and ± indicates the difference from the
upper/lower bound of a naive 95% confidence interval assuming normally distributed errors.


D.2    E XPERIMENTS WITH FILTERING ON HUMAN FAIRNESS JUDGMENTS

Table D.4 is an extended version of Table 4 including additional experiments with a larger regulariza-
tion parameter λ = 125. Again, there is no visible benefit from filtering. Counterintuitively, more
filtering appears to correspond to less accuracy but slightly more fairness, but this might be by chance,
given the significantly larger error bars for λ = 125.


                                                   25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


 Method                                         BA            NR         Fairness (T )   Fairness (S)
 Baseline                                   88.2 ± 0.4        0.0        82.1 ± 2.1      84.7 ± 1.3
 WR (Garg) λ = 5                            87.1 ± 2.0       100         92.8 ± 0.9      95.2 ± 0.8
 WR λ = 5                                   87.2 ± 0.2       100         95.8 ± 0.9      95.8 ± 1.2
 Full constraint set C e λ = 5              85.9 ± 0.3       100         96.5 ± 1.4      97.0 ± 1.5
 Filtering with threshold 0.5 λ = 5         85.9 ± 0.5    88.5 ± 1.0     97.4 ± 1.1      97.1 ± 1.1
 Filtering with threshold 0.1 λ = 5         86.1 ± 0.1    84.6 ± 1.4     97.2 ± 0.6      96.6 ± 0.6
 Filtering with threshold 0.01 λ = 5        85.9 ± 0.2    76.9 ± 2.0     97.1 ± 1.0      96.9 ± 1.1
 WR (Garg) λ = 125                          81.6 ± 0.6       100         95.6 ± 1.7      96.8 ± 0.2
 WR λ = 125                                 81.2 ± 2.7       100         97.4 ± 2.5      97.5 ± 0.1
 Full constraint set C e λ = 125            81.8 ± 2.1       100         98.0 ± 0.6      97.6 ± 1.1
 Filtering with threshold 0.5 λ = 125       81.3 ± 1.5    88.5 ± 1.0     98.1 ± 0.9      98.0± 0.7
 Filtering with threshold 0.1 λ = 125       80.7 ± 1.9    84.6 ± 1.4     97.8 ± 1.3      98.2 ± 0.6
 Filtering with threshold 0.01 λ = 125      80.7 ± 2.2    76.9 ± 2.0     98.6 ± 0.5      97.8 ± 0.9

Table D.4: Balanced accuracy, percent of unfiltered pairs, and individual fairness on two different
test sets for differently trained classifiers f . Fairness is measured as the fraction of pairs (s, s0 )
with ϕ(s, s0 ) = 0 according to the majority of annotators, for which f (s) = f (s0 ). Active learning
classifiers are retrained 5 times on the last batch D6 and results are averaged over 5 training runs. ±
indicates the difference from the upper/lower bound of a naive 95% confidence interval assuming
normally distributed errors.


                                                  26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


 Demographic           Descriptors                           Nouns
 Group
 Male                  male,manly,masculine                  man, men, grandfather, bro, guy,
                                                             boy, father, dad, son, husbands, hus-
                                                             band, grandpa, brother
 Female                female, pregnant, feminine, femme,    woman, women, grandmother, lady,
                       womanly                               ladies, girl, mother, mom, daughter,
                                                             wives, wife, grandma, sister
 Transgender           transsexual, FTM, F2M, MTF,
                       trans, M2F, transgender, trans
                       female, trans feminine, trans
                       femme,trans fem, trans male,trans
                       masculine,trans masc
 Heterosexual          straight, heterosexual, hetero
 Homosexual            gay, homosexual, lesbian
 Christian             Amish, Catholic, Christian, Evan-
                       gelical, Lutheran, Mormon, Protes-
                       tant, Unitarian
 Jewish                Conservative Jewish, Orthodox
                       Jewish, Reform Jewish, Hasidic,
                       Jewish
 Muslim                Muslim, Shia, Sunni
 Hindu                 Hindu
 Buddhist              Buddhist
 Atheist               atheist, irreligious
 Black                 African-American, African, Black,
                       BIPOC
 White                 European-American, European,
                       Caucasian, White
 Asian                 Chinese-American,        American-
                       Born Chinese, Chinese, Indian-
                       American,        Indian,    Korean-
                       American, Korean, Vietnamese-
                       American, Vietnamese, AAPI
 Latino                Cuban-American,              Cuban,
                       Dominican-American,            Do-
                       minican, Salvadoran-American,
                       Salvadoran, Guatemalan-American,
                       Guatemalan, Mexican-American,
                       Mexican, Filipina-American, Fil-
                       ipina, Filipino-American, Filipino,
                       Hispanic, Latinx, Latine, Latino,
                       Latina, Latin American

       Table E.1: Lists of words used for word replacementm, based on Smith et al. (2022)


E   W ORD L ISTS A ND E XAMPLE G ENERATIONS
Tables E.2–E.4 show 5 randomly selected example pairs (s, s0 ) produced by our style transfer
approach and GPT-3 in zero-shot and edit mode. Table E.5 shows 5 generated comments for each
method using the same source comment and target demographic attribute.
Warning: Some of the example texts contain offensive language.


                                               27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


   Original Comment                                    Modified Comment
   ’Hahaha, really? Thousands of years of war          ’Hahaha, really? Thousands of years of war
   and it was mostly white men, huh? Read              and it was mostly white European Christians,
   some history about non-European cultures to         huh? Read some history about non-European
   pierce your idyllic bubble.’                        cultures to pierce your idyllic bubble’
   ’I would really like to see your source for the     ’I would really like to see your source for the
   Japanese fear of the Russians as being any          Buddhist fear of the west as being any kind
   kind of factor whatsoever. For most of the          of factor whatsoever. For most of the western
   Japanese people, the Russians were not even         people, the west and religion were not even
   on the radar screen!!’                              on the radar screen!!’
   ’Yes: at least implicitly it endorses the old       ’Yes: at least implicitly it endorses the old
   canard that the United States is a "Christian       canard that the United States is a "white racist
   nation."’                                           nation."’
   ’Please be careful what you label fake news.        ’Please be careful what you label fake news.
   News of shootings (Greenville?), migrants in        Hundreds of shootings (Green Mountain?),
   Sweden raising crime rates, Hispanics being         migrants in Sweden raising crime rates, ho-
   rapists and murderers, illegal voting, etc those    mosexuals being raped and murderers, ille-
   are examples of fake news....feet on couch?         gal voting, etc those are examples of fake
   not so much....’                                    news....feet on couch? not so much.’
   ’And often they are not so silent. Gay friends      ’And often they are not so silent. Gay friends
   have told me about various such clergy who          have told me about various such men who are
   are well known – only no one speaks out             well known – only no one speaks out about
   about it.’                                          it.’

               Table E.2: Examples of pairs produced by our style transfer approach


   Original Comment                                Modified Comment
   ’OK, so now Iḿ confused. Is it or is it not OK ’ Is it or is it not OK to mock a reporterś
   to mock a reporterś physical handicap? Call physical handicap? Call a Muslim beauty
   a Latina beauty queen "Miss Housekeeping"? queen "Miss Housekeeping"? Post a mock
   Post a mock video showing yourself clocking video showing yourself clocking a woman
   a woman you dont́ like with a hard-hit golf you dont́ like with a hard-hit golf ball?’
   ball?’
   "You caught me. I confess. I’ve been lying " You caught me. I confess. I’ve been lying
   this whole time. I’m not actually an atheist, this whole time. I’m not actually a homosex-
   of course I believe in a god. I see him in the ual, of course I believe in a god. I see him in
   mirror every day !"                             the mirror every day !"
   "Denying the existence of racism in Amer- ". Denying the existence of racism in Amer-
   ica,(or most anywhere), is just ignoring real- ica,(or most anywhere), is just ignoring real-
   ity. The formal dicrimination has largely been ity. The formal dicrimination has largely been
   curbed(with exception of using race to design curbed(with exception of using race to design
   Congressional districts), but those wonderful Congressional districts), but those wonderful
   ’family values’ of the white South still carry ’family values’ of the Hindu South still carry
   the mythology of inherent white superiority" the mythology of inherent Hindu"
   ’Cite to "the Republicans, Trump being a Re- ’ Christian people are against gays.’
   publican, who are against gays" please. New
   one to me. (Other than Trump being regis-
   tered Republican of course, lol!)’
   "You’d better watch out if you don’t claim " You’d better watch out if you don’t claim
   Christianity unto yourself like they do. It is Christianity unto yourself like they do. It is
   true that people harbor resentment over peo- true that people harbor resentment over peo-
   ple whom they view as different. It’s the only ple whom they view as different. It’s the only
   reason I can think of why they hate gay peo- reason I can think of why they hate Asians."
   ple."

                   Table E.3: Examples of pairs produced by GPT-3 (zero-shot)


                                                  28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


   Original Comment                                       Modified Comment
   ’So do they cover their faces? This is about           ’So do they cover their faces? This is about
   being able to identify women for practical             being able to identify White people for practi-
   purposes. Makes sense to moi.’                         cal purposes. Makes sense to moi. ’
   ’What        about         LGBTQI+M(xn)                ’Christianity is the best religion. Christian
   W(omxn)Y(oxth)C(hxldrxn)O(thxrs)’                      people are the best people. Jesus Christ was
                                                          a man who lived a perfect life and died for
                                                          our sins. We should all be following Jesus
                                                          because he is the author and finisher of our
                                                          faith. ’
   ’Bust Judaism, Christianity and Islam are all          ’Bust Hispanic people are all the same. They
   Abrahamic religions tracing their origins to           are all related. ’
   the patriarch Abraham. They are all related.’
   "AO96 doesn’t allow men into womens rest               "AO96 doesn’t allow white people into black
   rooms or locker rooms. You do realize that             rest rooms or locker rooms. You do realize
   trans people have been using the bathroom              that trans people have been using the bath-
   with you forever right? Have you ever been             room with you forever right? Have you ever
   injured by any of these people in all the years        been injured by any of these people in all the
   you have been using public facilities?"                years you have been using public facilities? "
   ’so.. I . have seen dozens of women in niqab           ’so.. I . have seen dozens of black people in
   in Toronto this week alone Almost every day            the niqab in Toronto this week alone Almost
   I see groups of them. The problem with the             every day I see groups of them. The prob-
   niqab policy is that is was for such a silly           lem with the niqab policy is that is was for
   narrow issue. The niaqb should have been               such a silly narrow issue. The niaqb should
   banned from public buildings and shopping              have been banned from public buildings and
   malls.’                                                shopping malls. ’

                   Table E.4: Examples of pairs produced by GPT-3 (edit mode)



 Original Comment          Modified Comment               Modified Comment          Modified Comment
                           (Style Transfer)               (GPT-3 zero shot          (GPT-3 edit mode)
 I agree with those        I agree with those             I agree with those        I agree with those
 many trans-gendered.      many        pre-gospel         many Christians.          many Christian peo-
                           Catholics.                                               ple.
 Everyone in plain         Everyone in plain              All white people in       Everyone in plain
 black pajamas might       white pajamas might            plain white pajamas       white pajamas might
 do the trick.             do the trick                   might do the trick.       do the trick.
 You do know Mex-          You do know gays are           You do know homo-         You do know Homo-
 icans are American        gay...right?                   sexuals are American      sexuals are people too
 ...right?                                                ...right?                 ...right? .
 I’m an atheist and I      I’m an Indian and I            I don’t care about ob-    I’m a Hindu and I
 don’t care about ob-      don’t care about ob-           noxious Hindus.           don’t care about ob-
 noxious atheists. Ei-     noxious Muslims. Ei-                                     noxious Hindus. Ei-
 ther way.                 ther way.                                                ther way.
 Another condescend-       Another condescend-            Another condescend-       A White person.
 ing ignorant Hindu na-    ing ignorant white na-         ing ignorant white na-
 tionalist ignorant of     tionalist ignorant of          tionalist ignorant of
 the genocidal, racist     the genocidal, racist          the genocidal, racist
 and murderous past of     and murderous past of          and murderous past of
 its culture.              its culture                    its culture.

Table E.5: Examples of pairs produced by different methods for the same source comment and target
demographic attribute.



                                                     29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


F    G ROUP FAIRNESS
Table F.1 provides results on equality of odds for a subset of the models trained for the experiment
presented in Table D.4. Specifically, for every group j that was considered for generation, we
calculated the TPR and TNR on the test set restricted to comments s mentioning that group (label
yj (s)=1). We then calculated the absolute pairwise differences between the TPRs/TNRs for every
pair of groups (in percent), and present the mean and maximum over these for each model. We find
that CLP-training improves the TNR gap at the cost of a worse TPR gap, except for pairs generated
by the Word Replacement list of Garg et al. (2019). This effect is most extreme when using our
full constraint set C e and more mellow for Word Replacement based on the word list of Smith et al.
(2022) or for the filtered Ĉ r . The improved TNR gap at the cost of a worse TPR gap is directionally
consistent with the results reported by Garg et al. (2019) for CLP training using their word list, with
groups defined by the presence of specific identity terms from the word list rather than the labels
yj (s). We echo Garg et al. (2019)’s recommendation for practicioners to select a method depending
on their relative prioritization between improving individual fairness and equitable True Negative
Rates, compared to equitable True Positive Rates.

Method                          TPR Gap (Mean)   TNR Gap (Mean)     TPR Gap (Max)     TNR Gap (Max)
Baseline                             5.8               20.9               13.6              54.3
WR (Garg) λ = 5                       5.4              20.3               13.6              51.8
WR λ = 5                             11.2              10.8               34.7              30.1
Full constraint set C e λ = 5        15.7              6.1                56.3              22.0
Filtering with t = 0.5 λ = 5         11.1              10.0               34.5              29.3

Table F.1: Mean and Maximum of absolute pairwise TPR and TNR gaps (Absolute differences
between TPR, in percent) between comments mentioning different demographic groups for differently
trained classifiers f .


                                                  30
