Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


O N T HE I MPACT OF M ACHINE L EARNING R ANDOM -
NESS ON G ROUP FAIRNESS

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT
         Statistical measures for group fairness in machine learning reflect the gap in
         performance of algorithms across different groups. These measures, however,
         exhibit a high variance, between different training instances, that makes them
         unreliable for empirical evaluation of fairness. What is the cause of this variance,
         and how can we reduce it? We investigate the impact of different sources of
         randomness in machine learning on group fairness. We show that the variance in
         group fairness measures is mainly due to the high volatility of the learning process
         on under-represented groups, which itself is largely caused by the stochasticity of
         data order during training. Based on these findings, we show how to manipulate
         group level accuracy (i.e. model fairness), with high efficiency and negligible
         impact on the overall predictive power of the model, by changing the data order.


1    I NTRODUCTION
Machine learning models are shown to manifest and escalate historical prejudices and biases present
in their training data (Crawford, 2013; Barocas & Selbst, 2016; Zhao et al., 2017; Abbasi et al., 2019).
Understanding these biases and the following ethical considerations has led to the rise of fair machine
learning research (Chouldechova & Roth, 2018; Caton & Haas, 2020; Mehrabi et al., 2021). Recent
work in fair deep learning have observed a trend of high variance in fairness measures across multiple
training runs (Qian et al., 2021; Amir et al., 2021; Sellam et al., 2021; Soares et al., 2022), usually
attributed to non-determinism in training. These results have challenged the legitimacy of existing
claims in the literature (Soares et al., 2022), and have even disputed the effectiveness of various bias
mitigation techniques (Amir et al., 2021; Sellam et al., 2021). Thus, a reliable extraction of fairness
trends in a model requires accounting for the high variance to avoid lottery winners (see Figure 1).
The naive solution of executing a large number of identical training runs to capture the overall
variance creates a huge computational demand, and discourages the examination of biases in several
rapidly growing forefronts of machine learning research by increasing the resource requirements.
Therefore, understanding the actual cause of the high variance in the fairness measures is critical.
To the best of our knowledge, we are the first to study fairness variance beyond trivially executing
multiple identical training runs. More specifically, we show the following:

• We show that the trends of fairness variance observed in literature are dominated by random data
  reshuffling during training, which causes high fairness variance between epochs even within a
  single training run, while the non-determinism in weight initialization has minimal influence.
• We extract an empirical relationship between group representation and instability in group level
  performance, highlighting higher vulnerability of minority to changing model behavior. Our results
  attribute the high fairness variance to lower prediction stability for under-represented subgroups.
• We demonstrate an immediate dominance of the data order on model fairness. A model’s fairness is
  predictable, based on only the most recent training points, irrespective of preceding model behavior.
• Based on this information, we propose to use the fairness variance across epochs as a proxy to
  study the changing model fairness across multiple training runs, thus reducing the computational
  requirements by a significant margin.
• Finally, we manipulate group level performances (i.e., model fairness) by changing the data order,
  with a relatively minor impact on the overall accuracy. This manipulation can improve fairness as
  well as reverse the effects of several bias mitigation algorithms within a single training epoch.


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                               (a) Fairness                                  (b) Performance

      Baseline

     Reweigh

      EO Loss

     FairBatch

             0%        2%         4%         6%         8%         10% 78%        80%         82%
                                   Average Odds                                 F1-Scorey


Figure 1: (a) Fairness (average odds) has a high variance across identical runs due to non-determinism
in training. This variance persists even with several state-of-the-art bias mitigation algorithms
(Reweighing (Kamiran & Calders, 2012); Equalized Odds Loss (Fukuchi et al., 2020); FairBatch (Roh
et al., 2020)), and reliable comparison between these methods can only be made after capturing the
overall model behavior, due to intersecting ranges. (b) The performance score (F1 score), however,
has significantly smaller range of variance and doesn’t face similar issues as fairness.


2   E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP
Datasets and Models We will conduct our investigation on ACSIncome and ACSEmployment
tasks of the Folktables dataset (Ding et al., 2021), and binary classification of the ’smiling’ label in
CelebA dataset (Liu et al., 2015), with gender (Female vs. Male) as the sensitive attribute for all
datasets. For CelebA, input features are obtained by passing the input image through a pre-trained and
frozen ResNet-50 backbone and extracting the output feature vector after the final average pooling
layer. More details on the datasets are provided in Appendix A.
We train a feed forward network on input features with a single hidden layer consisting of 64
neurons and ReLU activation, and train the model with cross-entropy (CE) loss objective for a total
of 300 epochs at batch size 128, in all our experiments unless specified otherwise. We include
additional experiments by changing training hyperparameters, i.e., batch size, learning rate, and
model architecture, in Appendix E.4. We use train-val-test split of 0.7 : 0.1 : 0.2, and maintain
the same split throughout all our experiments, i.e. we do not consider potential non-determinism
introduced due to changing train-val-test splits. All our evaluations are performed on the test split.
We will focus primarily on the ACSIncome dataset in the main text, while additional experiments on
CelebA and ACSEmployment are included in the appendix.

Fairness Metrics and Variance Fairness in machine learning has been interpreted widely into a
multitude of definitions. In this paper, we will focus on average odds (AO), empirically interpreted as
the average disparity between true positive rates and false positive rates of various groups. We also
include additional results for equalized opportunity (EOpp) and disparate impact (DI) in Appendix
F.3. For model predictions R, true labels Y , and sensitive attributes A, average odds can be defined
as,
                             1 X
        AverageOdds :=                 |P(R = 1|Y = y, A = 0) − P(R = 1|Y = y, A = 1)|.             (1)
                             2
                              y={0,1}
At the heart of our work is the study of fairness variance across model checkpoints. Unless otherwise
specified, variance across multiple training runs refers to the variance across final checkpoints at
epoch 300 of each training run. Similarly, variance across epochs refers to variance in a single
training run across checkpoints at the end of every epoch for the last 200 epochs of training (i.e.,
from epoch 100 to epoch 300). We make this choice as the model has converged to stable accuracy
scores before epoch 100 (refer to the training curve in Appendix A for more details).

Non-Determinism in Model Training In this work, we focus on randomness due to stochasticity
in the training algorithm, and we set manual seeds at various intermediate locations in our code to
control the randomness. We refer to the seed set right before building the neural model as the weight


                                                   2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


initialization seed, which influences the randomness in sampling the weight values. Similarly, we
refer to the seed set right before the first training data shuffling as random reshuffling seed, which
influences the data order that will be used as reference for the rest of the training. During training, we
simply set the epoch number as seed right before reshuffling the reference data order at every epoch.
As we can change the reference data order by changing the random reshuffling seed, this setup allows
us to control non-determinism in data order throughout training with a single random seed. Fixing
both weight initialization and random reshuffling seed allows us to deterministically replicate model
training, while changing both seeds simultaneously is similar to the discussion of non-determinism
present in literature. Pseudo code detailing the definition of various random seeds is provided in
Appendix A. We also perform additional experiments on the impact of randomness introduced by
dropout regularization in Appendix A.

3         T HE S OURCES OF R ANDOMNESS
We start by moving past the trivial observation that different training runs lead to different outcomes,
and investigate the high fairness variance by studying the intricacies of the training dynamics.

3.1            W EIGHT I NITIALIZATION AND R ANDOM R ESHUFFLING

Neural model training under widely adapted mini-batch stochastic gradient descent (SGD) has two
main sources of non-determinism, i.e. weight initialization and random reshuffling. To decouple
their impact on fairness variance, we perform the following experiment. We execute three sets of 50
unique training runs each while , (i) allowing for both sources of randomness, (ii) changing only the
weight initialization while keeping the random reshuffling fixed, and (iii) changing only the random
reshuffling while keeping the weight initialization fixed. For ACSIncome, we collect average odds
(AO) and F1 score of all training runs in Figure 2 (see Figure 13 for the other datasets).

                    (a) Normal training      (b) Fixed Reshuffling           (c) Fixed Weight Init

               79.8%
    F1 Score


               79.6%
               79.4%
               79.2%
                79%
                       6% 7% 8% 9%               6% 7% 8% 9%                      6% 7% 8% 9%
                       Average Odds               Average Odds                    Average Odds

Figure 2: Average Odds (AO) variance by (a) allowing for both sources of randomness simultaneously,
represents the instability in fairness scores as noted by existing literature. We see a significant drop in
variance if we change only (b) the weight initialization while keeping the random reshuffling fixed.
However, we observe high range of fairness variance by changing only (c) the random reshuffling,
even for a fixed weight initialization. These results suggest random reshuffling of the data order as
the dominant source of variance in fairness, with little influence from weight initialization.

The large range of fairness scores reported by allowing for both sources of randomness represents the
variance observed in existing literature. Interestingly, when these sources are examined separately, the
variance due to random reshuffling is equivalently large but the variance due to weight initialization
drops significantly. It is clear that fairness variance originates from data order shuffling, while
randomness in weight initialization has minimal impact. To further probe the difference between
these two sources of non-determinism, we plot the median, inter-quartile range and overall range
of average odds (AO) across the complete set of 50 training runs for the last 200 epochs in the two
isolated settings from the previous experiment, i.e., changing only the weight initialization and only
the random reshuffling, respectively. The resulting plots are collected in Figure 3.
We find high correlation in fairness scores across training runs with changing weight initialization
(average pairwise pearson coefficient ≈ 0.91), despite high variance between epochs as observed in
Figure 3(a). This behavior supports our observations of low variance in fairness scores at the final


                                                    3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                 (a) Fixed Data Reshuffling                                  (b) Fixed Weight Initialization

                     10%

      Average Odds     8%

                       6%
                         100       150        200            250                300 100          150          200       250      300
                                             Epoch                                                          Epoch
                                               Median                    Inter-quartile range     Overall range

Figure 3: Median, inter-quartile range, and overall range of average odds across 50 different training
runs while changing only the weight initialization or the random reshuffling respectively. (a) Changing
only the weight initialization while keeping random reshuffling fixed implies that for any particular
epoch, all training runs are fed the same data order. Despite different initializations, these models
have very little variance across training runs, but high variance across epochs. This highlights the
dominant impact of random reshuffling on model fairness. (b) Changing only the random reshuffling
further supports our claim, as we see high variance even across training runs.


epoch in Figure 2. Furthermore, there is a lack of any reasonable correlation between fairness scores
of training runs with changing random reshuffling (average pairwise pearson coefficient ≈ 0.13), with
noticeably high variance across both changing epochs and training runs in Figure 3(b). Interestingly,
the high fairness variance across epochs inside a single training run in Figure 3(a) closely matches
the variance that we observe across multiple training runs in Figure 3(b).


3.2       C HANGING P REDICTIONS AND DATA D ISTRIBUTION

In previous experiments, we observed high variance in model fairness, and thus in turn it’s predictive
behavior, even between consecutive epochs. The changing predictive behavior of neural models is
not surprising, and has been studied extensively in literature (Toneva et al., 2018; Kirkpatrick et al.,
2017; Jagielski et al., 2022; Tirumala et al., 2022). As we are concerned with the fairness of the
final decisions made by the model, we focus on a change in the model’s discrete output class when
discussing changing predictions. More specifically, a model is said to have undergone a change in
prediction for some input x during epoch i, if ŷi (x) ̸= ŷi−1 (x), where ŷi (x) is the output class when
passing the input x through the model checkpoint at the end of epoch i.


               (a) Data Distribution                                        (b) Unique Data Points that Changed Prediction
            40%                                                          15%
                                                      Group Percentage


            30%                                                          10%

            20%                                                           5%

            10%                                                           0%
                                                                            100            150          200          250        300
                               Dummy                                                                   Epoch
                     Female (Salary ≥ 50K)    Male (Salary ≥ 50K)                     Male (Salary < 50K)      Female (Salary < 50K)


Figure 4: (a) The underlying data distribution of ACSIncome shows positive labels from group
Female as an under-represented minority. (b) Total percentage of unique data points from each
subgroup that change prediction across epochs follow the opposite order of their representation in the
training data. These results highlight subgroups with least representation, i.e. positive labels from
group Female in this setting, being the most vulnerable to changing predictions.


                                                                                  4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


While these changing predictions maintain overall stable average performance, they can still have
disparate impact on individual groups, the exact characteristics of which are less known. We study
this instability by investigating individual data points which change their predictions. We plot the
percentage of data points from each group that changed their prediction at least once between epochs
100 and k, where we gradually increase the value of k. The results are collected in Figure 4.
Clearly, the trends in percentage of unique data points with changing predictions mimics the distribu-
tion of each group in the original dataset, i.e. the groups which are represented the least are the most
vulnerable to changing model behavior. In ACSIncome dataset, positive labels from group Female
is severely under represented, and consequently can be seen to have almost twice the percentage of
unique examples with changing predictions than any other group in the dataset. The higher instability
of minority is an indication of higher uncertainty in the underlying model predictions. Thus, any
fairness metric defined on the output of such a model will also reflect this instability, and manifests as
variance in existing literature (Amir et al., 2021; Sellam et al., 2021; Soares et al., 2022).

4     DATA O RDER AND FAIRNESS
The previous set of experiments suggest the existence of an intricate relationship between the data
order and resulting model fairness. In this section, we dig deeper into this relationship and exploit it
to approximate fairness variance without separately training multiple models.

4.1   I MMEDIATE I MPACT OF DATA O RDER

A single epoch of SGD comprises of learning on a sequence of mini-batches from the training data,
changing the model parameters one gradient update at a time. The data order during training governs
the order of gradient updates and thus its impact on resulting model behavior is quite obvious (Bengio
et al., 2009). However, our investigation into fairness variance suggests that this impact might be
more immediate than expected, capable of stably predicting fairness scores irrespective of the model’s
preceding behavior. To test this, we design an experiment as follows. We sample 1000 unique
checkpoints randomly from last 200 epochs of 50 different training runs while allowing both forms
of training non-determinism simultaneously. These checkpoints represent a variety of models with
different weight initialization, training data order and even number of training epochs. We then train
each of these checkpoints for exactly one epoch on a common randomly chosen data order. We
collect fairness variance across checkpoints before and after this single epoch of training in Figure 5.

                                           ACSIncome                        CelebA

                                    10%                            10%
                     Average Odds


                                                                    8%
                                                           Dummy


                                    8%                              6%
                                                                    4%
                                    6%                              2%
                                          Before   After                 Before   After

Figure 5: (Before) Multiple checkpoints taken from training runs with changing weight initialization,
training data order, and even number of training epochs, show a high range of fairness variance (i.e.,
average odds variance), as expected. (After) However, these fairness scores are stabilized significantly
by training these checkpoints for only a single epoch on a common randomly chosen data order. This
shows the immediate impact of data order on model fairness.

Before training on the same data order for a single epoch, these checkpoints represent the complete
range of fairness variance previously noted. However, after only a single epoch of training on a
common data order, these models have all moved towards the same fairness score with significantly
lower variance. This highlights the immediate impact of data order of model fairness, which is stable
based on only the data order of the most recent epoch. An existing line of research suggests the
presence of no energy valleys in deep learning loss landscape between minimas of separately trained
models (Draxler et al., 2018; Garipov et al., 2018), which could explain the immediate impact of data
order, as various checkpoints might be connected in the loss landscape. Another possible explanation


                                                           5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


of models converging to the same fairness scores relies on a recent work that shows that there is only
one functionally unique minima in loss landscape of neural models (Ainsworth et al., 2022). Thus, it
is possible that different models when fed the same data order for even one epoch move towards a
functionally common model, with possible permutation symmetries in them.
Epochs are pseudo constructs, used to record multiple passes through the data, and thus we expect
the influence of data order on model fairness to have a granular manifestation as the few most recent
gradient updates of the model. Furthermore, while we have shown that the fairness variance is indeed
reduced, we are yet to show that it is also predictable. To achieve both simultaneously, we extend
the experiment above as follows. We start by extracting the data order corresponding to the epochs
achieving best and worst fairness scores on the validation set in a standard training run. Next, we
train these checkpoints on exactly b batches, taken from the suffix of data order with best and worst
fairness scores as described above. This allows us to obtain models which have experienced the same
most recent b gradient updates. For example, at b = 0, this setup involves no training and we simply
report the variance across the original set of checkpoints, while at b = 1070 (i.e., total number of
batches in an epoch for ACSIncome), this setup will repeat the previous experiment. We test for
b = {0, 20, 50, 100, 200} and the results are collected in Figure 6.

                               Best Fairness Order                       Worst Fairness Order
      Average Odds


                     10%                                       10%

                     8%                                        8%

                     6%                                        6%

                           0     20    50    100     200             0      20    50   100      200
                           Number of Training Batches                Number of Training Batches

Figure 6: Fairness scores (average odds) stabilize as the number of most recent common training
batches increase, highlighting the impact of these gradient updates on model fairness. Moreover, it
stabilizes to low or high fairness scores based on the corresponding data order from the epoch with
best or worst fairness score, showing the predictability of model fairness for any given data order.

As the number of fixed batches b increases, the model fairness gets more stable, and already at
b = 200, the model fairness is as stable as seen in previous set of experiments. This shows that it
is indeed the most recent gradient updates seen by the model which dominate its fairness scores,
irrespective of model behavior prior to those updates. Moreover, the trends of stability move towards
expected fairness based on the choice of original data order taken from best or worst fairness epoch
as described earlier, which helps us show the predictability of the impact of data order.

4.2   C APTURING FAIRNESS VARIANCE IN A S INGLE T RAINING RUN

We now return to our original problem of capturing fairness variance without wasting computing
resources on a large number of training runs. We saw stability and predictability in fairness scores
based on the data order, and thus fairness variance across multiple training runs is simply the
randomness in data order across their last epochs. As these data orders are obtained by random
shuffling, their distribution across multiple training runs should result in the same empirical range of
fairness as their distribution across epochs. Thus, we propose evaluating intermediate checkpoints in
a single training run as a proxy for reporting fairness variance across multiple training runs.
We test this by first plotting the distribution of fairness scores for sampling across multiple training
runs (three different stopping epochs) and sampling across epochs (three different training runs) in
Figure 7(a). Furthermore, we also test the quality of black swans, i.e. the best models captured, as a
function of number of unique training runs and number of epochs evaluated per training run. For a data
point epochs = e; seeds = s, we perform s unique training runs, and evaluate the model for last e
epochs in each training run, thus accumulating a total of e ∗ s checkpoints. These checkpoints are then
used to calculate some quality measure, and averaged over 50 repeats to compensate for randomness
in choosing s training runs. The experiment is performed for all combinations of e ∈ [1, 50] and
s ∈ [1, 50]. We use two different quality measures for a set of checkpoints as described above, (i) the


                                                           6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


best fairness achieved across all checkpoints, and (ii) the Hausdorff distance (Birsan & Tiba, 2005) of
the pareto-front (including both fairness and F1 scores) from the best achievable pareto-front, i.e., for
e = 50; s = 50. The results are collected in Figure 7(b).

                                        (a) Fairness Score Distribution                                                            (b) Black Swans

                   11                                                                                                            40


                                                                                                                                                           Average Odds
                                                                                                                                 30                  7.0


                                                                                                                         Seeds
                   10
                                                                                                                                 20                  6.0
                    9
                                                                                                                                 10
                                                                                                                                  00
    Average Odds


                                                                                                                                       20     40
                    8                                                                                                                  Epochs

                                                                                                                                                     3.0


                                                                                                                                                           Hausdorff Distance
                    7                                                                                                            40
                                                                                                                                 30                  2.5


                                                                                                                         Seeds
                    6
                                                                                                                                 20                  2.0
                    5
                                                                                                                                 10                  1.5
                        Across Seeds     Across Seeds    Across Seeds    Across Epochs   Across Epochs   Across Epochs            00   20     40
                        (Epoch : 200)    (Epoch : 250)   (Epoch : 300)     (Seed : 0)      (Seed : 1)      (Seed : 2)
                                                                   Sampling                                                            Epochs

Figure 7: (a) Fairness scores (average odds) across multiple training runs and across epochs in
a single training run have similar empirical distributions. Thus, studying this distribution across
epochs provides a highly efficient alternative to executing multiple training runs. (b) Quality of black
swans (i.e. extremely rare checkpoints) improves with more checkpoints collected, either in terms of
fairness (the lowest achievable average odds score) or the trade-off between overall performance and
fairness (the hausdorff distance to the best pareto front). This improvement occurs at the same rate,
irrespective of sampling checkpoints across multiple random seeds (x-axis) or multiple epochs in a
single seed (y-axis). But, sampling across epochs is significantly cheaper.

As we can notice from the plot in Figure 7(a), the empirical distribution of fairness across multiple
training runs closely matches the distribution across a single training run. We even performed the
Kolmogorov–Smirnov (KS) test (Massey Jr, 1951) to match sampling across multiple runs (at epoch
300) and sampling across epochs (for a single training run with seed 0) and found the maximum
difference in empirical CDF to be only 0.07, with a p-value of 0.712, i.e. the probability that both
set of checkpoints were sampled from the same underlying distribution. Moreover, the quality of
black swans in Figure 7(b) for both quality measures suggests similar trends. For example, when
comparing the two extremes, i.e. e = 1; s = 50 and e = 50; s = 1, we see similar results, with latter
requiring 50 times less computation. This shows that the commonly used method to capture fairness
variance in literature (i.e., e = 1; s = 50) is highly inefficient use of computing resources, and one
can achieve the same by simply observing model behavior across a single training run. With these
experiments, we show direct benefits of evaluating multiple epochs in a single training run, saving
huge amounts of resources and time in capturing the overall model variance.

5                  M ANIPULATING G ROUP L EVEL ACCURACY WITH DATA O RDER

In previous sections, we explored the instability in model fairness and took advantage of our insights
to reduce computational requirements for studying this variance. However, the predictability of
fairness scores based on the most recent batches implies the possibility that we should be able to finely
manipulate the fairness scores, or more precisely the group level accuracy, by simply controlling the
data order. We hypothesize that the data distribution seen by the model in the most recent batches
can temporarily change the loss landscape and nudge the group level accuracy behavior towards the
chosen distribution. Coupled with the immediate impact of data order shown in previous sections,
this could allow us to manipulate group level accuracy in only a single epoch of fine-tuning.
To test this hypothesis, we perform the following experiment. We start by defining the ratio between
different groups, to indicate the distribution that will dominate the model behavior. For example, a
ratio of 1 : 10 between two groups will distinctly favor the latter group, while a ratio of 10 : 1 will
favor the first group. We then form batches in the exact ratio as provided until we run out of data


                                                                                                  7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


points (which will happen for any ratio that is not the exact distribution of the original dataset). The
excess data points are then shuffled randomly and placed at the prefix of data order.
Similar to previous experiment settings, we pick the last epoch checkpoint from 50 unique training
runs while allowing for both forms of non-determinism (i.e. weight initialization and random
reshuffling), and then train them all for a single epoch on our custom data order. For our first
experiment, we fix all other ratios and only change the ratio between positive and negative labels
in group Female. We record the group level accuracy for all subgroups separately, along with the
overall model accuracy. We repeat the experiment by now changing only the ratio between positive
and negative labels in group Male. The results are collected in Figure 8.

                 100%                                                   100%
                  80%                                                    80%
      Accuracy


                                                             Accuracy
                  60%                                                    60%
                  40%                                                    40%
                                  F-Pos    F-Neg     M-Pos                                F-Pos   F-Neg     M-Pos
                  20%             M-Neg    Overall
                                                                         20%             M-Neg    Overall
                   0%                                                     0%
                        10−1             100          101                      10−1             100          101
                               Ratio of F-Pos : F-Neg                                 Ratio of M-Pos : M-Neg

Figure 8: We show how to control group level accuracy by changing data distribution of the most
recent gradient updates, tested separately for (a) ratio between positive and negative labels for group
Female, and (b) ratio between positive and negative labels for group Male, while keeping other ratios
fixed. In only a single epoch of training, we are able to manipulate the group level accuracy trade-off,
with relatively small impact on overall accuracy.

It is clear that by manipulating the data distribution seen by the model in the most recent gradient
updates, we can control the group level accuracy of the model. While the overall accuracy drops
noticeably for extreme ratios, it does not change much in the middle despite significant variance
in group level performances. This further strengthens our claim on the dominance of data order
on model fairness and group level accuracy. Fairbatch (Roh et al., 2020), a state-of-the-art bias
mitigation algorithm, follows a similar formulation as our custom data order. They create batches
with fixed ratio between groups, and the ratio is optimized at every epoch to counter the existing bias
in the model. Our results not only explain the success of their algorithm, but also state that instead of
regularly adapting the distribution to compensate for the model bias, one can directly use the final
desired distribution and the model will adapt to it immediately.
Finally, we extract two special cases from the above experiments, i.e. ratios of 1 : 1 and 1 : 3 between
positive and negative labels of group Female (for ACSIncome dataset), and call them EqualOrder
and AdvOrder respectively. While EqualOrder achieves competitive performances with state-of-
the-art bias mitigation methods, AdvOrder is capable of derailing the fairness scores of various
mitigation algorithms. Note that we can force even worse fairness gaps than achieved by AdvOrder
by pushing the ratio to its extreme, however that will also noticeably impact the model’s overall
accuracy. We perform experiments with three unique setups, standard training and two commonly
used bias mitigation algorithms. This includes, (i) Reweighing (Kamiran & Calders, 2012), a data
pre-processing algorithm which weighs every label-group pair based on its representation in the
overall dataset, and (ii) Equalized Odds Loss (Fukuchi et al., 2020), an in-processing loss function to
nudge the model towards fair predictions. We incorporate both EqualOrder and AdvOrder in these
setups to see the influence of data order. The results are collected in Figure 9.
By simply training with EqualOrder for a single epoch, the baseline models achieve competitive
fairness scores to state-of-the-art bias mitigation algorithms. Reweighing suffers from an unexpected
high bias under EqualOrder, as the combination of ideally distributed data order along with increase
in the weight of minority data points pushes the model towards significant unfair behavior against the
majority. On the other hand, using AdvOrder in the baseline setting can further push the model bias,
emphasizing the adversarial power of data ordering. Both Reweighing and Equalized Odds Loss also
suffers similar fates, but with controlled damage in latter due to the loss function regularly adapting
to the degrading behavior. These results together cement the effectiveness of manipulating group
level accuracy by controlling the data order for just a single epoch of training.


                                                             8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                80%                                                         20%


                                                             asfasfafadafafasf
                                                              Average Odds
    asfasfafafasf
                75%                                                         15%

      F1 Score  70%                                                         10%

                65%                                                              5%

                60%                                                              0%
                       Baseline Reweighing EO Loss                                    Baseline Reweighing EO Loss
                      No additional training   Single Epoch of EqualOrder               Single Epoch of AdvOrder

Figure 9: Under baseline training setup, by changing only the data order for just a single epoch
of training, EqualOrder gets competitive performance to commonly used bias mitigation methods.
Similarly, AdvOrder gets significantly worse fairness than even the baseline. For Reweighing, we see
an increase in bias even with EqualOrder, as the beneficial weighing of minority creates bias towards
the majority. On the other hand, even reweighing is not enough to counter the effects of AdvOrder.
Finally, equalized odds loss is capable of dynamically adapting to the model’s changing predictive
behavior, yet we still observe noticeable increase in bias under AdvOrder.


6   R ELATED W ORK

Variance in Fair Machine Learning Recently, there has been a growing awareness of high variance
and instability in fair deep learning, associated with non-determinism in model training or underlying
implementations (Amir et al., 2021; Sellam et al., 2021; Soares et al., 2022; Qian et al., 2021), and
the challenges it creates in trusting existing results. The high variance in fairness scores has even
been used to propose a new leave-one-out unfairness metric (Black & Fredrikson, 2021).
Soares et al. (2022) refute various trends in literature associated with fairness of large language
models by simply executing multiple identical training runs, while Sellam et al. (2021) focus on the
impact of randomness in pre-training paradigm and find further increase in instability. Amir et al.
(2021) even revisit state-of-the-art bias mitigation in clinical texts and show a lack of statistically
significant improvement after accounting for non-determinism in training. While existing literature
focuses on exploring the impact of fairness variance, we instead focus on investigating the source
of this non-determinism. Furthermore, we propose to move away from the practice of executing
multiple training runs to capture this variance and instead provide a computationally efficient proxy.

Data Order and Example Forgetting Controlling the data order during training has gained
noticeable success in improving convergence speeds (Bengio et al., 2009; Shah et al., 2020; Soviany
et al., 2022; Mohtashami et al., 2022), while its adversarial capabilities have also been explored
(Shumailov et al., 2021). Even under randomly shuffled data order, neural models are known to
undergo changes in predictive behavior during training (Toneva et al., 2018; Kirkpatrick et al., 2017;
Jagielski et al., 2022; Tirumala et al., 2022). We extend the discussion on non-determinism in model
behavior to model fairness, and investigate its connections with data order. We focus specifically
on the instability in predictions made by the learning model and not its internal state, as we are
concerned about the disparity in group level decisions which highlights the encoded bias.

7   C ONCLUSION

Fairness variance in deep learning has raised concerns regarding the reliability of existing results
in literature. In this paper, we took a closer look at this variance and proposed a proxy to training
multiple models by studying fairness scores inside a single training run, which exploits a surprisingly
dominant impact of data order on model behavior. We even manipulated the data order to minutely
control group level accuracy without losing overall accuracy in only a single epoch on training. In
our work, we focused only on the discrete decisions made by the model, as we were investigating
the impact of non-determinism in model training on its fairness. However, further extensions of this
discussion to trends in the internal state of the learned model can reveal even granular characteristics,
and has potential application in similar fields of research suffering from high variance.


                                                            9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


8   R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT
Our work studies various sources of non-determinism in neural model training and its impact on
model fairness. Thus, it is important to address the implementation choices we have made to allow
easy reproducibility. We provide a minimal psuedo code in Appendix A to clearly define various
random seeds used in our setup to control training non-determinism. The complete training and
evaluation pipeline is deterministic outside the choice of these random seeds, i.e., one can perfectly
replicate the training by simply fixing these seeds. We also provide our code to train models and
perform several evaluations done in the paper as supplementary material to allow easy adaptation for
future research.

R EFERENCES
Mohsen Abbasi, Sorelle A Friedler, Carlos Scheidegger, and Suresh Venkatasubramanian. Fairness
 in representation: quantifying stereotyping as a representational harm. In Proceedings of the 2019
 SIAM International Conference on Data Mining, pp. 801–809. SIAM, 2019.
Samuel K Ainsworth, Jonathan Hayase, and Siddhartha Srinivasa. Git re-basin: Merging models
  modulo permutation symmetries. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.04836, 2022.
Silvio Amir, Jan-Willem van de Meent, and Byron C Wallace. On the impact of random seeds on
   the fairness of clinical classifiers. In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference of the North American
  Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, pp.
   3808–3823, 2021.
Solon Barocas and Andrew D Selbst. Big data’s disparate impact. Calif. L. Rev., 104:671, 2016.
Yoshua Bengio, Jérôme Louradour, Ronan Collobert, and Jason Weston. Curriculum learning. In
  Proceedings of the 26th annual international conference on machine learning, pp. 41–48, 2009.
T Birsan and Dan Tiba. One hundred years since the introduction of the set distance by dimitrie
  pompeiu. In IFIP Conference on System Modeling and Optimization, pp. 35–39. Springer, 2005.
Emily Black and Matt Fredrikson. Leave-one-out unfairness. In Proceedings of the 2021 ACM
 Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency, pp. 285–295, 2021.
Simon Caton and Christian Haas. Fairness in machine learning: A survey. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2010.04053, 2020.
Alexandra Chouldechova and Aaron Roth. The frontiers of fairness in machine learning. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1810.08810, 2018.
Kate Crawford. The hidden biases in big data. Harvard business review, 1(4), 2013.
Frances Ding, Moritz Hardt, John Miller, and Ludwig Schmidt. Retiring adult: New datasets for fair
  machine learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34, 2021.
Felix Draxler, Kambis Veschgini, Manfred Salmhofer, and Fred Hamprecht. Essentially no barriers in
  neural network energy landscape. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 1309–1318.
  PMLR, 2018.
Dheeru Dua and Casey Graff. UCI machine learning repository, 2017. URL http://archive.
  ics.uci.edu/ml.
Akihiko Fukuchi, Yoko Yabe, and Masashi Sode.              Fairtorch.   https://github.com/
 wbawakate/fairtorch, 2020.
Timur Garipov, Pavel Izmailov, Dmitrii Podoprikhin, Dmitry P Vetrov, and Andrew G Wilson.
  Loss surfaces, mode connectivity, and fast ensembling of dnns. Advances in neural information
  processing systems, 31, 2018.
Moritz Hardt, Eric Price, and Nati Srebro. Equality of opportunity in supervised learning. Advances
 in neural information processing systems, 29, 2016.


                                                 10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image
  recognition. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition,
  pp. 770–778, 2016.
Matthew Jagielski, Om Thakkar, Florian Tramèr, Daphne Ippolito, Katherine Lee, Nicholas Carlini,
 Eric Wallace, Shuang Song, Abhradeep Thakurta, Nicolas Papernot, et al. Measuring forgetting of
 memorized training examples. arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.00099, 2022.
Faisal Kamiran and Toon Calders. Data preprocessing techniques for classification without discrimi-
  nation. Knowledge and information systems, 33(1):1–33, 2012.
James Kirkpatrick, Razvan Pascanu, Neil Rabinowitz, Joel Veness, Guillaume Desjardins, Andrei A
  Rusu, Kieran Milan, John Quan, Tiago Ramalho, Agnieszka Grabska-Barwinska, et al. Overcoming
  catastrophic forgetting in neural networks. Proceedings of the national academy of sciences, 114
  (13):3521–3526, 2017.
Ziwei Liu, Ping Luo, Xiaogang Wang, and Xiaoou Tang. Deep learning face attributes in the wild. In
  Proceedings of International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), December 2015.
Frank J Massey Jr. The kolmogorov-smirnov test for goodness of fit. Journal of the American
  statistical Association, 46(253):68–78, 1951.
Ninareh Mehrabi, Fred Morstatter, Nripsuta Saxena, Kristina Lerman, and Aram Galstyan. A survey
  on bias and fairness in machine learning. ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR), 54(6):1–35, 2021.
Amirkeivan Mohtashami, Sebastian Stich, and Martin Jaggi. Characterizing & finding good data
 orderings for fast convergence of sequential gradient methods. arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.01838,
 2022.
Shangshu Qian, Viet Hung Pham, Thibaud Lutellier, Zeou Hu, Jungwon Kim, Lin Tan, Yaoliang
  Yu, Jiahao Chen, and Sameena Shah. Are my deep learning systems fair? an empirical study of
  fixed-seed training. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34, 2021.
Yuji Roh, Kangwook Lee, Steven Euijong Whang, and Changho Suh. Fairbatch: Batch selection for
  model fairness. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2020.
Thibault Sellam, Steve Yadlowsky, Ian Tenney, Jason Wei, Naomi Saphra, Alexander D’Amour,
  Tal Linzen, Jasmijn Bastings, Iulia Raluca Turc, Jacob Eisenstein, et al. The multiberts: Bert
  reproductions for robustness analysis. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2021.
Vatsal Shah, Xiaoxia Wu, and Sujay Sanghavi. Choosing the sample with lowest loss makes sgd
  robust. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pp. 2120–2130. PMLR,
  2020.
Ilia Shumailov, Zakhar Shumaylov, Dmitry Kazhdan, Yiren Zhao, Nicolas Papernot, Murat A
   Erdogdu, and Ross J Anderson. Manipulating sgd with data ordering attacks. Advances in Neural
   Information Processing Systems, 34:18021–18032, 2021.
Ioana Baldini Soares, Dennis Wei, Karthikeyan Natesan Ramamurthy, Moninder Singh, and Mikhail
  Yurochkin. Your fairness may vary: Pretrained language model fairness in toxic text classification.
  In Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, 2022.
Petru Soviany, Radu Tudor Ionescu, Paolo Rota, and Nicu Sebe. Curriculum learning: A survey.
  International Journal of Computer Vision, pp. 1–40, 2022.
Nitish Srivastava, Geoffrey Hinton, Alex Krizhevsky, Ilya Sutskever, and Ruslan Salakhutdinov.
  Dropout: a simple way to prevent neural networks from overfitting. The journal of machine
  learning research, 15(1):1929–1958, 2014.
Kushal Tirumala, Aram H Markosyan, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Armen Aghajanyan. Memorization
 without overfitting: Analyzing the training dynamics of large language models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2205.10770, 2022.


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Mariya Toneva, Alessandro Sordoni, Remi Tachet des Combes, Adam Trischler, Yoshua Bengio, and
 Geoffrey J Gordon. An empirical study of example forgetting during deep neural network learning.
 In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2018.
Jieyu Zhao, Tianlu Wang, Mark Yatskar, Vicente Ordonez, and Kai-Wei Chang. Men also like
   shopping: Reducing gender bias amplification using corpus-level constraints. In Proceedings of the
   2017 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pp. 2979–2989, 2017.


                                                 12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Appendix
Table of Contents
     A Non-Determinism in Model Training                                                        14

     B Datasets                                                                                 14

     C Training Curve and Convergence                                                           15

     D Dropout Regularization                                                                   16

     E Additional Experiments for All Datasets                                                  17
       E.1 Weight Initialization and Random Reshuffling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     17
       E.2 Changing Predictions and Data Distribution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   18
       E.3 Capturing Variance in a Single Training Run . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    19
       E.4 Manipulating Group Level Accuracy with Data Order . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        20

     F Additional Experiments for Changing Hyperparameters                                      21
       F.1 Weight Initialization and Random Reshuffling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     21
       F.2 Changing Predictions and Data Distribution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   24
       F.3 Manipulating Group Level Accuracy with Data Order . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        25

     G Additional Experiments for Other Fairness Metrics                                        26
       G.1 High Variance in Fairness Scores . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   27
       G.2 Weight Initialization and Random Reshuffling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     27
       G.3 Capturing Variance in a Single Training Run . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    28

     H 10 Raw Training Runs from Figure 3                                                       29


                                                  13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A    N ON -D ETERMINISM IN M ODEL T RAINING
We provide a minimal pseudo-code to explain our control over training non-determinism and define
weight initialization and random reshuffling seeds.


....
torch.manual_seed(weight_initialization_seed)
model = MLPModel() # Initialize Neural Model
...
train_data, .. = load_dataset() # load data with deterministic order
train_data = shuffle(train_data, seed=random_reshuffling_seed)
...
trainloader = torch.utils.data.DataLoader(train_data, ..., shuffle=True)
...
for epoch in range(total_epochs):
    ...
    torch.manual_seed(epoch)
    for batch in trainloader:
        ...



B    DATASETS
ACSIncome ACSIncome is one of the five pre-defined tasks in the Folktables dataset Ding et al.
(2021), which was recently collected to improve the older and commonly used UCI Adult Income
dataset Dua & Graff (2017). More specifically, we use the subset of Folktables dataset from the state
of California, USA for 2018. The dataset contains a total of 195, 665 data points with 10 features
each, where each data points represents an individual. The task is a binary classification to predict
whether the individual’s income is above $50, 000. For fairness measures, we use gender (Female vs
Male) as the sensitive attribute, which is also one of the 10 input features.
List of features : Age, Class of worker, Educational attainment, Marital status, Occupation, Place of
birth, Relationship, Usual hours worked per week in past 12 months, Sex, Recoded detailed race code

ACSEmployment ACSEmployment is another one of the five pre-defined tasks in the Folktables
dataset Ding et al. (2021). We use the same subset from the state of California, USA for 2018 as
above. The dataset contains a total of 378, 817 data points with 16 features each, and the task is a
binary classification to predict whether the individual is employed or not. For fairness measures,
same as above, we use gender (Female vs Male) as the sensitive attribute.
List of features : Age, Educational attainment, Marital status, Sex, Disability recode, Employment
status of parents, Mobility status, Citizenship status, Military service, Ancestry recode, Nativity,
Relationship, Hearing difficulty, Vision difficulty, Cognitive difficulty, Recoded detailed race code,
Grandparents living with grandchildren

CelebA CelebA dataset is a large scale celebrity face attributes dataset Liu et al. (2015), which
contains a total of 202, 599 images of celebrities with 40 different binary labels each. We focus on
the binary classification task of the ’smiling’ label in the dataset, while we use the ’gender’ label as
the sensitive attribute for fairness evaluation. Moreover, we do not directly use the images of CelebA
dataset, but instead pass them through a pre-trained and frozen ResNet-50 backbone He et al. (2016)
to extract image representations, which are treated as inputs to our model.


                                                  14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


C              T RAINING C URVE AND C ONVERGENCE
To understand why we choose to study the model behavior between epochs 100 and 300, we point
the reader towards the overall training curve of the model plotted in Figure 10. It is clear that the
model has converged by epoch 100, and maintains stable accuracy scores for the last 200 epochs.

                                       (a) Aggregated training curve          (b) Two individual training curves
                                 80%
                      F1 Score
                                 78%

                                 76%

                                 74%
                                       50    100    150    200   250    300      50   100    150    200   250      300
                                                   Epoch                                    Epoch


Figure 10: (Left) Aggregated training curve for all 50 training runs with both changing weight
initialization and random reshuffling. (Right) Example of two individual training runs.

Even though the accuracy scores have converged, we still find high variance in fairness scores as
discussed in the main text of the paper. One might suspect this implies that fairness scores could
take longer to converge. To check this, we allow a single training to run for a total of 3000 epochs
(as opposed to the standard 300 epochs used in all other experiments in our paper) and collect the
fairness scores in Figure 11. It is clear that the model fairness does not stabilize by simply increasing
the number of epochs, which further supports our hypothesis of never-ending local oscillations due to
SGD noise that cause high fairness variance.


               10%
Average Odds


               8%

               6%

               4%
                                 500               1,000               1,500                2,000               2,500    3,000
                                                                        Epoch

                                  Figure 11: A single training run extended to 3000 epochs.


                                                                       15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


D                 D ROPOUT R EGULARIZATION
Another notable source of randomness in neural model training is dropout regularization (Srivastava
et al., 2014). Dropout regularization randomly drops a certain percentage (known as dropout rate) of
connections between consecutive layers in the model at every forward pass during training. We extend
our discussion from Section 3 to study the impact of dropout on the trends of random reshuffling seen
in Figure 3. More specifically, we repeat the experiments while introducing various rates of dropout
in the training setup. The results are collected in Figure 12.
Randomness in dropout regularization under fixed weight initialization and fixed random reshuffling
(Figure12(e), (h)) introduces minute variance across multiple runs. While it adds noise to previously
noted trends, the variance in fairness across consecutive epochs in a single training run, as well as the
dominance of random reshuffling on fairness variance is still clearly noticeable (Figure 12(c), (d), (f),
(g)). Interestingly, the overall range of fairness variance does go down with higher dropout rate, but
gradually impacts the final achieved accuracy scores (Figure 12(j), (k)) as well as fairness.

                                                                               No Dropout
                              (a) Fixed Data Reshuffling                  (b) Fixed Weight Initialization

                10%
 Average Odds


                      8%

                      6%
                        100    150         200      250         300 100        150      200          250       300
                                        Epoch                                          Epoch

                                                                       Dropout Rate = 10%
                              (c) Fixed Data Reshuffling                  (d) Fixed Weight Initialization                              (e) Fixed Both

                10%
 Average Odds


                      8%

                      6%
                        100    150         200      250         300 100        150      200          250       300 100           150        200         250     300
                                        Epoch                                          Epoch                                               Epoch

                                                                       Dropout Rate = 20%
                              (f) Fixed Data Reshuffling                  (g) Fixed Weight Initialization                              (h) Fixed Both

                10%
 Average Odds


                      8%

                      6%
                        100    150         200      250         300 100        150      200          250       300 100           150        200         250     300
                                        Epoch                                          Epoch                                               Epoch

                                                                   Median        Inter-quartile range         Overall range

                                                                          Training Curves
                                     (i) No Dropout                         (j) Dropout Rate = 10%                            (k) Dropout Rate = 20%
                      80%
           F1 Score


                      78%

                      76%

                      74%
                               50    100    150    200    250    300      50     100   150     200      250    300       50      100     150      200   250   300
                                           Epoch                                       Epoch                                            Epoch


Figure 12: Additional experiments with dropout regularization reveal similar trends as in Figure 3.
These results further highlight the dominant impact of random reshuffling on fairness.



                                                                                 16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


E     A DDITIONAL E XPERIMENTS FOR A LL DATASETS

E.1   W EIGHT I NITIALIZATION AND R ANDOM R ESHUFFLING

We provide additional results in Figure 13, 14 on CelebA and ACSEmployment dataset to show the
dominance of random reshuffling on model fairness.

                                                                                          CelebA
                                                 (a) Normal training               (b) Fixed Reshuffling               (c) Fixed Weight Init
                                88%


                                87%
                    F1 Score


                                86%


                                85%
                                   2%                   4%      6%     8%         2%       4%       6%     8%        2%       4%     6%        8%
                                                        Average Odds                       Average Odds                       Average Odds

                                                                               ACSEmployment
                                                 (a) Normal training               (b) Fixed Reshuffling                (c) Fixed Weight Init


                       81.8%
         F1 Score


                       81.6%


                       81.4%
                                                4.5% 5% 5.5% 6% 6.5%              4.5% 5% 5.5% 6% 6.5%                 4.5% 5% 5.5% 6% 6.5%
                                                      Average Odds                         Average Odds                         Average Odds


Figure 13: Additional experiments on CelebA and ACSEmployment datasets reveal similar trends as
seen in Figure 2. Random reshuffling of data order is the dominant source of variance in fairness
scores, with very little influence from the weight initialization.


                                                                                          CelebA
                                                             (a) Fixed Data Reshuffling                   (b) Fixed Weight Initialization
                                                10%
                               Average Odds


                                                8%
                                                6%
                                                4%
                                                2%
                                                  100         150       200       250          300 100         150      200         250        300
                                                                       Epoch                                           Epoch

                                                                               ACSEmployment
                                                          (a) Fixed Data Reshuffling                      (b) Fixed Weight Initialization
                                                7%
                                 Average Odds


                                                6%

                                                5%

                                                4%
                                                  100         150      200        250         300 100          150      200        250         300
                                                                      Epoch                                           Epoch

                                                                         Median         Inter-quartile range    Overall range


Figure 14: Additional experiments on CelebA and ACSEmployment datasets reveal similar trends as
in Figure 3. These results further highlight the dominant impact of random reshuffling on fairness.



                                                                                              17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


E.2             C HANGING P REDICTIONS AND DATA D ISTRIBUTION

We show the relationship between data distribution and changing predictions for CelebA and AC-
SEmployment in Figure 15. The group with least representation maintains being the most vulnerable
to changing predictions.

                                                                                CelebA
                          (a) Data Distribution                                     (b) Unique Data Points that Changed Prediction
                       40%


                                                           Group Percentage
                                                                              20%
                       30%
                                                                              10%
                       20%

                       10%                                                     0%
                                                                                 100           150            200        250        300
                                Dummy                                                                     Epoch

                                 Male (Smiling)   Male (Not Smiling)                   Female (Not Smiling)     Female (Smiling)

                                                         ACSEmployment
                          (a) Data Distribution                                  (b) Unique Data Points that Changed Prediction
                       40%                                                    20%
                                                           Group Percentage



                                                                              15%
                       30%
                                                                              10%
                       20%
                                                                               5%
                       10%                                                     0%
                                                                                 100           150            200        250        300
                                Dummy                                                                     Epoch

                              Female (Employed)    Male (Employed)                    Male (Unemployed)       Female (Unemployed)


Figure 15: Additional experiments on CelebA and ACSEmployment datasets reveal similar trends
as seen in Figure 4. These results highlight subgroups with least representation being the most
vulnerable to changing predictions.

We showed that the fairness scores are dominated by the most recent gradient updates as seen by the
model. As a sanity check, we also provide ablation study for experiments in Figure 6, but choose the b
batches randomly instead of from the prefix. The results are collected in Figure 16. The results show
that it is indeed the batches from data order prefix that govern the predictability of model fairness.

                             Best Fairness Order                                                               Worst Fairness Order
 Average Odds


                10%                                                                       10%

                8%                                                                          8%

                6%                                                                          6%

                       0        20        50       100                        200                       0           20         50    100   200
                        Number of Training Batches                                                        Number of Training Batches

Figure 16: Additional experiments by choosing b batches, similar to the experiments in Figure 6, but
choosing batches randomly instead of the prefix. The results still maintain stability as b increases
but now they stabilize to random fairness scores instead of best and worst fairness scores as seen in
Figure 6. Clearly, its the most recent batches in that order which truly governs the model fairness.


                                                                                     18
    Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


    E.3               C APTURING VARIANCE IN A S INGLE T RAINING RUN

   We show the empirical similarity of distribution across multiple training runs and multiple epochs in
   a single training run for additional datasets CelebA and ACSEmployment in Figure 17.

                                                                   CelebA
                                      (a) Fairness Score Distribution                                                                (b) Black Swans

                                                                                                                             40                            5.0


                                                                                                                                                                 Average Odds
               10
                                                                                                                             30                            4.0


                                                                                                                     Seeds
                                                                                                                             20
                8
                                                                                                                             10                            3.0
Average Odds


                                                                                                                              00            20     40
                6                                                                                                                           Epochs
                                                                                                                                                           3.0


                                                                                                                                                                 Hausdorff Distance
                4                                                                                                            40
                                                                                                                             30


                                                                                                                     Seeds
                                                                                                                                                           2.0
                2
                                                                                                                             20
                                                                                                                             10
                                                                                                                                                           1.0
                     Across Seeds    Across Seeds    Across Seeds    Across Epochs   Across Epochs   Across Epochs            00            20     40
                     (Epoch : 200)   (Epoch : 250)   (Epoch : 300)     (Seed : 0)      (Seed : 1)      (Seed : 2)
                                                               Sampling                                                                     Epochs


                                                                             ACSEmployment
                                      (a) Fairness Score Distribution                                                                      (b) Black Swans
               7.5                                                                                                                                                     5.5
                                                                                                                                     40


                                                                                                                                                                                      Average Odds
                                                                                                                                                                       5.2
               7.0                                                                                                                   30
                                                                                                                             Seeds


                                                                                                                                                                       5.0
                                                                                                                                     20
               6.5
                                                                                                                                     10                                4.8
                                                                                                                                                                       4.5
Average Odds


                                                                                                                                      00       20     40
               6.0
                                                                                                                                               Epochs
               5.5                                                                                                                                                     1.2
                                                                                                                                     40
                                                                                                                                                                       1.0            Hausdorff Distance
               5.0                                                                                                                   30
                                                                                                                             Seeds


                                                                                                                                                                       0.8
                                                                                                                                     20
               4.5                                                                                                                   10                                0.5
                     Across Seeds    Across Seeds    Across Seeds    Across Epochs   Across Epochs   Across Epochs                    00                               0.2
                     (Epoch : 200)   (Epoch : 250)   (Epoch : 300)     (Seed : 0)      (Seed : 1)      (Seed : 2)                              20     40
                                                               Sampling                                                                        Epochs

    Figure 17: Additional experiments on CelebA and ACSEmployment datasets reveal similar trends as
    seen in Figure 7. Fairness scores (average odds) across multiple training runs and across epochs in a
    single training run have similar empirical distributions. Thus, studying this distribution across epochs
    provides a highly efficient alternative to executing multiple training runs.


                                                                                          19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


E.4       M ANIPULATING G ROUP L EVEL ACCURACY WITH DATA O RDER

We provide additional results in Figure 18, 19, highlighting the predictability of model fairness based
on the data order, and its impact compared against various state-of-the-art baselines.

                                                               CelebA
                      100%                                                        100%
           Accuracy


                                                                     Accuracy
                       80%                                                               80%
                                        F-Pos    F-Neg       M-Pos                                        F-Pos   F-Neg     M-Pos
                                        M-Neg    Overall                                                 M-Neg    Overall
                       60%                                                               60%
                              10−1             100          101                                10−1             100          101
                                     Ratio of F-Pos : F-Neg                                           Ratio of M-Pos : M-Neg
                                                           ACSEmployment
                      100%                                                        100%
                       80%                                                         80%
           Accuracy


                                                                     Accuracy
                       60%                                                         60%
                       40%                                                         40%
                                        F-Pos    F-Neg       M-Pos                                        F-Pos   F-Neg     M-Pos
                       20%              M-Neg    Overall
                                                                                   20%                   M-Neg    Overall
                        0%                                                          0%
                              10−1             100          101                                10−1             100          101
                                     Ratio of F-Pos : F-Neg                                           Ratio of M-Pos : M-Neg

Figure 18: Additional experiments on CelebA and ACSEmployment datasets reveal similar trends
as seen in Figure 8. In only a single epoch of training, we are able to manipulate the group level
accuracy trade-off, with relatively small impact on overall accuracy.


                                                               CelebA
                      90%                                                           10%
                                                                     asfasfafadafafasf
                                                                      Average Odds


                      88%                                                                8%
      asfasfafafasf
        F1 Score


                      86%                                                                6%
                      84%                                                                4%
                      82%                                                                2%
                      80%                                                                0%
                             Baseline Reweighing EO Loss                                       Baseline Reweighing EO Loss
                                                           ACSEmployment
                                                                     asfasfafadafafasf


                      80%                                                           30%
                                                                      Average Odds
      asfasfafafasf
        F1 Score


                      70%                                                           20%

                      60%                                                           10%

                      50%                                                                0%
                             Baseline Reweighing EO Loss                                       Baseline Reweighing EO Loss

                      No additional training     Single Epoch of EqualOrder                           Single Epoch of AdvOrder

Figure 19: Additional experiments on CelebA and ACSEmployment datasets reveal similar trends
as seen in Figure 9. EqualOrder gets competitive performance to commonly used bias mitigation
methods. Similarly, AdvOrder gets significantly worse fairness than even the baseline.



                                                                     20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


F           A DDITIONAL E XPERIMENTS FOR C HANGING H YPERPARAMETERS
We provide additional experiments for (i) batch size 16 and 1024, deviating from the default batch
size of 128 in the main text, (ii) learning rate 0.01 and 0.0001, deviating from the default learning
rate of 0.001 in the main text, and (iii) model architecture with two hidden layers containing 2048
and 64 neurons respectively, deviating from the single hidden layer architecture used in the main text.

F.1          W EIGHT I NITIALIZATION AND R ANDOM R ESHUFFLING

We provide additional results in Figure 21 for changing batch size, learning rate, and architecture on
ACSIncome dataset to show the dominance of random reshuffling on model fairness. With a decrease
in batch size, the range of fairness variance increases significantly, but the overall expected trends
follow the same behavior as noted in the main text, i.e. a sharp change in fairness scores across
epochs under fixed data reshuffling, and high variance even for a single epoch across multiple runs
under changing data reshuffling (fixed weight initialization). Similar trends can be observed when we
increase the learning rate, or provide the training algorithm with a bigger neural model. The increase
in variance suggests high instability with smaller batch size, higher learning rate, and bigger neural
models, all of which is expected.
On the other hand, one would expect more stable model behavior with a bigger batch size or a smaller
learning rate. While this is indeed the case, the comparison here is not fair because these models
have not yet converged, as evident by the clear downward trend of fairness scores in Figure 21. Note
that compared to these models, the original set of models converged before epoch 100 (see Appendix
A). To further highlight the same, we also show the training curve of all 5 settings compared against
the default setup in Figure 20. It is clear that certain hyperparameter settings are not conducive to
efficient convergence, even though they might eventually provide more stable fairness scores.
Finally, to understand the difficulty of reaching convergence, we continue training a single instance
with batch size 1024 (and learning rate 0.0001) for a total of 1000 epochs and compare it against the
standard training setup (i.e., with batch size 128 and learning rate 0.001). The results are collected
in Figure 22, 23. It is clear that a larger batch size (or lower learning rate) significantly slows down
the convergence speed. Moreover, it also does not achieve the same accuracy scores previously seen,
possibly due to not being able to take complete advantage of the noise usually found in mini-batch
gradient descent. Thus, using a high number of training epochs for a model with hyperparameters
that enforce stability (i.e. large batch size or lower learning rate) is an inefficient solution to solving
the problem of fairness variance.

                      (a) Standard Training                  (b) Batch Size = 16                       (c) Batch Size = 1024
           80%
F1 Score


           78%

           76%

           74%
                 50     100   150     200   250   300   50    100    150    200    250   300      50     100   150     200     250   300
                              Epoch                                 Epoch                                      Epoch
                  (d) Learning Rate = 0.01              (e) Learning Rate = 0.0001             (f) Model Architecture = {2048, 64}
           80%
F1 Score


           78%

           76%

           74%
                 50     100   150     200   250   300   50    100    150    200    250   300      50     100   150     200     250   300
                              Epoch                                 Epoch                                      Epoch


Figure 20: Training curve of the five new settings, along with original training curve copied here for
easy reference. It is clear that decreasing the batch size, increasing learning rate, or using a bigger
model architecture results in a faster model convergence but with higher variance even in accuracy
scores. On the other hand, models with high batch size or low learning rate tend to not achieve the
same accuracy scores and are still improving even at 300 epochs.


                                                                    21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                      Batch Size = 16
                                (a) Fixed Data Reshuffling               (b) Fixed Weight Initialization
                        15%


         Average Odds
                        10%

                        5%

                          100    150       200       250      300 100         150     200       250        300
                                          Epoch                                      Epoch
                                                     Batch Size = 1024
                                (a) Fixed Data Reshuffling               (b) Fixed Weight Initialization

                        12%
         Average Odds


                        10%

                        8%

                          100    150       200       250      300 100         150     200       250        300
                                          Epoch                                      Epoch
                                                   Learning Rate = 0.01
                                (a) Fixed Data Reshuffling               (b) Fixed Weight Initialization
                        15%
         Average Odds


                        10%

                        5%

                          100    150       200       250      300 100         150     200       250        300
                                          Epoch                                      Epoch
                                                  Learning Rate = 0.0001
                                (a) Fixed Data Reshuffling               (b) Fixed Weight Initialization

                        12%
         Average Odds


                        10%

                        8%
                          100    150       200       250      300 100         150     200       250        300
                                          Epoch                                      Epoch
                                          Model Architecture = {2048, 64}
                                (a) Fixed Data Reshuffling               (b) Fixed Weight Initialization
                        15%
         Average Odds


                        10%

                        5%

                          100    150       200       250      300 100         150     200       250        300
                                          Epoch                                      Epoch

                                            Median     Inter-quartile range   Overall range


Figure 21: Additional experiments for changing training hyperparameters with experiment setting as
in Figure 3. These results further highlight the dominant impact of random reshuffling on fairness.



                                                             22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                   80%

                   78%


     F1 Score
                   76%

                   74%

                   72%                                                    Batch Size = 128
                                                                          Batch Size = 1024
                   70%
                           200             400             600             800                1,000
                                                  Epoch
                                                                                 Batch Size = 128
                   14%                                                           Batch Size = 1024
    Average Odds


                   12%

                   10%

                   8%

                   6%
                           200             400             600             800                1,000
                                                  Epoch

Figure 22: Using a higher batch size can over time achieve reasonably stable fairness scores, however
the convergence speed is significantly slower. Moreover, the higher batch size does not convergence
to the same accuracy scores, and looses a noticeable margin of accuracy.

                   80%

                   78%
     F1 Score


                   76%

                   74%

                   72%                                               Learning Rate = 0.001
                                                                     Learning Rate = 0.0001
                   70%
                           200             400             600             800                1,000
                                                  Epoch
                                                                         Learning Rate = 0.001
                   14%                                                   Learning Rate = 0.0001
    Average Odds


                   12%

                   10%

                   8%

                   6%
                           200             400             600             800                1,000
                                                  Epoch

Figure 23: Using a lower learning rate can achieve reasonably stable fairness scores, however the
convergence speed is significantly slower. Moreover, the lower learning rate does not convergence to
the same accuracy scores, and looses a noticeable margin of accuracy.


                                                 23
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


F.2          C HANGING P REDICTIONS AND DATA D ISTRIBUTION

We note changing predictions for all 5 settings described above in Figure 24. Note that since we are
focusing on changing training hyperparameters for ACSIncome, the data distribution remains the
same as in Figure 4(a) (also copied here in Figure 24 for reference).
Same as before, model instability has increased with smaller batch size, higher learning rate, or
bigger model architecture, but the trends of vulnerability for various subgroups remains the same.
We already know that the models have not converged for higher batch size or smaller learning rate,
but we can still see the same trends of higher vulnerability for minority, although they are not as
pronounced as in already converged models.

                                                                          Batch Size
                                       Batch Size = 16                                                                  Batch Size = 1024
                               Unique Data Points that Changed Prediction                                         Unique Data Points that Changed Prediction
      Group Percentage


                                                                                         Group Percentage
                         30%                                                                                6%

                         20%                                                                                4%

                         10%                                                                                2%

                         0%                                                                                 0%
                           100           150       200         250         300                                100         150        200        250       300
                                                  Epoch                                                                             Epoch

                                                                       Learning Rate
                                   Learning Rate = 0.01                                                              Learning Rate = 0.0001
                               Unique Data Points that Changed Prediction                                         Unique Data Points that Changed Prediction
      Group Percentage


                                                                                         Group Percentage


                         30%                                                                                6%

                         20%                                                                                4%

                         10%                                                                                2%

                         0%                                                                                 0%
                           100           150       200         250         300                                100         150        200        250       300
                                                  Epoch                                                                             Epoch

                           ACSIncome Data Distribution                                                      Model Architecture = {2048, 64}
                                      (a) Data Distribution                                                       Unique Data Points that Changed Prediction
                                   40%
                                                                                      Group Percentage


                                                                                                            30%
                                   30%
                                                                                                            20%
                                   20%                                                                      10%

                                   10%                                                                      0%
                                                                                                              100          150       200         250       300
                                               Dummy                                                                                Epoch

                                     Female (Salary ≥ 50K)    Male (Salary ≥ 50K)     Male (Salary < 50K)                    Female (Salary < 50K)


Figure 24: Additional experiments reveal similar trends as seen in Figure 4. These results highlight
subgroups with least representation being the most vulnerable to changing predictions.


                                                                                 24
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


F.3   M ANIPULATING G ROUP L EVEL ACCURACY WITH DATA O RDER

We provide additional results in Figure 25, highlighting the predictability of model fairness based on
the data order. Note that the hyperparameter setting for an additional epoch of fine-tuning during
group accuracy manipulation is the same as the setup used for training that particular model. For
example, when manipulating models which were trained with batch size 16, the single epoch of
fine-tuning is also done with batch size 16.

                                                      Batch Size = 16
                 100%                                                      100%
                  80%                                                       80%
      Accuracy


                                                                Accuracy
                  60%                                                       60%
                  40%                                                       40%
                                  F-Pos     F-Neg       M-Pos                                F-Pos   F-Neg     M-Pos
                  20%             M-Neg     Overall
                                                                            20%             M-Neg    Overall
                   0%                                                        0%
                        10−1             100          101                         10−1             100          101
                               Ratio of F-Pos : F-Neg                                    Ratio of M-Pos : M-Neg
                                                    Learning Rate = 0.01
                 100%                                                      100%
                  80%                                                       80%
      Accuracy


                                                                Accuracy
                  60%                                                       60%
                  40%                                                       40%
                                  F-Pos     F-Neg       M-Pos                                F-Pos   F-Neg     M-Pos
                  20%             M-Neg     Overall
                                                                            20%             M-Neg    Overall
                   0%                                                        0%
                        10−1             100          101                         10−1             100          101
                               Ratio of F-Pos : F-Neg                                    Ratio of M-Pos : M-Neg
                                          Model Architecture = {2048, 64}
                 100%                                                      100%
                  80%                                                       80%
      Accuracy


                                                                Accuracy


                  60%                                                       60%
                  40%                                                       40%
                                  F-Pos     F-Neg       M-Pos                                F-Pos   F-Neg     M-Pos
                  20%             M-Neg     Overall
                                                                            20%             M-Neg    Overall
                   0%                                                        0%
                        10−1             100          101                         10−1             100          101
                               Ratio of F-Pos : F-Neg                                    Ratio of M-Pos : M-Neg

Figure 25: Additional experiments reveal similar trends as seen in Figure 8. In only a single epoch of
training, we are able to manipulate the group level accuracy trade-off, with relatively small impact on
overall accuracy.

We also provide results for models with high batch size and low learning rate separately in Figure
26. However, note that not only are these models not converged, but they are also fine-tuned on the
same inefficient hyperparameter settings. Thus, the trends here are not comparable, but added for
completeness.


                                                                25
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                     Batch Size = 1024
                 100%                                                       100%
                  80%                                                        80%

      Accuracy


                                                                 Accuracy
                  60%                                                        60%
                  40%                                                        40%
                                  F-Pos    F-Neg        M-Pos                                 F-Pos   F-Neg     M-Pos
                  20%             M-Neg    Overall
                                                                             20%             M-Neg    Overall
                   0%                                                         0%
                        10−1             100          101                          10−1             100          101
                               Ratio of F-Pos : F-Neg                                     Ratio of M-Pos : M-Neg
                                               Learning Rate = 0.0001
                 100%                                                       100%
                  80%                                                        80%
      Accuracy


                                                                 Accuracy
                  60%                                                        60%
                  40%                                                        40%
                                  F-Pos    F-Neg        M-Pos                                 F-Pos   F-Neg     M-Pos
                  20%             M-Neg    Overall
                                                                             20%             M-Neg    Overall
                   0%                                                         0%
                        10−1             100          101                          10−1             100          101
                               Ratio of F-Pos : F-Neg                                     Ratio of M-Pos : M-Neg

Figure 26: Additional experiments as seen in Figure 25, but for models that did not converge as noted
earlier. The results are added for completeness.


G    A DDITIONAL E XPERIMENTS FOR OTHER FAIRNESS M ETRICS
We repeat the experiment in the main text for two more fairness metrics, Equal Opportunity (EOpp)
and Disparate Impact (DI) Hardt et al. (2016)
For model predictions R, true labels Y , and sensitive attributes A, EOpp can be defined as,

                 EqualOpportunity := |P(R = 1|Y = 1, A = 0) − P(R = 1|Y = 1, A = 1)|.                                   (2)

Similarly, DI can be defined as,

                                                                P(R = 1|A = 0) P(R = 1|A = 1)
                    DisparateImpact := 1 − min(                               ,               ).                        (3)
                                                                P(R = 1|A = 1) P(R = 1|A = 0)


                                                                26
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


G.1   H IGH VARIANCE IN FAIRNESS S CORES

We start by repeating the results in Figure 1 to show high variance in different fairness measures.

                                               (a) Equal Opportunity                                      (b) Performance

            Baseline

            Reweigh

            EO Loss

           FairBatch

                               0%         2%          4%          6%         8%         10%         12% 78%       80%           82%
                                                           Equal Opportunity                                    F1-Scorey

                                                (a) Disparate Impact                                      (b) Performance

            Baseline

            Reweigh

            EO Loss

           FairBatch

                                    10%         15%         20%           25%          30%          35% 78%       80%           82%
                                                           Disparate Impact                                     F1-Scorey


Figure 27: Additional experiments with different fairness metrics for setting in Figure 1. Clearly,
fairness has a high variance across identical runs. Note that the x-axis across fairness and accuracy
metric is not similarly scaled for disparate impact to keep the results readable.


G.2   W EIGHT I NITIALIZATION AND R ANDOM R ESHUFFLING

We provide additional results for EOpp and DI for the experiment conducted in Figure 3 on ACSIn-
come dataset. The results collected in Figure 28 show similar trends as seen in the main text.

                                                               Equal Opportunity
                                           (a) Fixed Data Reshuffling                   (b) Fixed Weight Initialization
                               14%
                Average Odds


                               12%
                               10%
                                8%

                                    100        150     200          250      300 100          150     200      250        300
                                                      Epoch                                          Epoch

                                                                Disparate Impact
                                           (a) Fixed Data Reshuffling                   (b) Fixed Weight Initialization

                               34%
                Average Odds


                               32%
                               30%
                               28%
                               26%
                                  100          150     200          250      300 100          150     200      250        300
                                                      Epoch                                          Epoch

                                                           Median     Inter-quartile range    Overall range


Figure 28: Additional experiments with fairness metric EOpp and DP reveal similar trends as in
Figure 3. These results further highlight the dominant impact of random reshuffling on fairness.



                                                                            27
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


G.3                         C APTURING VARIANCE IN A S INGLE T RAINING RUN

We show the empirical similarity of distribution across multiple training runs and multiple epochs in
a single training run for fairness measures EOpp and DI in Figure 29.

                                                                                                               ACSIncome
                                                  Equal Opportunity                                                                                                             Disparate Impact
                       14
                                                                                                                                                36
                       13
                                                                                                                                                34
                       12
   Equal Opportunity


                                                                                                                                                32


                                                                                                                             Disparate Impact
                       11

                       10
                                                                                                                                                30
                        9
                                                                                                                                                28
                        8

                        7                                                                                                                       26

                        6                                                                                                                       24
                            Across Seeds    Across Seeds    Across Seeds    Across Epochs   Across Epochs   Across Epochs                              Across Seeds     Across Seeds     Across Seeds     Across Epochs   Across Epochs   Across Epochs
                            (Epoch : 200)   (Epoch : 250)   (Epoch : 300)     (Seed : 0)      (Seed : 1)      (Seed : 2)                               (Epoch : 200)    (Epoch : 250)    (Epoch : 300)      (Seed : 0)      (Seed : 1)      (Seed : 2)
                                                                      Sampling                                                                                                                     Sampling

                                                                                                            ACSEmployment
                                                  Equal Opportunity                                                                                                             Disparate Impact
                       14
                                                                                                                                                20.0

                       12                                                                                                                       17.5


                       10                                                                                                                       15.0
   Equal Opportunity


                                                                                                                             Disparate Impact


                                                                                                                                                12.5
                        8

                                                                                                                                                10.0
                        6
                                                                                                                                                 7.5
                        4
                                                                                                                                                 5.0

                        2                                                                                                                        2.5
                            Across Seeds    Across Seeds    Across Seeds    Across Epochs   Across Epochs   Across Epochs                               Across Seeds     Across Seeds     Across Seeds    Across Epochs   Across Epochs   Across Epochs
                            (Epoch : 200)   (Epoch : 250)   (Epoch : 300)     (Seed : 0)      (Seed : 1)      (Seed : 2)                                (Epoch : 200)    (Epoch : 250)    (Epoch : 300)     (Seed : 0)      (Seed : 1)      (Seed : 2)
                                                                      Sampling                                                                                                                      Sampling

                                                                                                                     CelebA
                                                  Equal Opportunity                                                                                                             Disparate Impact
                                                                                                                                                40
                       14


                       12                                                                                                                       35

                       10
   Equal Opportunity


                                                                                                                             Disparate Impact


                                                                                                                                                30
                        8


                        6
                                                                                                                                                25

                        4

                                                                                                                                                20
                        2

                            Across Seeds    Across Seeds    Across Seeds    Across Epochs   Across Epochs   Across Epochs                              Across Seeds     Across Seeds     Across Seeds     Across Epochs   Across Epochs   Across Epochs
                            (Epoch : 200)   (Epoch : 250)   (Epoch : 300)     (Seed : 0)      (Seed : 1)      (Seed : 2)                               (Epoch : 200)    (Epoch : 250)    (Epoch : 300)      (Seed : 0)      (Seed : 1)      (Seed : 2)
                                                                      Sampling                                                                                                                     Sampling



Figure 29: Additional experiments for fairness metrics EOpp and DI. Fairness scores across multiple
training runs and across epochs in a single training run have similar empirical distributions. Thus,
studying this distribution across epochs provides a highly efficient alternative.


                                                                                                                            28
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


H    10 R AW T RAINING RUNS FROM F IGURE 3
We plot 10 randomly chosen training runs each for fixed weight initialization and fixed random
reshuffling in Figure 30 and Figure 31, respectively. As expected, each individual training run in both
settings has high variance across epochs even after convergence. More importantly, the trends of
fairness matches closely across multiple runs for fixed random reshuffling, even though they started
from different weight initialization.

                       10%
        Average Odds


                       8%

                       6%
                         100   120   140   160   180        200   220   240   260   280   300
                                                        Epoch
                       10%
        Average Odds


                       8%

                       6%
                         100   120   140   160   180        200   220   240   260   280   300
                                                        Epoch
                       10%
        Average Odds


                       8%

                       6%
                         100   120   140   160   180        200   220   240   260   280   300
                                                        Epoch
                       10%
        Average Odds


                       8%

                       6%
                         100   120   140   160   180        200   220   240   260   280   300
                                                        Epoch
                       10%
        Average Odds


                       8%

                       6%
                         100   120   140   160   180        200   220   240   260   280   300
                                                        Epoch

Figure 30: 10 randomly chosen raw training runs plotted in groups of 2 for fixed weight initialization.


                                                       29
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                      10%
       Average Odds


                      8%

                      6%
                        100   120   140   160   180        200   220   240   260   280   300
                                                       Epoch
                      10%
       Average Odds


                      8%

                      6%
                        100   120   140   160   180        200   220   240   260   280   300
                                                       Epoch
                      10%
       Average Odds


                      8%

                      6%
                        100   120   140   160   180        200   220   240   260   280   300
                                                       Epoch
                      10%
       Average Odds


                      8%

                      6%
                        100   120   140   160   180        200   220   240   260   280   300
                                                       Epoch
                      10%
       Average Odds


                      8%

                      6%
                        100   120   140   160   180        200   220   240   260   280   300
                                                       Epoch

Figure 31: 10 randomly chosen raw training runs plotted in groups of 2 for fixed random reshuffling.


                                                      30
