Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


P OST- HOC C ONCEPT B OTTLENECK M ODELS
 Mert Yuksekgonul, Maggie Wang, James Zou
 Stanford University
 {merty,maggiewang,jamesz}@stanford.edu



                                             A BSTRACT
         Concept Bottleneck Models (CBMs) map the inputs onto a set of interpretable
         concepts (“the bottleneck”) and use the concepts to make predictions. A concept
         bottleneck enhances interpretability since it can be investigated to understand what
         concepts the model ”sees” in an input and which of these concepts are deemed
         important. However, CBMs are restrictive in practice as they require dense concept
         annotations in the training data to learn the bottleneck. Moreover, CBMs often do
         not match the accuracy of an unrestricted neural network, reducing the incentive
         to deploy them in practice. In this work, we address these limitations of CBMs
         by introducing Post-hoc Concept Bottleneck models (PCBMs). We show that we
         can turn any neural network into a PCBM without sacrificing model performance
         while still retaining the interpretability benefits. When concept annotations are
         not available on the training data, we show that PCBM can transfer concepts from
         other datasets or from natural language descriptions of concepts via multimodal
         models. A key benefit of PCBM is that it enables users to quickly debug and
         update the model to reduce spurious correlations and improve generalization to
         new distributions. PCBM allows for global model edits, which can be more
         efficient than previous works on local interventions that fix a specific prediction.
         Through a model-editing user study, we show that editing PCBMs via concept-
         level feedback can provide significant performance gains without using data from
         the target domain or model retraining. The code for our paper can be found in
         https://github.com/mertyg/post-hoc-cbm.


1    I NTRODUCTION
There is growing interest in developing deep learning models that are interpretable and yet still
flexible. One approach is concept analysis (Kim et al., 2018), where the goal is to understand if and
how high-level human-understandable features are “engineered” and used by neural networks. For
instance, we may like to probe a skin lesion classifier to understand if the Irregular Streaks concept is
encoded in the embedding space of the classifier and used later to make the prediction.
Our work builds on the earlier idea of concept bottlenecks, specifically Concept Bottleneck Models
(CBMs) (Koh et al., 2020). Concept bottlenecks are inspired by the idea that we can solve the task of
interest by applying a function to an underlying set of human-interpretable concepts. For instance,
when trying to classify whether a skin tumor is malignant, dermatologists look for different visual
patterns, e.g. existence of Blue-Whitish Veils can be a useful indicator of melanoma (Menzies et al.,
1996; Lucieri et al., 2020). CBMs train an entire model in an end-to-end fashion by first predicting
concepts (e.g. the presence of Blue-Whitish Veils), then using these concepts to predict the label.
By constraining the model to only rely on a set of concepts and an interpretable predictor, we can:
explain what information the model is using when classifying an input by looking at the weights/rules
in the interpretable predictor and understand when the model made a particular mistake due to
incorrect concept predictions.
While CBMs provide several of the benefits mentioned above, they have several key limitations:
1. Data: CBMs require access to concept labels during model training, i.e. training data should be
   annotated with which concepts are present. Even though there are a number of densely annotated
   datasets such as CUB (Wah et al., 2011), this is particularly restrictive for real-world use cases,
   where training datasets rarely have concept annotations.


                                                   1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


2. Performance: CBMs often do not match the accuracy of an unrestricted model, potentially
   reducing the incentive to use them in practice. When the concepts are not enough to solve the
   desired task, it is not clear how to improve the CBM and match the original model performance,
   while retaining the interpretability benefits.
3. Model editing: Koh et al. (2020) discuss intervening on the model to fix the prediction for a single
   input, yet it is not shown how to holistically edit and improve the model itself. Intervening only
   changes the model behavior for a single sample, but global editing changes the model behavior
   completely. When the model picks up an unintended cue, or learns spurious associations, using
   the latter approach and editing the concept bottleneck can improve the model performance more
   generally than an intervention tailored toward one specific input. Prior work on CBMs does not
   discuss how to globally edit a model’s behavior. Ideally, we would like to edit models with the
   help of human input in order to lower computational costs and remove assumptions about data
   access.
Our contributions. In this work, we propose the Post-hoc Concept Bottleneck Model (PCBM)
to address these important challenges. PCBMs can convert any pre-trained model into a concept
bottleneck model in a data-efficient manner, and enhance the model with the desired interpretability
benefits. When the training data does not have concept annotations, which is often the case, PCBM can
flexibly leverage concepts annotated in other datasets and natural language descriptions of concepts.
When applicable, PCBMs can remove the laborious concept annotation process by leveraging
multimodal models to obtain concept representations; this results in richer and more expressive
bottlenecks using natural language descriptions of a concept, making PCBMs more accessible in
various settings. Furthermore, when the available concepts are not sufficiently rich, we introduce
a residual modeling step to the PCBM to recover the original blackbox model’s performance. In
experiments across several tasks, we show that PCBMs can be used with comparable performance
compared to black-box models. While prior work (Koh et al., 2020) demonstrated the possibility of
performing local model interventions to change individual predictions, here we propose interventions
for changing global model behavior. Through user studies, we show that PCBM enables efficient
global model edits without retraining or access to data from the target domain and that users
can improve PCBM performance by using concept-level feedback to drive editing decisions.


2      P OST- HOC C ONCEPT B OTTLENECK M ODELS

           with                with                                 Post-hoc CBM (PCBM)
    Concept Activation   or Multimodal
      Vectors (CAVs)         Models         Backbone    Embeddings        Projection onto the   Predictions
                                                                          Concept Subspace
                             “stripes”
                              “horse”
                                                                          Stripes: 0.8
                              “mane”
                                                                          Horse: 1.2            Interpretable      PCBM
                                                                          Hands: -0.5             Predictor      prediction
                                                                          Black: 0.7             (e.g. Sparse
                                                                          Mane: 0.9
                                                                                                Linear Layer)    p(Zebra): 0.8
                               Text                                       ..
                             Encoder

                                                                                                                PCBM-h
                                                                          Residual                              prediction
                                                                           Fitting
                                                                                                                p(Zebra): 0.95


                  ...
                                                                Hybrid Post-hoc CBM (PCBM-h)
    Learning the Concept Bank            Fitting the Concept Bottleneck


Figure 1: Post-hoc Concept Bottleneck Models. First, we learn the vectors in our concept bank.
With the CAV approach, for each concept, e.g. stripes, we train a linear SVM to distinguish the
embeddings of examples that contain the concept and use the vector normal to the boundary (CAV).
When annotations are hard to obtain, we can leverage multimodal models and use the text encoder to
map each concept to a vector. Next, we project the embeddings produced by the backbone onto the
concept subspace defined by the set of vectors. We then train an interpretable predictor to classify the
examples from their projections. When the concept library is incomplete, we can construct a PCBM-h
by sequentially introducing a residual predictor that maps the embeddings to the target space.


                                                               2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


There are two main steps to building a PCBM. We let f : X → Rd be any pretrained backbone model,
where d is the size of the corresponding embedding space and X is the input space. For instance, f
can be the image encoder of CLIP (Radford et al., 2021) or the model layers up to the penultimate
layer of a ResNet (He et al., 2016). An overview of PCBMs can be found in 1, and we describe the
steps in detail below.
Learning the Concept Subspace (C): To learn concept representations, we make use of CAVs
(Concept Activation Vectors) (Kim et al., 2018). In particular, we first define a concept library
I = {i1 , i2 , ..., iNc }, where Nc denotes the number of concepts. The concepts in the library can be
selected by a domain expert or learned automatically from the data (Ghorbani et al., 2019; Yeh et al.,
2020). For each concept i, we collect embeddings for the positive examples, denoted by the set Pi =
{f (xp1 ), ..., f (xpNp )}, that exhibit the concept, and negative examples Ni = {f (xn1 ), ..., f (xpNn )}
that do not contain the concept. In practice, densely annotated datasets (Caesar et al., 2018; Fong &
Vedaldi, 2018) are used to collect points that are positive/negative for the concept. Importantly, unlike
CBMs, these samples can be different from the data used to train the backbone model. Following
(Kim et al., 2018), we train a linear SVM using Pi and Ni to learn the corresponding CAV, that is,
the vector normal to the linear classification boundary. We denote the CAV for concept i as ci . Let
C ∈ RNc ×d denote the matrix of concept vectors, where each row ci represents the corresponding
concept i. Given an input, we project the embedding of the input onto the subspace spanned by
concept vectors (the concept subspace). Particularly, we let fC (x) = projC f (x) ∈ RNc , where the
ith entry is fC (x) = ⟨f||c  (x),ci ⟩
                (i)
                                   2
                               i ||2
                                      ∈ R. It is important to observe that we do not need to annotate the
training data with concepts. Namely, the dataset used to learn concepts can be different from the
original training data. In several of our experiments, we use held-out datasets to learn the concept
subspace.
Leveraging multimodal models to learn concepts: Annotating images with concepts is a laborious
process. In practice, this can be an important roadblock before using CBMs. To address this, here
we show that we can also leverage natural language concept descriptions and multimodal models
to implement concept bottlenecks. This approach alleviates the need of collecting labeled data to
construct the concept subspace. Multimodal models such as CLIP (Radford et al., 2021) have a text
encoder ftext along with an image encoder, which maps a description to the shared embedding space.
We leverage the text encoder to augment the process of learning concept vectors. For instance, we
can have ctext
           stripes = ftext (“stripes”) where the concept vector for stripes is obtained by mapping the
prompt using the text encoder. For each concept description, we can collect the text embeddings and
construct our multimodal concept bank C text as our subspace.
For a given classification task, we can use ConceptNet (Speer et al., 2017) to obtain concepts that
are relevant to these classes. ConceptNet is an open knowledge graph, where we can find concepts
that have particular relations to a query concept. For instance, we can find relations of the form “A
Cat has {whiskers, four legs, sharp claws, ..}”. Similarly, we can find ”parts” of a given class (e.g.
”bumper”, ”roof” for ”truck”), or the superclass of a given class (e.g. ”animal”, ”canine” for ”dog”).
We restrict ourselves to five sets of relations for each class: the hasA, isA, partOf, HasProperty,
MadeOf relations in ConceptNet. We collect all concepts that have these relations with classes in
each classification task to build the concept subspace.
Learning the Interpretable Predictor: Next, we define an interpretable predictor that maps the
concept subspace to the model prediction. Concretely, let g : RNc → Y be an interpretable predictor,
such as a sparse linear model or a decision tree, where Y = {1, 2, ..., K} denotes the label space.
An interpretable predictor is desirable because it provides insight into which concepts the model is
relying on when making a decision. If a domain expert observes a counter-intuitive phenomenon in
the predictor, they can edit the predictor to improve the model. To learn the PCBM, we solve the
following problem:
                                                                λ
                             min E [L(g(fC (x)), y)] +              Ω(g)                        (1)
                               g (x,y)∼D                      Nc K
where fC = projC f (x) is the projection onto the concept subspace, L(ŷ, y) is a loss function such as
cross-entropy loss, Ω(g) is a complexity measure to regularize the model, and λ is the regularization
strength. Note that the concept subspace is fixed during PCBM training. In this work, we use
sparse linear models to learn the interpretable predictor, where g(fC (x)) = wT fC (x) + b. We
apply the softmax function to g if the problem is a classification problem. Similarly, we define


                                                    3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Ω(g) = α||w||1 + (1 − α)||w||22 to be the elastic-net penalty parameterized by α, then normalize by
the number of classes and concepts.
The expressiveness of the concept subspace is crucial to PCBM performance. However, even when
we have a rich concept subspace, concepts may not be enough to solve a task of interest. When the
performance of the PCBM does not match the performance of the original model, users have less
incentive to use interpretable models like concept bottlenecks. Next, we aim to address this limitation.
Recovering the original model performance with residual modeling: What happens when the
concept bank is not sufficiently expressive, and PCBM performs worse than the original model? For
instance, there may be skin lesion descriptors that are not available in the concept library. Ideally,
we would like to preserve the original model’s accuracy while retaining the interpretability benefits.
Drawing inspiration from the semiparametric model literature on fitting residuals (Härdle et al.,
2004), we introduce Hybrid Post-hoc CBMs (PCBM-h). After fixing the concept bottleneck and
the interpretable predictor, we re-introduce the embeddings to ‘fit the residuals’. In particular, we
solve the following:
                             min E(x,y)∼D [L(g(fC (x)) + r(f (x)), y)]                             (2)
                               r

where r : Rd → Y is the residual predictor. Note that in Equation 2, while training the residual
predictor, the trained concept bottleneck (the concept subspace (fC ) and the interpretable predictor(g))
is kept fixed, i.e. fitting PCBM-hs is a sequential procedure. We hypothesize that the residual predictor
will compensate for what is missing from the concept bank and recover the original model’s accuracy.
We implement the residual predictor as a linear model, i.e. r(f (x)) = wrT f (x) + br . Given a trained
PCBM-h, if we would like to observe model performance in the absence of the residual predictor, we
can simply drop r (in other words, concept contributions do not depend on the residual step).


3       E XPERIMENTS

We evaluate the PCBM and PCBM-h in challenging image classification and medical settings,
demonstrating several use cases for PCBMs. We further address practical concerns and show that
PCBMs can be used without a loss in the original model performance. We used the following datasets
to systematically evaluate the PCBM and PCBM-h:
CIFAR10, CIFAR100 (Krizhevsky et al., 2009) We use CLIP-ResNet50 (Radford et al., 2021) as
the backbone model. For the concept bottleneck, we use 170 concepts introduced in (Abid et al.,
2022) which are extracted from the BRODEN visual concepts dataset (Fong & Vedaldi, 2018). These
include objects (e.g. dog), settings, (e.g. snow) textures (e.g. stripes), and image qualities (e.g.
blurriness). The full list of concepts can be found in (Abid et al., 2022).
COCO-Stuff (Caesar et al., 2018) is a dataset derived from MS-COCO (Lin et al., 2014), consisting
of scenes with various object annotations. Previous work (Singh et al., 2020) has shown that there are
severe co-occurrence biases in this dataset. For instance, images from the wine glass often also have
a dining table in the image. Singh et al. (2020) identifies these 20 classes with heavy co-occurrence
biases and we train PCBMs to recognize these 20 objects, where we minimize the binary cross-entropy
loss individually for each class. In this scenario, we again use CLIP-ResNet50 (Radford et al., 2021)
as the backbone and BRODEN visual concepts as the set of concepts.
CUB (Wah et al., 2011) In the 200-way bird identification task, we use a ResNet18 (He et al., 2016)
trained on the CUB dataset1 . We use the same training/validation splits and 112 concepts as in (Koh
et al., 2020). These concepts include wing shape, back pattern, and eye color.
HAM10000 (Tschandl et al., 2018) is a dataset of dermoscopic images, which contain skin lesions
from a representative set of diagnostic categories. The task is detecting whether a skin lesion is
benign or malignant. We use the Inception (Szegedy et al., 2015) model trained on this dataset,
which is available from (Daneshjou et al., 2021). Following the setting in (Lucieri et al., 2020), we
collect concepts from the Derm7pt (Kawahara et al., 2018) dataset. The 8 concepts obtained from this
dataset include Blue Whitish Veil, Pigmented Networks, Regression Structures, which are reportedly
associated with the malignancy of a lesion.

    1
        The CUB pretrained model is obtained from https://github.com/osmr/imgclsmob


                                                   4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


SIIM-ISIC (Rotemberg et al., 2021) To test a real-world transfer learning use case, we evaluate the
model trained on HAM10000 on a subset of the SIIM-ISIC Melanoma Classification dataset. We use
the same concepts described in the HAM10000 dataset.
We use linear probing on top of the backbones for CIFAR, COCO, and ISIC to obtain the baseline
model performance. For CUB and HAM10000, we use the out-of-the-box models trained on the
respective datasets without any additional training. We emphasize that in all of our experiments
except CUB, we learn concepts using a held-out dataset. Namely, while the original CBMs need
to have concept annotations for training images, we remove this limitation by post-hoc learning of
concepts with any dataset. To learn the concept subspace, we use 50 pairs of images for each concept
to train a Linear SVM. We refer the reader to the Appendix for further details on datasets and training.
PCBMs achieve comparable performance to the original model: In Table 1, we report results
over these five datasets. PCBM achieves comparable performance to the original model in all datasets
except CIFAR100, and PCBM-h matches the performance in all scenarios. Strikingly, PCBMs match
the performance of the original model in HAM10000 and ISIC, with as few as 8 human-interpretable
concepts. In CIFAR100, we hypothesize that the concept bank available is not sufficient to classify
finer-grained classes, and hence there is a performance gap between the PCBM and the original
model. When the concept bank is not sufficient to solve the task, PCBM-h can be introduced to
recover the original model performance while retaining the benefits of PCBM (see next sections).
Comparing to CBM: A comparison to CBM was not possible in most datasets, as CBMs cannot be
trained due to the lack of dense annotations. To compare the data efficiency of both methods, we
report a comparison of CBM to PCBM when trained on CUB in Appendix C, finding that CBM can
only reach a similar performance to PCBM with 20x more annotations. Analyzing the residual
predictor: To understand whether PCBM-h overrides PCBM predictions, in Appendix B, we look
at the consistency between PCBM and PCBM-h predictions. We show that the residual component in
PCBM-h intervenes only when the prediction is wrong, and fixes mistakes. When PCBM is confident,
PCBM-h does not modify the prediction or significantly increase the confidence. In general, the
residual component may dominate when the bottleneck is insufficient and future work can aim to
explicitly limit the residual component, e.g. PIE (Wang et al., 2021) regularizer.

Table 1: PCBMs achieve comparable performance to the original model. We report performance
over different scenarios for the original model and PCBMs with concept datasets. In CIFAR100,
PCBM performs poorly since the concept bank is not expressive enough to solve a finer-grained task;
however, PCBM-h recovers the original model’s accuracy. Strikingly, PCBMs match the performance
of the original model in HAM10000 and ISIC, with as few as 8 human-interpretable concepts.
Original CBMs cannot be trained on CIFAR/HAM10000/ISIC/COCO-Stuff, as they do not have
concept labels in the training dataset. The mean and standard errors are reported over 10 random
seeds. We report AUROC for HAM10000 and ISIC, mAP for COCO-Stuff, and accuracy for CIFAR
and CUB.

                   CIFAR10         CIFAR100       COCO-Stuff          CUB         HAM10000            ISIC
 Original Model       0.888           0.701           0.770           0.612           0.963           0.821
 PCBM             0.777 ± 0.003   0.520 ± 0.005   0.741 ± 0.002   0.588 ± 0.008   0.947 ± 0.001   0.736 ± 0.012
 PCBM-h           0.871 ± 0.001   0.680 ± 0.001    0.768 ± 0.01   0.610 ± 0.010   0.962 ± 0.002   0.801 ± 0.056


PCBM using CLIP concepts:
Here, we show that when la- Table 2: Concept Bottlenecks with CLIP concepts. When a
beled examples to learn concepts concept bank is not available or is insufficient, we can use natural
are not available, we can use language descriptions of concepts with CLIP to implement CBMs.
multimodal representations such
as CLIP to generate concepts                                    CIFAR10      CIFAR100     COCO-Stuff
without the laborious annotation        Original Model (CLIP)     0.888         0.701         0.770
                                      PCBM & labeled concepts 0.777 ± 0.003 0.520 ± 0.005 0.741 ± 0.002
cost. Using ConceptNet, we ob-         PCBM & CLIP concepts   0.833 ± 0.003 0.600 ± 0.003 0.755 ± 0.001
tain concept descriptions for CI- PCBM-h & CLIP concepts 0.874 ± 0.001 0.691 ± 0.006 0.769 ± 0.001
FAR10, CIFAR100, and COCO-
Stuff tasks (206, 527, and 822
concepts, respectively), using the relations described in Section 2. The concept subspace is obtained
by using text embeddings for the concept descriptions generated by the ResNet50 variant of CLIP.
In Table 2, we give an overview of the results. We observe that with a more expressive multimodal


                                                       5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


bottleneck, we can almost recover the original model accuracy in CIFAR10, and we reduce the
performance gap in CIFAR100. CLIP contains extensive knowledge of natural images, and thus
captures natural image concepts (e.g. red, thorns). However, CLIP is less reliable at representing
more granular or domain-specific concepts (e.g. blue whitish veils) and hence this methodology is less
applicable to more domain-specific applications. While there is a recent trend in training multimodal
models for biomedical applications (Zhang et al., 2020; EleutherAI), these models are trained with
smaller datasets and are less competitive. We hope that as these models improve, PCBMs will make
it easier to deploy concept bottlenecks in more specialized domains.
Explanations in PCBMs: In Figure 2, we provide sample concept weights in the corresponding
PCBMs. For instance, in HAM10000, PCBMs use Blue Whitish Veils, Atypical Pigment Networks,
and Irregular Streaks to identify malignant lesions, whereas Typical Pigment Networks, Regular
Streaks, and Regular Dots and Globules are used to identify benign lesions. These associations
are consistent with medical knowledge (Menzies et al., 1996; Lucieri et al., 2020). We observe
similar cases in CIFAR-10 and CIFAR-100, where the class Rose is associated with the concepts
Flower, Thorns and Red. In Appendix Section F, we further analyze the global explanations of
COCO-Stuff and show that PCBM reveals co-occurrence biases in the training data. Note that the
concept weights for PCBM-h are exactly the same as for PCBM since the residual model is fit after
the concept weights are fixed. However, given the addition of the residual component, the net effect
of concepts may be different. We also note that the concept weights discussed may not reflect the
causal effect. Estimating the causal effect of a concept requires careful treatment (Goyal et al., 2019),
e.g. accounting for the interactions between concepts, and we leave this to future work.

                                                          HAM10000                                          CIFAR100
                                 Class: Malignant


                                                                                        Class: Wolf
                                                    Blue Whitish Veils          0.459                 Canine               4.972
        Interpretable
          Predictor                                 Atypical Pigment Nets       0.158                 Fur                  3.860
           (Sparse
        Linear Layer)                               Irregular Streaks           0.131                 Long Ears            3.641
                                 Class: Benign


                                                    Regular Streaks             0.323                 Flower               3.249
                                                                                        Class: Rose


                                                    Regular Dots and
                                                                                0.151                 Thorns               2.214
 Analyzing Concept Importances                      Globules

                                                    Typical Pigment Nets        0.091                 Red                  2.109

                                                               PCBM                                   PCBM with CLIP Concepts

Figure 2: Explaining Post-hoc CBMs. We report the top 3 largest weights in the linear layer for the
shown classes. For instance, Blue Whitish Veils, Atypical Pigment Networks, and Irregular Streaks
have large weights for classifying whether a skin lesion is malignant. These are consistent with
dermatologists’ findings (Menzies et al., 1996).



4    M ODEL EDITING WITH P OST- HOC C ONCEPT B OTTLENECKS

When we observe a counter-intuitive phenomenon or a spurious correlation in the concept bottleneck,
can we make the model perform better by simple edit operations? In this section, we show that
PCBMs come with the benefit of easy and global concept-level model feedback. Koh et al. (2020)
demonstrate the ability of CBMs to incorporate local interventions. Namely, if a user identifies a
misprediction in the concept bottleneck, they can intervene on the concept prediction, and change the
prediction for the particular instance, we call this a local intervention or edit. Here, we are interested
in editing models to perform ‘global’ edits. Namely, with simple concept-level feedback, we would
like to edit a PCBM and change the entire model behavior. For instance, in our experiments, we
investigate the use case of adapting a PCBM to a new distribution. Unlike most existing model
editing approaches, we do not need any data from either the training or target domains to perform
the model edit, which can be a significant advantage in practice when data is inaccessible. Given a
trained PCBM, we edit our concept bottleneck by manipulating the concept weights. For simplicity,
in the experiments below we only focus on positive weights in the linear model.


                                                                            6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


4.1    C ONTROLLED EXPERIMENT: EDITING PCBM WHEN THE SPURIOUS CONCEPT IS KNOWN

For our editing experiments, we use the Metashift (Liang & Zou, 2022) dataset to simulate distribution
shifts. We use 10 different scenarios where there is a distribution shift for a particular class between
the training and test datasets. For instance, during training, we only use table images that also contain
a dog in the image and test the model with table images where there is not a dog in the image. We
denote the training domain as table(dog). We give more details and the results of all domains in the
Appendix. We use an ImageNet pretrained ResNet50 variant as a backbone and the visual concept
bank described in the Experiments section. Given a PCBM, we evaluate three editing strategies:
1. Prune: We set the weight of a particular concept on a particular class prediction to 0, i.e. for a
   concept indexed by i, we let w̃i = 0.
2. Prune+Normalize: After applying pruning, we rescale the concept weights. Let P denote the
   indices of positive weights that are pruned, P̃ denote the indices of weights that remain, and
   wP , wP̃ be corresponding weight vectors for the particular class. We rescale each weight to match
   the original norm of the vector by letting ∀i ∈ P̃ , w̃i = wi (1+ ||wP ||1
                                                                     ||wP̃ ||1 ), leading to ||w̃||1 = ||w||1 .
   The normalization step alleviates the imbalance between class weights upon pruning concepts with
   large weights for a particular class.
3. Fine-tune (Oracle): We compare our simple editing strategies to fine-tuning on the test domain,
   which can be considered an oracle. Particularly, we fine-tune the PCBM using samples from the
   test domain and then test the fine-tuned model with a set of held-out samples.
In the context of Metashift experiments, we simply edit the concept spuriously correlated with a
particular class. Concretely, for the domain table(dog), we prune the weight of the dog concept for
the class table. In Table 3, we report the result of our editing experiments over 10 scenarios. We
observe that for PCBMs, the Prune+Normalize strategy can recover almost half of the accuracy gains
achieved by fine-tuning on the original test domain. Further, we observe that PCBM-h obtains lower
accuracy gains with model editing. In PCBM, we can remove the concept from the model, but in
PCBM-h, there may still be leftover information about the spurious concept in the residual part of the
model. This is in line with our expectations, i.e. PCBM-h is a ‘less’ interpretable but more powerful
variant of PCBM. While it still offers partial editing improvements that would not be possible with
the vanilla model, it does not bring as much improvement as the PCBM.

Table 3: Model edits with Post-Hoc CBMs. We report results over 10 distribution shift experiments
generated using Metashift. Accuracy and edit gains are averaged over 10 scenarios and are reported
as mean ± standard error. We observe that very simple editing strategies in the concept subspace
provide almost 50% of the gains made by fine-tuning on the test domain.

                             Unedited             Prune         Prune + Normalize       Fine-tune (Oracle)
  PCBM Accuracy           0.656 ± 0.025      0.686 ± 0.026         0.750 ± 0.019          0.859 ± 0.028
  PCBM Edit Gain                —                0.029                 0.093                  0.202
  PCBM-h Accuracy         0.657 ± 0.039      0.672 ± 0.033         0.713 ± 0.027          0.861 ± 0.032
  PCBM-h Edit Gain              —                0.017                 0.058                  0.190

Even though our edit strategy is extremely simple, we can recover almost half of the gains made by
fine-tuning the model. It is particularly easy to use since it can be applied without fine-tuning or
using any knowledge or data from the target domain. However, this methodology requires knowledge
of the spurious concept in the training domain. This may not be realistic in practice, and in the next
section, we turn to human users for guidance.

4.2    U SER STUDY: EDITING PCBM WITH HUMAN GUIDANCE

One of the advantages of pruning is that it is naturally amenable to bringing humans into the loop.
Rather than attempting to automate the edits, we can rely on a human to pick concepts that make
logical sense to prune. We show that users make fast and insightful pruning decisions that improve
model performance on test data when there is a distribution shift. Notably, these decisions can be
made even when the user knows little about the model architecture and has no knowledge of the true


                                                      7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


underlying spurious correlation in the training data. We conduct a user study where we explore the
benefits of human-guided pruning on PCBM and PCBM-h performance.
                                                 Study Design:
                                                 We construct 9 MetaShift scenarios with a distribution shift for one
Remove concepts from the model that you think
may hinder generalization for classifying
Keyboard.
                                                 of the classes between the training and testing datasets, which we
The model was trained to distinguish Beach, Bus,
                                                 refer to as the ”shifted class”. For instance, all of the training images
Airplane, Keyboard and Bird
                                                 for the class Keyboard also contain a Cat in the image, whereas test
                                                 images do not have a cat in the image. The list of the 9 scenarios can
                                                 be found in the Appendix. For each scenario, we train a PCBM and
                                                 a PCBM-h with CLIP concepts on the training dataset and task the
                                                 users with making edits to the trained models by selecting concepts
                                                 to prune. We use CLIP’s ResNet50 variant as our backbone, and
                                                 leverage ConceptNet to construct the concept subspace.
                                Figure 3 shows the concept-selection interface. We refer to the
                                Appendix for the full set of instructions given to the user. The
                                display consists of the classification task the model was trained on
                                and the concepts with the ten most positive weights for the shifted
                                class. The user selects a subset of the concepts to prune. Neither the
                                original model accuracy nor the accuracy after pruning is revealed
                                to the user until all scenarios are completed. The target audience
Figure 3: User Study In- for the study was machine learning practitioners and researchers; 30
terface. We train PCBMs volunteers participated for a total of 30 × 9 = 270 experiments. The
on MetaShift scenarios, each IRB has determined that this does not require review.
with a distribution shift be-
tween the training and test Human-guided editing is fast and improves model accuracy:
datasets. The user selects con- On average, users prune 3.65 ± 0.39 concepts in 34.3 ± 6.4s per
cepts to prune from the model. scenario. We evaluate the effectiveness of user pruning by comparing
                                the model accuracy after user pruning to the accuracy of the unedited
model on a held-out dataset from the test domain. All 30/30 users improve the model accuracy
when averaged over scenarios. 8/30 users improve model accuracy in all scenarios and 26/30 users
improve model accuracy in at least 6 scenarios. We compare human-guided editing to three baselines:
 1. Random Pruning: We uniformly select without replacement a subset of the top ten concepts to
    prune, matching the number of concepts pruned by the user for a fair comparison.
 2. Greedy Pruning (Oracle): We greedily select one of the top 10 concepts that, when pruned,
    improves the model accuracy the most. We match the number of concepts pruned by the user.
 3. Fine-tune (Oracle): The model is fine-tuned on samples from the test domain.
Table 4: Human-guided editing improves model accuracy for PCBMs with CLIP concepts
(N=30). We show the test accuracy on the shifted class averaged across 9 MetaShift scenarios, before
and after the model is edited. Accuracies and edit gains are reported as mean ± standard error. (For
the pruning strategies, we first compute the mean test accuracy across users within each scenario,
then calculate the overall mean and standard error from the within-scenario means). We see that
user pruning surpasses random pruning and can achieve nearly 50% of the accuracy gains made by
fine-tuning and over 80% of the accuracy gains made by greedy pruning.

                          Unedited       Random Prune       User Prune      Greedy Prune (Oracle)     Fine-tune (Oracle)
 PCBM Accuracy         0.620 ± 0.035     0.604 ± 0.039    0.719 ± 0.042         0.740 ± 0.041           0.824 ± 0.049
 PCBM Edit Gain              —               -0.016           0.099                 0.120                   0.204
 PCBM-h Accuracy       0.642 ± 0.034     0.622 ± 0.037    0.736 ± 0.034         0.766 ± 0.034           0.856 ± 0.018
 PCBM-h Edit Gain            —               -0.020           0.094                 0.124                   0.224


We consider greedy pruning and retraining to be oracles since they require ”leaked” knowledge of the
test domain. Table 4 reports the model performance improvements for PCBM and PCBM-h, averaged
over all 270 experiments in the user study. Improvements within each separate scenario can be found
in the Appendix. We note that even with the residual component in PCBM-h, we can still improve
model performance by editing the concept bottleneck. We observe that user pruning achieves marked
improvement in model performance compared to the unedited model, attaining around 50% of the
accuracy gains from fine-tuning and 80% of the gains from greedy pruning.


                                                            8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


5    R ELATED W ORKS

Concepts Using human concepts to interpret model behavior has been drawing increasing inter-
est (Kim et al., 2018; Bau et al., 2017; 2020). Related work focuses on understanding if neural
networks encode and use concepts (Lucieri et al., 2020; Kim et al., 2018; McGrath et al., 2021), or
generate counterfactual explanations to understand model behavior (Ghandeharioun et al., 2021; Abid
et al., 2022; Akula et al., 2020). Recent works evaluated the causal validity of explanations (Feder
et al., 2021; Elazar et al., 2021; Goyal et al., 2019), e.g. to eliminate potential confounding effects.
There is further increasing interest in automatically discovering the concepts that are used by a
model (Yeh et al., 2020; Ghorbani et al., 2019; Lang et al., 2021). Concept-based Models: Concept
bottleneck models (CBMs) (Koh et al., 2020) extend the earlier idea (Lampert et al., 2009; Kumar
et al., 2009) of first predicting the concepts, then using concepts to predict the target. CBMs bring
about interpretability benefits but require training the model using concept labels for the entire training
dataset, which is a key limitation. CBMs have not been analyzed in terms of model edits. Recent work
reveals that end-to-end learned CBMs encode information beyond the desired concept (Mahinpei
et al., 2021; Margeloiu et al., 2021). Concept Whitening (Chen et al., 2020) aims to align each concept
with an individual dimension in a layer. While a subset of dimensions is aligned, this approach lacks
a bottleneck since there are dimensions that are potentially not aligned with a concept (comparable
to PCBM-h). Barnett et al. (2021) learns prototypes and uses them as concepts, where the distance
to prototypes determines the model prediction. PCBM-h is inspired by semiparametric models on
fitting residuals (Härdle et al., 2004). PIE (Wang et al., 2021) has a similar approach, where they
combine individual features with more complicated interaction terms for tabular data.
Model Editing Model editing aims to achieve the removal or modification of information in a given
neural network. Several models investigated editing factual knowledge in language models: Zhu
et al. (2020) use variants of fine-tuning to achieve this objective while retaining performance on
unmodified factual knowledge and Mitchell et al. (2021); De Cao et al. (2021); Hase et al. (2021)
update the model by training a separate network to modify model parameters to achieve the desired
edit. Similarly, Sotoudeh & Thakur (2021) proposes ”repairing” models by finding minimal parameter
updates that satisfy a given specification. One thread of work focuses on intervening on the latent
space of neural networks to alter the generated output towards the desired state, e.g. removal
of artifacts or manipulation of object positions (Sinitsin et al., 2020; Bau et al., 2020; Santurkar
et al., 2021). For instance, Bau et al. (2020) edits generative models. Santurkar et al. (2021) edits
classifiers by modifying ‘rules’, such as making a model perceive the concept of a ‘snowy road‘
as the concept of a ‘road’, and they achieve this by modifying minimal updates to specific feature
extractors. FIND (Lertvittayakumjorn et al., 2020) prunes individual neurons chosen by users and
later fine-tunes the model. Right for the Right Concepts (Stammer et al., 2021) similarly fine-tune
a neuro-symbolic model with user-provided feedback maps. Bontempelli et al. (2021) give an
overview of concept-based models and a discussion on debugging strategies while concurrent work
ProtoPDebug (Bontempelli et al., 2022) proposes an efficient debugging strategy.


6    L IMITATIONS AND C ONCLUSION

In this work, we presented Post-hoc CBMs as a way of converting any model into a CBM, retaining
the original model performance without losing the interpretability benefits. We leveraged multimodal
models as an interface to use concepts, without the laborious concept annotation steps. Further, in
addition to the local intervention benefits of CBM, we demonstrated that PCBMs can be leveraged to
perform global model interventions. Many benefits of CBMs depend on the quality of the concept
library. The concept set should be expressive enough to solve the task of interest. Users should be
careful about the concept dataset used to learn concepts, which can reflect various biases. While there
are several such real-world tasks, it is an open question if human-constructed concept bottlenecks
can solve larger-scale tasks(e.g. ImageNet level). Hence, finding concept subspaces for models in an
unsupervised fashion is an active area of research that will help with the usability and expressivity of
concept bottlenecks. Multimodal models provide an effective interface for concept-level reasoning,
yet it is unclear what is the optimal way to have humans in the loop. Here, we presented a simple
way of taking human input via concept pruning; how to incorporate richer feedback is an interesting
direction for future work.


                                                    9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We would like to thank Duygu Yilmaz, Adarsh Jeewajee, Carlos Guestrin, Edward Chen, Kyle
Swanson, Omer Faruk Akgun, and Roxana Daneshjou for their support and comments on the
manuscript, and all members of the Zou Lab and Guestrin Lab for helpful discussions. We thank the
anonymous reviewers for their suggestions to improve this manuscript. J.Z. is supported by NSF
CAREER 1942926 and the Chan-Zuckerberg Biohub.

E THICAL S TATEMENT

In our user study, we did not collect any user information. We applied to the IRB within our institution
and “IRB has determined that this research does not involve human subjects as defined in 45 CFR
46.102(f) and therefore does not require review by the IRB”.

R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT

The code to reproduce all experiments will be released at https://github.com/mertyg/
post-hoc-cbm. All of the backbones we used to construct concept bottlenecks are released public
checkpoints, and we stated all of these in the manuscript.

R EFERENCES
Abubakar Abid, Mert Yuksekgonul, and James Zou. Meaningfully debugging model mistakes using
  conceptual counterfactual explanations. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp.
  66–88. PMLR, 2022.

Arjun Akula, Shuai Wang, and Song-Chun Zhu. Cocox: Generating conceptual and counterfactual
  explanations via fault-lines. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence,
  2020.

Alina Jade Barnett, Fides Regina Schwartz, Chaofan Tao, Chaofan Chen, Yinhao Ren, Joseph Y Lo,
  and Cynthia Rudin. A case-based interpretable deep learning model for classification of mass
  lesions in digital mammography. Nature Machine Intelligence, 3(12):1061–1070, 2021.

David Bau, Bolei Zhou, Aditya Khosla, Aude Oliva, and Antonio Torralba. Network dissection:
  Quantifying interpretability of deep visual representations. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference
  on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 6541–6549, 2017.

David Bau, Steven Liu, Tongzhou Wang, Jun-Yan Zhu, and Antonio Torralba. Rewriting a deep
  generative model. In European Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 351–369. Springer, 2020.

Andrea Bontempelli, Fausto Giunchiglia, Andrea Passerini, and Stefano Teso. Toward a unified
  framework for debugging gray-box models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2109.11160, 2021.

Andrea Bontempelli, Stefano Teso, Fausto Giunchiglia, and Andrea Passerini. Concept-level debug-
  ging of part-prototype networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.15769, 2022.

Holger Caesar, Jasper Uijlings, and Vittorio Ferrari. Coco-stuff: Thing and stuff classes in context. In
  Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 1209–1218,
  2018.

Zhi Chen, Yijie Bei, and Cynthia Rudin. Concept whitening for interpretable image recognition.
  Nature Machine Intelligence, 2(12):772–782, 2020.

Roxana Daneshjou, Kailas Vodrahalli, Weixin Liang, Roberto A Novoa, Melissa Jenkins, Veronica
  Rotemberg, Justin Ko, Susan M Swetter, Elizabeth E Bailey, Olivier Gevaert, et al. Disparities
  in dermatology ai: Assessments using diverse clinical images. arXiv preprint arXiv:2111.08006,
  2021.


                                                  10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Nicola De Cao, Wilker Aziz, and Ivan Titov. Editing factual knowledge in language models. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2104.08164, 2021.
Yanai Elazar, Shauli Ravfogel, Alon Jacovi, and Yoav Goldberg. Amnesic probing: Behavioral
  explanation with amnesic counterfactuals. Transactions of the Association for Computational
  Linguistics, 9:160–175, 2021.
EleutherAI. CLASP: Contrastive Language Aminoacid Sequence Pretraining, 2021. URL https:
  //github.com/MicPie/clasp.
Amir Feder, Nadav Oved, Uri Shalit, and Roi Reichart. Causalm: Causal model explanation through
 counterfactual language models. Computational Linguistics, 47(2):333–386, 2021.
Ruth Fong and Andrea Vedaldi. Net2vec: Quantifying and explaining how concepts are encoded by
  filters in deep neural networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and
  pattern recognition, pp. 8730–8738, 2018.
Asma Ghandeharioun, Been Kim, Chun-Liang Li, Brendan Jou, Brian Eoff, and Rosalind W Pi-
  card. Dissect: Disentangled simultaneous explanations via concept traversals. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2105.15164, 2021.
Amirata Ghorbani, James Wexler, James Y Zou, and Been Kim. Towards automatic concept-based
 explanations. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 32, 2019.
Yash Goyal, Amir Feder, Uri Shalit, and Been Kim. Explaining classifiers with causal concept effect
  (cace). arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.07165, 2019.
Wolfgang Härdle, Marlene Müller, Stefan Sperlich, and Axel Werwatz. Nonparametric and semi-
 parametric models, volume 1. Springer, 2004.
Peter Hase, Mona Diab, Asli Celikyilmaz, Xian Li, Zornitsa Kozareva, Veselin Stoyanov, Mohit
  Bansal, and Srinivasan Iyer. Do language models have beliefs? methods for detecting, updating,
  and visualizing model beliefs. arXiv preprint arXiv:2111.13654, 2021.
Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image
  recognition. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition,
  pp. 770–778, 2016.
Jeremy Kawahara, Sara Daneshvar, Giuseppe Argenziano, and Ghassan Hamarneh. Seven-point
  checklist and skin lesion classification using multitask multimodal neural nets. IEEE journal of
  biomedical and health informatics, 23(2):538–546, 2018.
Been Kim, Martin Wattenberg, Justin Gilmer, Carrie Cai, James Wexler, Fernanda Viegas, et al.
  Interpretability beyond feature attribution: Quantitative testing with concept activation vectors
  (tcav). In International conference on machine learning, pp. 2668–2677. PMLR, 2018.
Pang Wei Koh, Thao Nguyen, Yew Siang Tang, Stephen Mussmann, Emma Pierson, Been Kim, and
  Percy Liang. Concept bottleneck models. In International Conference on Machirane Learning, pp.
  5338–5348. PMLR, 2020.
Alex Krizhevsky, Geoffrey Hinton, et al. Learning multiple layers of features from tiny images. 2009.
Neeraj Kumar, Alexander C Berg, Peter N Belhumeur, and Shree K Nayar. Attribute and simile
  classifiers for face verification. In 2009 IEEE 12th international conference on computer vision,
  pp. 365–372. IEEE, 2009.
Christoph H Lampert, Hannes Nickisch, and Stefan Harmeling. Learning to detect unseen object
  classes by between-class attribute transfer. In 2009 IEEE conference on computer vision and
  pattern recognition, pp. 951–958. IEEE, 2009.
Oran Lang, Yossi Gandelsman, Michal Yarom, Yoav Wald, Gal Elidan, Avinatan Hassidim, William T
  Freeman, Phillip Isola, Amir Globerson, Michal Irani, et al. Explaining in style: Training a gan to
  explain a classifier in stylespace. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on
  Computer Vision, pp. 693–702, 2021.


                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Piyawat Lertvittayakumjorn, Lucia Specia, and Francesca Toni. Find: Human-in-the-loop debugging
  deep text classifiers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.04987, 2020.
Weixin Liang and James Zou. Metashift: A dataset of datasets for evaluating contextual distribution
 shifts and training conflicts. arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.06523, 2022.
Tsung-Yi Lin, Michael Maire, Serge Belongie, James Hays, Pietro Perona, Deva Ramanan, Piotr
  Dollár, and C Lawrence Zitnick. Microsoft coco: Common objects in context. In European
  conference on computer vision, pp. 740–755. Springer, 2014.
Adriano Lucieri, Muhammad Naseer Bajwa, Stephan Alexander Braun, Muhammad Imran Malik,
 Andreas Dengel, and Sheraz Ahmed. On interpretability of deep learning based skin lesion
  classifiers using concept activation vectors. In 2020 International Joint Conference on Neural
 Networks (IJCNN), pp. 1–10. IEEE, 2020.
Anita Mahinpei, Justin Clark, Isaac Lage, Finale Doshi-Velez, and Weiwei Pan. Promises and pitfalls
  of black-box concept learning models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.13314, 2021.
Andrei Margeloiu, Matthew Ashman, Umang Bhatt, Yanzhi Chen, Mateja Jamnik, and Adrian Weller.
  Do concept bottleneck models learn as intended? arXiv preprint arXiv:2105.04289, 2021.
Thomas McGrath, Andrei Kapishnikov, Nenad Tomašev, Adam Pearce, Demis Hassabis, Been Kim,
  Ulrich Paquet, and Vladimir Kramnik. Acquisition of chess knowledge in alphazero. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2111.09259, 2021.
SW Menzies, C Ingvar, and WH McCarthy. A sensitivity and specificity analysis of the surface
 microscopy features of invasive melanoma. Melanoma research, 6(1):55–62, 1996.
Eric Mitchell, Charles Lin, Antoine Bosselut, Chelsea Finn, and Christopher D Manning. Fast model
  editing at scale. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.11309, 2021.
Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal,
  Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al. Learning transferable visual
  models from natural language supervision. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp.
  8748–8763. PMLR, 2021.
Veronica Rotemberg, Nicholas Kurtansky, Brigid Betz-Stablein, Liam Caffery, Emmanouil
  Chousakos, Noel Codella, Marc Combalia, Stephen Dusza, Pascale Guitera, David Gutman,
  et al. A patient-centric dataset of images and metadata for identifying melanomas using clinical
  context. Scientific data, 8(1):1–8, 2021.
Shibani Santurkar, Dimitris Tsipras, Mahalaxmi Elango, David Bau, Antonio Torralba, and Alek-
  sander Madry. Editing a classifier by rewriting its prediction rules. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 34, 2021.
Krishna Kumar Singh, Dhruv Mahajan, Kristen Grauman, Yong Jae Lee, Matt Feiszli, and Deepti
  Ghadiyaram. Don’t judge an object by its context: learning to overcome contextual bias. In
  Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp.
  11070–11078, 2020.
Anton Sinitsin, Vsevolod Plokhotnyuk, Dmitry Pyrkin, Sergei Popov, and Artem Babenko. Editable
  neural networks. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2020. URL https:
 //openreview.net/forum?id=HJedXaEtvS.
Matthew Sotoudeh and Aditya V Thakur. Provable repair of deep neural networks. In Proceedings
 of the 42nd ACM SIGPLAN International Conference on Programming Language Design and
 Implementation, pp. 588–603, 2021.
Robyn Speer, Joshua Chin, and Catherine Havasi. Conceptnet 5.5: An open multilingual graph of
  general knowledge. In Thirty-first AAAI conference on artificial intelligence, 2017.
Wolfgang Stammer, Patrick Schramowski, and Kristian Kersting. Right for the right concept: Revising
 neuro-symbolic concepts by interacting with their explanations. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
 Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 3619–3629, 2021.


                                                 12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Christian Szegedy, Wei Liu, Yangqing Jia, Pierre Sermanet, Scott Reed, Dragomir Anguelov, Du-
  mitru Erhan, Vincent Vanhoucke, and Andrew Rabinovich. Going deeper with convolutions. In
  Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 1–9, 2015.
Philipp Tschandl, Cliff Rosendahl, and Harald Kittler. The ham10000 dataset, a large collection of
  multi-source dermatoscopic images of common pigmented skin lesions. Scientific data, 5(1):1–9,
  2018.
Catherine Wah, Steve Branson, Peter Welinder, Pietro Perona, and Serge Belongie. The caltech-ucsd
  birds-200-2011 dataset. 2011.
Tong Wang, Jingyi Yang, Yunyi Li, and Boxiang Wang. Partially interpretable estimators (pie):
  black-box-refined interpretable machine learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2105.02410, 2021.
Chih-Kuan Yeh, Been Kim, Sercan Arik, Chun-Liang Li, Tomas Pfister, and Pradeep Ravikumar. On
  completeness-aware concept-based explanations in deep neural networks. Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 33:20554–20565, 2020.
Yuhao Zhang, Hang Jiang, Yasuhide Miura, Christopher D Manning, and Curtis P Langlotz. Con-
  trastive learning of medical visual representations from paired images and text. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2010.00747, 2020.
Chen Zhu, Ankit Singh Rawat, Manzil Zaheer, Srinadh Bhojanapalli, Daliang Li, Felix Yu, and Sanjiv
  Kumar. Modifying memories in transformer models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2012.00363, 2020.


A    T RAINING D ETAILS
Hyperparameters: In all of our experiments ElasticNet sparsity ratio parameter was α = 0.99.
We trained all our models on a single NVIDIA-Titan Xp gpu. All of the models were trained for
a total number of 10 epochs. We tune the regularization strength on a subset of the training set,
that is kept as a validation set. PCBMs are fitted using scikit-learn’s SGDClassifier class, with 5000
maximum steps. Hybrid parts are trained with PyTorch, where we used Adam as the optimizer with
0.01 learning rate, with 0.01 L2 regularization on the residual classifier weights, and trained for 10
epochs.
Dataset Details:

      1. Metashift: For all metashift experiments, we have 5 class classification problems. We
         have 50 images for each class as the training set, and 50 images for each class in the test
         dataset, which is different from the training images. The regularization strength for Metashift
         experiments is 0.002.
      2. CIFAR: We use the original training and test splits of CIFAR datasets. The regularization
                                                     2.0
         strength for CIFAR10 and CIFAR100 is KN        c
                                                          . We use linear probing to evaluate the original
         model
      3. COCO-Stuff: We use the original training and test splits of COCO dataset. We sample
         500 training and 250 test images from the dataset for each class, and we upsample the
         images whenever there are not enough images. Recognizing each of the 20 biased classes
         itepsingh2020don is treated as a binary classification task where we minimize binary cross
         entropy loss separately for 20 classes, and compute the mean average precision metric.
         The regularization strength for COCO-Stuff is 0.001. We evaluate the original model
         performance using linear probes with CLIP.
      4. Ham10k: We split 80% of the HAM10k dataset and use it as the training set, and use the
                                                                                          2.0
         remaining 20% as the test data. The regularization strength for Ham10k is KN        c
                                                                                               .
      5. ISIC: We use 2000 images for training (400 malignant, 1600 benign) and evaluate the model
         on a held-out set of 500 images (100 malignant, 400 benign). The regularization strength
         for ISIC is 0.001
                     KNc . We evaluate the original model performance using a linear probe.
      6. CUB: We use the training and test splits provided in Koh et al. (Koh et al., 2020). The
                                                         0.01
         regularization strength for CIFAR10 and CUB is KN  c
                                                              .


                                                   13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Visual Concepts: We used Broden Visual concept bank for CIFAR and controlled editing experiments,
CUB’s training data for CUB concepts, and derm7pt dataset for dermatology concepts. For each of
these, we use 50 pairs of positive and negative images, and learn a linear SVM. We use the vector
normal to the decision boundary as the concept vector.
Multimodal concepts: For concept learning, we leveraged the ConceptNet hierarchy. For each
classification task, we searched concept net for the class name and obtained concepts that have the
following relation with the query concept: hasA, isA, partOf, HasProperty, MadeOf. We share the
code for obtaining natural language concepts using ConceptNet. For each of these concepts, we
obtain the text embedding using CLIP and use those as the concept vector.


B    R ESIDUAL COMPONENT INTERVENES ONLY WHEN NECESSARY

Does PCBM-h alter predictions made by the PCBM? We hypothesized that the residual component
would intervene only when the concept bottleneck is not sufficient. To better understand the effect of
residual predictor, we analyzed the prediction consistency between the two models for CIFAR10 and
CIFAR100, where we looked at the models with labeled concepts (i.e. 170 concepts). In Figure 4 and
5, x-axis denotes the confidence of PCBM, the orange line gives the accuracy for samples with the
given confidence, and the blue line gives the consistency between PCBM and PCBM-h for the same
samples, i.e. whether they make the same prediction. In CIFAR10 and CIFAR100, we show that
PCBM and PCBM-h consistency is high when the model confidence is high, and the model accuracy
is high. Consequently, PCBM-h changes the model prediction mostly when the PCBM prediction is
likely a mistake, and the confidence is low. In Figure 5, we show that all of the predictions changed
by PCBM-h are to fix model mistakes. Further, in Figure 6 we show the PCBM confidence and the
mean absolute deviation between the PCBM confidence and the PCBM-h confidence. We observe
that PCBM-h has less effect on model confidence as the model gets more confident.


                           CIFAR10                                          CIFAR100
     1.0                                                  1.0

     0.8                                                  0.8
Metric


                                                     Metric


     0.6                                                  0.6
     0.4               PCBM-h Consistency                 0.4               PCBM-h Consistency
                       Accuracy                                             Accuracy
     0.2
               2

                       4

                                6

                                         8

                                                 0



                                                                    2

                                                                            4

                                                                                    6

                                                                                            8

                                                                                                    0
           -0.

                   -0.

                            -0.

                                     -0.

                                             -1.



                                                                -0.

                                                                        -0.

                                                                                -0.

                                                                                        -0.

                                                                                                -1.
         0.0

               0.2

                       0.4

                                0.6

                                         0.8



                                                              0.0

                                                                    0.2

                                                                            0.4

                                                                                    0.6

                                                                                            0.8


                   PCBM Confidence                                      PCBM Confidence
Figure 4: Residual component intervenes mostly when the confidence is low. Here, we look at
the consistency between PCBM and PCBM-h predictions (i.e. whether both models make the same
prediction). Namely, at each confidence level for the PCBM, we report the accuracy and consistency
with the PCBM-h predictions. Overall, we see that PCBM-h is most likely to change the model
prediction when the model is making a mistake, and otherwise, predictions are consistent.


C    C OMPARISON TO CBM

In most of our experiments, there is no clear way to run CBM as a benchmark, as none of the datasets
have dense concept annotations - except CUB. In CUB, we run CBM as a baseline. Particularly,
we try the joint training strategy from Koh et al. (Koh et al., 2020), where it was reported to


                                                     14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                             CIFAR10                                                   CIFAR100
                                                            3000                # of PCBM mistakes
     800                                                                        # of Mistakes fixed by PCBM-h
                                                            2500                # of Predictions Changed
     600                                                    2000
Metric


                                                       Metric
     400                                                    1500
                                                            1000
     200
                                                             500
         0                                                     0
               2

                         4

                                6

                                        8

                                               0


                                                                            2

                                                                                   4

                                                                                            6

                                                                                                   8

                                                                                                          0
              -0.

                     -0.

                              -0.

                                       -0.

                                              -1.


                                                                        -0.

                                                                                 -0.

                                                                                         -0.

                                                                                                  -0.

                                                                                                         -1.
             0.0

                    0.2

                             0.4

                                    0.6

                                             0.8


                                                                      0.0

                                                                                0.2

                                                                                       0.4

                                                                                                0.6

                                                                                                        0.8
                         PCBM Confidence                                           PCBM Confidence

Figure 5: Residual component intervenes only to fix mistakes. Here we show the number of
mistakes, the number of predictions changed by PCBM-h, and the number of mistakes fixed by
PCBM-h. We see that PCBM-h only changes the model predictions to fix model mistakes.



                             CIFAR10                                                  CIFAR100
                                                                                Mean PCBM Confidence
     0.8                                                        0.8             Mean Abs. Dev. in Confidence
     0.6                                                        0.6
Metric


                                                       Metric


     0.4                                                        0.4
     0.2                                                        0.2
             2

                     4

                               6

                                        8

                                                   0



                                                                       2

                                                                                 4

                                                                                         6

                                                                                                  8

                                                                                                           0
           -0.

                    -0.

                              -0.

                                       -0.

                                               -1.



                                                                      -0.

                                                                                -0.

                                                                                        -0.

                                                                                                 -0.

                                                                                                         -1.
         0.0

                   0.2

                           0.4

                                    0.6

                                             0.8



                                                                 0.0

                                                                            0.2

                                                                                      0.4

                                                                                               0.6

                                                                                                        0.8
                     PCBM Confidence                                             PCBM Confidence

Figure 6: Effect of the residual predictor on the confidence. Here we show the PCBM confidence
and mean absolute deviation between the PCBM confidence and the PCBM-h confidence. We observe
that PCBM-h has less effect on model confidence as the model gets more confident.



give the best results in the CUB dataset. To make the comparison equal, we use the same set of
concepts in both models, and use a linear predictor layer. Further, in both cases, we use the same
frozen ResNet18 backbone. We searched over a grid of learning rates from {0.01, 0.01, 0.1, 1.0}
and λ ∈ {0.001, 0.01, 0.1, 1.0} where λ is the coefficient of the concept predictors in the joint
training objective (see the CBM paper, Section 3), and the ElasticNet regularization strength in
{0.001, 0.01, 0.1, 1.0}. In Table 5, we report the model performance. Overall, we observe some
benefit from using dense concept annotations over the entire training dataset, where CBMs achieve a
slightly better performance than PCBMs, and the original backbone. We note that this was at the cost
of 112 concept annotations for each of the training samples.
We further analyze the behavior of CBM under different number of annotations. In Figure 7 we
train the CBM with varying number of annotations. CBMs require dense annotations, e.g. 11200
annotations would mean 11200/112 = 100 images. On the x-axis, we give the number of annotations
used to train the CBM. On the y-axis, we give the accuracy on the test set. We observe that CBMs
require a much larger amount of annotations to achieve the same accuracy as PCBMs.


                                                       15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Table 5: Comparison to CBM. We compare PCBM to CBM in the CUB dataset. The accuracy over
the test set is reported.

                     ResNet18(Backbone)        PCBM       PCBM-h       CBM(Backbone Fixed)
 CUB Accuracy                       0.612       0.588       0.610                0.629



                                0.6
                                0.5
                         Accuracy
                                0.4
                                0.3                            CBM
                                                               PCBM
                                0.2
                                    50 00
                                        6


                                                    60


                                                               00
                                      17
                                      2



                                                 81


                                                             36
                                    11



                                               18


                                                           31
                                            # of Annotations
Figure 7: Effect of the number of annotations in CBM. Here we train the CBM with varying
number of annotations. CBMs require dense annotations, e.g. 11200 annotations would mean
11200/112 = 100 images. On the x-axis, we give the number of annotations used to train the CBM.
On the y-axis, we give the accuracy on the test set. We observe that CBMs require a much larger
amount of annotations to achieve the same accuracy as PCBMs.


D    C ONTROLLED M ETASHIFT E XPERIMENTS FOR M ODEL E DITING
For Metashift, we have 2 tasks. Both tasks are 5-class object recognition tasks, where in the first
one classes are airplane, bed, car, cow, keyboard, and for the second one we have beach, computer,
motorcycle, stove, table. For each of these, we use a ResNet18 pretrained on ImageNet as the
backbone of the P-CBM, and then use 100 images per class to train the concept bottleneck. For all
experiments, we use the Adam Optimizer with a learning rate of 0.05, the regularization parameters
λ = 0.05, α = 0.99. Similar to CIFAR experiments, we use the Broden Concept dataset. Below we
give the entire set of results.


                                               16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


 Train            Test             Model        Original   Prune    Prune+Normalize     Fine-Tune
 bed(dog)         bed(cat)         P-CBM        0.760      0.760    0.760               0.920
 bed(cat)         bed(dog)         P-CBM        0.680      0.700    0.720               0.940
 table(dog)       table(cat)       P-CBM        0.520      0.540    0.620               0.760
 table(cat)       table(dog)       P-CBM        0.660      0.700    0.740               0.760
 table(books)     table(dog)       P-CBM        0.600      0.580    0.780               0.720
 table(books)     table(cat)       P-CBM        0.620      0.680    0.800               0.820
 car(dog)         car(cat)         P-CBM        0.718      0.718    0.744               0.949
 car(cat)         car(dog)         P-CBM        0.620      0.760    0.840               0.840
 cow(dog)         cow(cat)         P-CBM        0.778      0.750    0.778               0.944
 keyboard(dog)    keyboard(cat)    P-CBM        0.620      0.580    0.720               0.940
 bed(dog)         bed(cat)         HP-CBM       0.760      0.760    0.780               0.900
 bed(cat)         bed(dog)         HP-CBM       0.760      0.740    0.760               0.940
 table(dog)       table(cat)       HP-CBM       0.600      0.620    0.640               0.780
 table(cat)       table(dog)       HP-CBM       0.540      0.580    0.640               0.820
 table(books)     table(dog)       HP-CBM       0.660      0.700    0.760               0.680
 table(books)     table(cat)       HP-CBM       0.760      0.800    0.820               0.780
 car(dog)         car(cat)         HP-CBM       0.795      0.769    0.795               0.974
 car(cat)         car(dog)         HP-CBM       0.640      0.660    0.740               0.720
 cow(dog)         cow(cat)         HP-CBM       0.639      0.639    0.639               0.917
 keyboard(dog)    keyboard(cat)    HP-CBM       0.400      0.460    0.560               0.940
                      Table 6: Results of the Metashift editing experiments.



E     U SER S TUDY
E.1   U SER I NTERFACE

Below, we provide screenshots of the initial launch page and the concluding summary page from the
user study. For the concept-selection interface, refer to the main paper.


                                               17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 8: Launch page for user study. Before starting the editing tasks, participants are shown a
launch page containing a brief background section on PCBMs and a set of instructions.


Figure 9: Summary page for user study. After completing all 9 scenarios, participants are shown a
summary page that includes the user’s choice of concepts, the accuracy of the unedited model, and
the accuracy achieved by the edited model.


E.2   H UMAN - GUIDED PCBM EDITING : D ETAILED PERFORMANCE RESULTS

In each of the 9 scenarios in the user study, the underlying classification task is a 5-class object
recognition task, and one of the classes has a spurious correlation in the training set. For instance, all


                                                   18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


training images for the class keyboard also contain a cat in the image. In Table 7, we list the classes
in the underlying classification task and the spurious correlation for each scenario.

        Table 7: Classification tasks and spurious correlations in user study scenarios.

                 Classification Task                            Spurious Correlation
                 airplane, bed, car, cow, keyboard              bed(dog)
                 beach, bus, airplane, keyboard, bird           keyboard(cat)
                 beach, car, airplane, bed, bird                bed(cat)
                 beach, motorcycle, airplane, couch, bird       couch(cat)
                 bus, painting, cat, computer, snowboard        painting(lamp)
                 bus, pillow, cat, computer, snowboard          pillow(clock)
                 bus, television, cat, computer, snowboard      television(fireplace)
                 car, fork, table, bed, computer                fork(tomato)
                 dog, car, airplane, couch, bird                car(snow)

Below, we report the test accuracies for each of the 9 scenarios in our user study, both for the shifted
class and for the overall classification task.
Table 8: Model accuracy of PCBM-h with CLIP concepts after editing (N=30) We report the test
accuracy in the shifted class and the overall test accuracy for each individual scenario in the user
study. Accuracy for the pruning strategies is averaged over users and is shown as mean ± standard
error.

 Scenario                Unedited      Random Prune      User Prune       Greedy Prune      Fine-tune
                                                 Shifted Class Test Accuracy

 bed(dog)                    0.720     0.651 ± 0.023   0.832 ± 0.008 0.838 ± 0.008              0.940
 keyboard(cat)               0.520     0.425 ± 0.040   0.788 ± 0.021 0.803 ± 0.015              0.940
 bed(cat)                    0.700     0.663 ± 0.016   0.789 ± 0.006 0.813 ± 0.008              0.860
 couch(cat)                  0.700     0.725 ± 0.033   0.763 ± 0.011 0.883 ± 0.010              0.960
 painting(lamp)              0.640     0.617 ± 0.006   0.640 ± 0.006 0.659 ± 0.002              0.840
 pillow(clock)               0.800     0.776 ± 0.008   0.815 ± 0.003 0.815 ± 0.003              0.820
 television(fireplace)       0.480     0.485 ± 0.004   0.535 ± 0.008 0.564 ± 0.009              0.760
 fork(tomato)                0.580     0.583 ± 0.012   0.655 ± 0.010 0.707 ± 0.009              0.840
 car(snow)                   0.640     0.676 ± 0.014   0.807 ± 0.013 0.817 ± 0.011              0.840
                                                    Overall Test Accuracy

 bed(dog)                    0.864     0.850 ± 0.005     0.882 ± 0.001    0.882 ± 0.001         0.900
 keyboard(cat)               0.764     0.741 ± 0.008     0.811 ± 0.004    0.814 ± 0.003         0.860
 bed(cat)                    0.820     0.808 ± 0.004     0.834 ± 0.001    0.841 ± 0.002         0.832
 couch(cat)                  0.840     0.839 ± 0.005     0.851 ± 0.002    0.858 ± 0.002         0.904
 painting(lamp)              0.852     0.841 ± 0.001     0.845 ± 0.001    0.854 ± 0.001         0.884
 pillow(clock)               0.888     0.882 ± 0.002     0.891 ± 0.001    0.891 ± 0.001         0.888
 television(fireplace)       0.816     0.817 ± 0.001     0.827 ± 0.002    0.832 ± 0.002         0.856
 fork(tomato)                0.700     0.695 ± 0.002     0.706 ± 0.001    0.711 ± 0.001         0.732
 car(snow)                   0.784     0.791 ± 0.003     0.816 ± 0.002    0.817 ± 0.002         0.848



F    A NALYSIS ON THE COCO-S TUFF B IASES
Singh et al (Singh et al., 2020) identifies co-occurence biases in the COCO-Stuff dataset, where
20 categories frequently co-occur with other identified categories. In Table 10, reader can find the
concepts, taken from Singh et al. In Table 10, we report the Top-5 concepts for the PCBM trained
with CLIP concepts. In the Biased Context column, we give the category that co-occurs frequently
with the given context. In PCBM Top-5 Concepts column, we give the concepts that have the highest


                                                  19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Table 9: Model accuracy of PCBM with CLIP concepts after editing (N=30) We report the test
accuracy in the shifted class and the overall test accuracy for each individual scenario in the user
study. Accuracy for the pruning strategies is averaged over users and is shown as mean ± standard
error.

 Scenario                    Unedited    Random Prune         User Prune          Greedy Prune       Fine-tune
                                                     Shifted Class Test Accuracy

 bed(dog)                       0.720    0.647 ± 0.024   0.830 ± 0.008 0.832 ± 0.008                    0.900
 keyboard(cat)                  0.520    0.412 ± 0.040   0.787 ± 0.021 0.799 ± 0.016                    0.980
 bed(cat)                       0.700    0.677 ± 0.017   0.813 ± 0.008 0.804 ± 0.007                    0.820
 couch(cat)                     0.680    0.701 ± 0.034   0.751 ± 0.012 0.882 ± 0.011                    0.920
 painting(lamp)                 0.580    0.579 ± 0.004   0.607 ± 0.007 0.635 ± 0.005                    0.520
 pillow(clock)                  0.740    0.760 ± 0.008   0.811 ± 0.005 0.799 ± 0.006                    0.720
 television(fireplace)          0.420    0.428 ± 0.004   0.459 ± 0.006 0.483 ± 0.007                    0.880
 fork(tomato)                   0.600    0.581 ± 0.012   0.642 ± 0.007 0.685 ± 0.006                    0.960
 car(snow)                      0.620    0.651 ± 0.014   0.777 ± 0.011 0.737 ± 0.008                    0.720
                                                      Overall Test Accuracy

 bed(dog)                       0.860    0.844 ± 0.005        0.878 ± 0.001       0.877 ± 0.001         0.880
 keyboard(cat)                  0.748    0.727 ± 0.008        0.802 ± 0.004       0.804 ± 0.003         0.800
 bed(cat)                       0.804    0.801 ± 0.004        0.830 ± 0.002       0.829 ± 0.001         0.668
 couch(cat)                     0.828    0.826 ± 0.006        0.841 ± 0.002       0.850 ± 0.001         0.892
 painting(lamp)                 0.836    0.835 ± 0.001        0.841 ± 0.001       0.847 ± 0.001         0.840
 pillow(clock)                  0.876    0.879 ± 0.002        0.890 ± 0.001       0.888 ± 0.001         0.848
 television(fireplace)          0.800    0.802 ± 0.001        0.808 ± 0.001       0.813 ± 0.001         0.812
 fork(tomato)                   0.704    0.699 ± 0.002        0.710 ± 0.001       0.705 ± 0.002         0.720
 car(snow)                      0.768    0.776 ± 0.003        0.799 ± 0.002       0.792 ± 0.002         0.732

 Biased
              Biased Context     PCBM Top-5 Concepts
 Category
 cup          dining table       table, coaster brake, crockery, dining table, column
 handbag      person             bag, platform, woman, person, toiletry
 apple        fruit              apple tree, fruit, edible fruit, citrus fruit, produce
 car          road               traffic circle, intersection, car window, car mirror, trunk
 bus          road               public transport, transportation, tube, carriages, traffic circle
 potted
              vase               tall plant, patio, vase, plant, plant organ
 plant
 spoon        bowl               eating utensil, utensil, cutlery, crockery, flatware
 microwave    oven               kitchen, washing machine, kitchen appliance, oven, countertop
 keyboard     mouse              computer, computer system, portable computer, computer brand, mouse
 clock        building-other     clock face, timepiece, the dial, plank, chimney
 hair drier   towel              shower, bathroom, toiletry, plumbing fixture, toilet
 skateboard   person             paved surface, person, outsole, instep, footwear
                                     Table 10: COCO-Stuff Concepts



weight for the given category. Looking at PCBM categories, we can see that we can identify the
biased contexts. For instance, cup category has table, dining table, apple has fruit, fresh vegetables,
car has traffic circle, intersection in the concepts identified as important, which are parallel to the
biased context. In other cases, our model surfaced different potential co-occurence biases, such as
chimney for clock, and toilet for hair drier. One important limitation for this analysis is that the
desired concepts should exist in the concept bank. To further improve the pipeline, automatic concept
discovery approaches shall be a fruitful research direction (Ghorbani et al., 2019; Yeh et al., 2020).


                                                       20
