Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


L EARNING ACHIEVEMENT S TRUCTURE FOR S TRUC -
TURED E XPLORATION IN D OMAINS WITH S PARSE R E -
WARD

 Zihan Zhou                                              Animesh Garg
 University of Toronto                                   University of Toronto
 Vector Institute                                        Vector Institute
 footoredo@gmail.com                                     garg@cs.toronto.edu

                                               A BSTRACT
             We propose Structured Exploration with Achievements (SEA), a multi-stage re-
             inforcement learning algorithm designed for achievement-based environments, a
             particular type of environment with an internal achievement set. SEA first uses of-
             fline data to learn a representation of the known achievements with a determinant
             loss function, then recovers the dependency graph of the learned achievements
             with a heuristic algorithm, and finally interacts with the environment online to
             learn policies that master known achievements and explore new ones with a con-
             troller built with the recovered dependency graph. We empirically demonstrate
             that SEA can recover the achievement structure accurately and improve explo-
             ration in hard domains such as Crafter that are procedurally generated with high-
             dimensional observations like images.


1       I NTRODUCTION
Exploration in complex environments with long horizon and high-dimensional input such as images
has always been challenging in reinforcement learning. In recent years, multiple works (Stadie et al.,
2015; Bellemare et al., 2016; Tang et al., 2017; Pathak et al., 2017; Burda et al., 2019a;b; Badia et al.,
2020) propose to use intrinsic motivation to encourage the agent to explore less-frequently visited
states or transitions and gain success in some hard exploration tasks in RL. Go-explore (Ecoffet
et al., 2021) proposes to solve the hard exploration problem by building a state archive and train-
ing worker policies to reach the old states and explore new states. The shared trait of these two
streams of RL exploration algorithms is that they are both built on the idea of increasing the visiting
frequency of unfamiliar states, either by providing intrinsic motivation or doing explicit planning.
However, This idea can be ineffective in procedurally generated environments since states in such
environments can be infinite and scattered, to the extent that the same state may never appear twice.
This is why exploration in such environments can be extremely hard. However, in most procedu-
rally generated environments, there will be a finite underlying structure fixed in all environment
instantiations. This underlying structure is essentially what makes the environment “meaningful”.
Therefore, discovering this structure becomes vital in solving procedurally generated environments.
In this work, we set our sight on achievement-based environments. Specifically, an achievement-
based environment has a finite set of achievements. The agent only gets rewarded when it completes
one of the achievements for the first time in an episode. Achievement-based environments are com-
monly seen in video games such as Minecraft. We argue that this type of environment also models
many real-life tasks. For example, when we try to learn a new dish, the recipe usually decom-
poses the whole dish into multiple intermediate steps, where completing each step can be seen as an
achievement. A good example of achievement-based environments in reinforcement learning com-
munity is Crafter (Hafner, 2021), a 2d open-world game with procedurally generated world maps
that includes 221 achievements. We introduce this environment in more detail in Sec. 3.1.
Achievement-based environments bring both benefits and challenges to reinforcement learning ex-
ploration. On one hand, the achievement structure is a perfect invariant structure in a procedurally
generated environment. On the other hand, the reward signal in such an environment is sparse since
    1
        21 in our modified version.


                                                     1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


the agent is only rewarded when an achievement is unlocked. The reward signal can even be con-
fusing since unlocking different achievements grants the same reward.
We propose Structured Exploration with Achievements (SEA), a multi-stage algorithm that effec-
tively solves exploration in achievement-based environments. SEA first tries to recover the achieve-
ment structure of the environment from collected trajectories, either from experts or other bootstrap-
ping RL algorithms. With the recovered structure, SEA deploys a nonparametric meta-controller to
learn a set of sub-policies that reach every discovered achievement and start from there to explore
new ones.
We empirically evaluate SEA in Crafter and an achievement-based environment TreeMaze that
we designed based on MiniGrid (Chevalier-Boisvert et al., 2018). In Crafter, our algorithm
can complete the hard exploration achievements consistently and reach the hardest achievement
(collect diamond) in the game at a non-negligible frequency. None of our tested baselines can
even complete any of the hard exploration achievements, and to the best of our knowledge, SEA is
the first algorithm to complete this challenge. We also show that SEA can accurately recover the
achievement dependency structure in both environments.
Although uncommon in the current RL scene, we argue that the achievement-based reward system
can be a good environment design choice. Designing a set of achievements can be easier than
crafting specific rewards system for the agent to learn. With the structure recovery module in SEA,
the agent can automatically discover the optimal progression route to the desired task, alleviating
the need for a high-quality achievement set. Furthermore, as shown in the TreeMaze experiments,
the achievements can even be not semantically relevant to the tasks.


2   R ELATED W ORK

Exploration in reinforcement learning. Exploration in RL has long been an important topic,
which can date back to ϵ-greedy and UCB algorithms in multi-armed-bandit problems. In recent
years, intrinsic motivation-based exploration algorithms (Stadie et al., 2015; Bellemare et al., 2016;
Tang et al., 2017; Pathak et al., 2017; Burda et al., 2019a;b; Badia et al., 2020) gained great success
in this area. These algorithms aim to find an estimation of the state or transition visiting frequency
and use an intrinsic reward to encourage the agent to visit the less frequently visited states. However,
they can be ineffective when the environment is procedurally generated, where the number of states
and transitions can be infinite and scattered.
Another line of work in this area relevant to ours is the go-explore (Ecoffet et al., 2021) series.
Go-explore builds an archive of explored states which are grouped into cells and learns a set of goal-
conditioned policies that reach each cell. It then starts exploration from the archived cells to find new
cells and updating the archive iteratively. Go-explore shows success in the hard exploration tasks in
Atari games. However, go-explore can also be ineffective in procedurally generated environments
since it uses image down-sampling as the default state abstraction method. Another point where
our work differs from go-explore is that we don’t seek to group all states into cells, but instead
only group the few import ones. This is helpful since archiving all the states and learning all the
goal-conditioned policies can take up huge amount of resources.

Hierarchical reinforcement learning. Hierarchical reinforcement learning (HRL) explores the
idea of dividing a large and complex task into smaller sub-tasks with reusable skills (Dayan &
Hinton, 1992; Sutton et al., 1999; Bacon et al., 2017; Vezhnevets et al., 2017; Nachum et al., 2018).
Eysenbach et al. (2019) and Hartikainen et al. (2020) propose to first learn a set of unsupervised
skills then build a policy with the learned skills for faster learning and better generalization; Bacon
et al. (2017) builds a set of policy options to learn. Goal-conditioned HRL (Vezhnevets et al., 2017;
Nachum et al., 2018; 2019) train a manager policy that proposes parameterized goals and a goal-
conditioned worker policy to reach the proposed goals. Kulkarni et al. (2016); Lyu et al. (2019);
Rafati & Noelle (2019); Sohn et al. (2020); Costales et al. (2022) train a set of sub-policies to solve
the subtasks provided by the environment and a meta-controller to maximize the reward. This line of
work is similar to ours in that they assume the subtasks are provided by the environment. However, in
our work, we don’t assume access to any additional subgoal information such as subgoal completion
signals from the environment that are typically required in this line of work. Additionally, the


                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


        (a) Crafter environment.                    (b) Crafter achievements dependency graph.

                                      Figure 1: The Crafter environment.
problems that we are solving are more complex, namely including more tasks and being image-
based and procedurally generated.
Despite being conceptually similar to the subgoal/subtask in HRL, the achievement in our work
bears a different meaning and serves a different purpose. For an extended discussion on this topic,
the reader can refer to Section D.1 in the appendix.

Building world models. Watter et al. (2015); Karl et al. (2017); Ha & Schmidhuber (2018);
Hafner et al. (2021) argue that learning a compact latent space world model is beneficial in en-
vironments with high-dimensional inputs such as images. L3 P (Zhang et al., 2021) proposes to
represent the world model as a graph by clustering states into nodes, similar to SEA. However, L3 P
learns the state representation with the objective to recover reachability, which is not guaranteed to
be useful in exploration.

Reward machines. Reward machines (Icarte et al., 2018a;b) is a concept that uses linear temporal
logic language to describe a non-Markovian reward function. Recent works (Camacho et al., 2019;
Icarte et al., 2019; 2022) exploit this concept to do structured reinforcement learning and improve
performance. However, they depend on the environment providing a labeling function to learn the
reward machine instead of learning one from the environment. Achievement-based environments
also feature a non-Markovian reward function since completing one achievement only gets rewarded
once in an episode, therefore it can be seen as a special instance of the reward machines.

3       P ROBLEM S ETUP
3.1       C RAFTER

To better explain the achievement-based environment, we introduce Crafter2 (Hafner (2021),
Fig. 1a). Crafter is a 2d open-world game featuring a procedurally generated world map and 21
in-game achievements. In this game, the agent needs to control the character to explore the world by
collecting materials, crafting tools, and defeating monsters. Whenever the agent completes a certain
achievement for the first time in an episode, it will receive a reward of one. For any subsequent
completion, the agent will not be rewarded. The goal of the game is to unlock as many achieve-
ments as possible. In Crafter, some achievements may have dependencies on others. For example,
the make wood pickaxe achievement depends on the place table achievement since craft-
ing a wood pickaxe requires the agent to be near a crafting table. These achievements and their
dependencies form a directed acyclic graph (DAG), demonstrated in Fig. 1b.

3.2       M ARKOV D ECISION P ROCESS WITH ACHIEVEMENTS

We formalize our definition of achievement-based environments as a Markov decision process
with achievements (MDPA). A Markov decision process with achievements is defined by a 5-tuple
    2
        We use a slightly modified version of Crafter. The detailed modification can be found in Appendix.


                                                         3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 2: Algorithm overview. SEA comprises of four parts. (1) It starts with collecting trajectories
either from domain experts or previously trained agents. (2) With the collected trajectories, SEA
learns the achievement representation with Eqn. 1 and builds an achievement classifier by cluster-
ing the learned representations. (3) SEA then recovers an achievement dependency graph with the
classifier and the collected trajectories. (4) We train a set of sub-policies to reach each recognized
achievement and an exploration policy for new achievements. A meta-controller is used to propose
target achievements according to the achievement dependency graph. We use the achievement clas-
sifier to filter out the reward signal for the target achievement.

(S, A, T, Γ, G), where S is the set of states, A is the set of actions, T : S ×A → ∆S is the stochastic
state transition function, Γ is the set of achievements, and G : S × A × S → Γ ∪ {∅} is the achieve-
ment completion function. For any state transition tuple (st , at , st+1 ), the achievement completion
function maps it to either one of the achievements in Γ, meaning that particular achievement is com-
pleted at this step, or ∅, meaning none of the achievements is completed. Achievement unlocking re-
ward can be derived from an MDPA trajectory. Specifically, for a trajectory τ = (s0 , a0 , s1 . . . , sT ),
the reward at step t ∈ 0, . . . , T − 1 is:

                                                 t−1
              rt := 1[G(st , at , st+1 ) ̸= ∅]           1[G(st , at , st+1 ) ̸= G(st′ , at′ , st′ +1 )],
                                                 Y

                                                 t′ =0


where 1[·] is the indicator function. Note that directly adding the reward function into an MDPA
breaks its Markovian property since the agent will only be rewarded for the first time it com-
pletes an achievement. We can instead derive a standard MDP from an MDPA by defining a set
of achievement-extended states S ∗ = S × 2Γ where we store the achievement completion informa-
tion into the state. We can also define the corresponding state transition function T ∗ : S ∗ × A → S ∗
and reward function R : S ∗ × A × S ∗ → R to complete the derivation.


4    M ETHOD

The advantage of learning in MDPA is that achievements, hinted by reward signals, are invariant
across different environment instantiations. These achievements can therefore be seen as check-
points, which allow us to do a divide-and-conquer of the hard environment exploration task.
Following this argument, we propose an algorithm Structured Exploration with Achievements (SEA),
which recovers the underlying achievement structure and conducts structural explorations. Specifi-
cally, we use the data collected from either previously trained agents or experts to recover the known
achievements and their corresponding structures. With the recovered achievement structure, we then
train multiple sub-policies to reach every discovered achievement and start individual searches for
new achievements from there.


                                                           4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


4.1   ACHIEVEMENT L EARNING

The first step of our method is to identify the achievements in the environment by learning the
representations of the achievements and then clustering the achievements with their representations.
For any trajectory τ = (s0 , a0 , . . . , sT ), we define Uτ := {t : rt = 1} be the step set where an
achievement is unlocked. For a representation dimension W , we want to train a model parameterized
by θ that maps the tuple (st , at , st+1 ) where t ∈ Uτ , to a vector of size W . We achieve this by
using the uniqueness property of achievements, that every two steps in Uτ correspond to different
achievements. In other words, we want to ensure the representations of each pair of steps in Uτ are
as distinct as possible.
Let s̄t := (st , at , st+1 ). We define the achievement representation distance matrix of trajectory τ as
Dτ := [∥ϕθ (s̄t1 ), ϕθ (s̄t2 )∥2 ]t1 ,t2 ∈Uτ and Dτ := Dτ / max Dτ .
Normalization is used to prevent the representation from outward expanding, since expanding in-
creases the pairwise distance but not the separability required for clustering. To maximize the pair-
wise distance of the achievement representations, we use the following loss:


                               Lachv (θ) := Eτ − det exp −kDτ     ,                                  (1)

where det(·) calculates the determinant of a matrix. The loss reaches the minimum value of -1 when
every pair of achievement representations in a trajectory are sufficiently different so that the matrix
is close to the identity matrix. This formulation is inspired by Kulesza (2012) and Parker-Holder
et al. (2020). Compared to directly maximizing the average pairwise distances, the advantage of this
formulation is that it prevents the different achievement representations in an episode from forming
clusters. In such case, the average pairwise distance is still high but the determinant loss is close to
zero.
We then use the K-Means algorithm for clustering. Suppose we cluster the achievements into N
clusters with centroids denoted as c1 , . . . , cN . We can now build an achievement classifier AC(s̄) :=
arg mini ∥ϕθ (s̄) − ci ∥2 . However, to improve the generalization of this classifier, we would like it
to gain the ability to recognize new achievements that are not in the dataset. To do this, we set a
threshold b = 0.5 · mini,j ∥ci − cj ∥2 . Let i∗ = arg mini ∥ϕθ (s̄) − ci ∥2 , the new classifier becomes:

                                             i∗

                                                  if ∥ϕθ (s̄) − ci∗ ∥2 < b,
                             AC(s̄) :=
                                             −1          otherwise,

where −1 means s̄ is a unrecognized new achievement.

4.2   ACHIEVEMENT D EPENDENCY G RAPH

With the achievements identified, we then use a heuristic algorithm to build a preliminary achieve-
ment dependency graph. The algorithm comprises of two parts: 1) we build a complete dependency
graph; 2) we trim down the complete graph into a minimal DAG.
We represent both graphs with an adjacency matrix of N nodes. We first calculate two heuristics of
the collected trajectories.


                      B EFOREij := |{vt1 = i ∧ vt2 = j | t1 < t2 ∈ Uτ , ∀τ }|
                      H APPENi := |{vt = i | t ∈ Uτ , ∀τ }|

We say i is a dependency of j if every time j happens, i happens before j. Therefore, for the first
part,

                              Gij := 1[B EFOREij /H APPENj > 1 − ϵ],

where ϵ is to account for identification error. For a small ϵ, G is guaranteed to be a DAG.


                                                   5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                           100%

                            75%


                accuracy
                            50%
                                      1m
                            25%       200k
                                      50k
                             0%
                                  0   4      8   12   16   0    4     8     12     16
                                      # cluster                # achievement

      Figure 3: Clustering accuracy with different data sizes. Clusters and achievements are
      sorted in descending order of prediction accuracy.
For the second part, we need to remove the unnecessary edges in G to get a minimal DAG while
maintaining the topology of G. In this case, an edge is considered unnecessary if removing it does
not affect the topological order of the graph. Since removing an edge i → j can only allow node j
to appear earlier in the topological order, we only need to calculate the left-most position of a node,
denoted as L EFT M OST(G, i).

                  G∗ij := Gij · 1[L EFT M OST(G\{i → j}, j) < L EFT M OST(G, j)].

We point out that our recovered graph may include more dependency edges than the ground truth
owing to the non-causal correlations from either agent preference or insufficient data. We will
address this issue in the next section.

4.3    S UB - POLICY L EARNING AND E XPLORATION

The last part of our algorithm is to learn a set of sub-policies that reach every achievement node
and do exploration from them. A sub-policy is a parameterized achievement-conditioned policy
σω (a|s, g) where ω is the parameter shared among all sub-policies and g ∈ Γ is the target achieve-
ment. Each sub-policy only receives a reward of 1 upon reaching its target achievement, which can
be done using the achievement classifier in Sec. 4.1.
To learn the sub-policies, we also need a meta-controller π(g|s) that proposes a target achievement to
learn. One option is to randomly select a new one when an achievement is completed. However, this
can be ineffective when a target achievement is proposed before all its dependencies are completed.
This is because the sub-policy only has access to the reward of its target achievement, which makes
the exploration much harder. Therefore, we instead use a controller that topologically traverses the
dependency graph. At the beginning of the episode or upon completion of any achievement, the
controller randomly selects an unfinished achievement whose dependent achievements have all been
completed. In our implementation, we also bias the selection probability towards a direct child of
the last completed achievement to provide continuity.
The unnecessary dependencies introduced in the last step won’t affect the effectiveness of sub-policy
learning since following the recovered dependency graph still guarantees the necessary topological
order. To explore a more accurate graph, we let the meta-controller selects the new target randomly
with a small possibility. We refer the readers to Sec. C.1.1 for more details on the meta-controller.

5     E XPERIMENTS

5.1    E XPERIMENT S ETUP

Our experiments are designed to evaluate the three main parts of our algorithm: achievement learn-
ing, graph recovery, and sub-policy learning & exploration. To better investigate different aspects of
our algorithm, we design a pedagogical environment based on MiniGrid (Chevalier-Boisvert et al.,
2018) called TreeMaze (Fig. 5). TreeMaze has 2 columns of N rooms. Each room contains either
a key that unlocks other rooms, an object that can be interacted with, or nothing. A key can only
unlock doors with the same color as the key, while some of the rooms are not locked. In TreeMaze,


                                                      6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                         100%                                                      100%
                                                                                                                IMPALA


           unlock rate


                                                                     unlock rate
                          75%                                                       75%                         SEA

                          50%                                                       50%

                          25%                       IMPALA                          25%
                                                    SEA
                           0%                                                        0%
                            0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00 1.25 1.50                        0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00 1.25 1.50
                                        # episode        1e6                                      # episode        1e6

                                    (a) Easy set.                                             (b) Hard set.

           Figure 4: Mean unlocking rate comparison in easy and hard achievement set.

every interaction, including opening a door, picking up a key, and interacting with other objects,
is seen as an achievement. The rooms are generated with the guarantee that it’s possible to unlock
all achievements. The locations of the rooms are randomized but the dependency graph is fixed.
We use three versions of TreeMaze in our experiments, the TreeMaze-Easy which contains 4 rooms
and 9 achievements, the TreeMaze-Normal which contains 10 rooms and 19 achievements and the
TreeMaze-Hard that contains 18 rooms and 30 achievements.
For the Crafter environment, we also include a limited version
(Crafter-Limited) which only contains 7 of the 21 achievements in
the full environment.
We train a vanilla IMPALA (Espeholt et al., 2018) agent for
the initial data gathering in each environment. In the full
Crafter environment, the IMPALA agent discovers 17 achieve-
ments (with > 1% reaching rate); In all the remaining envi-
ronments, the IMPALA agents discover all of the achievements.
We consider the 17 achievements reachable by a vanilla IM-
PALA agent as the easy achievement set, and the remaining
four achievements (make iron pickaxe, make iron sword,
defeat zombie, collect diamond) as the hard achievement                      Figure 5: TreeMaze.
set. The reason why these achievements are particularly hard to
complete is that crafting iron tools in Crafter has three prerequisites: the character near a crafting
table, the character near a furnace, the character has at least one wood, one coal, and one iron in the
inventory. Of the 4 hard achievements, collect diamond is objectively the hardest achievement
to unlock as not only does it depends on the make iron pickaxe, but also that the diamond
resource is extremely scarce in the game. The complete achievement list can be found in Sec. B.1.

5.2   ACHIEVEMENT LEARNING
                                                                                                              Latent   SEA -det   SEA
We first investigate the clustering accuracy of our algo-      Crafter-Limited 0.755           1.000
                                                               Crafter          N/A     0.966  1.000
rithm. As an evaluation metric, we calculate both cluster      TreeMaze-Easy   0.735           1.000
purity, which is defined as the proportion of the major-       TreeMaze-Normal  N/A            0.994
ity achievement in each cluster, and achievement purity,       TreeMaze-Hard    N/A      N/A   0.996
which is defined as the proportion of the majority cluster
that the achievement is clustered into. The final clustering      Table 1: Clustering accuracies.
accuracy is defined as the mean purity across all clusters and achievements.

Baseline and result. We design a latent space-based baseline for achievement learning. Specif-
ically, we train a neural network to predict the environmental reward and use the latent variable
of the network as the achievement representation. The idea behind this baseline is that to predict
a certain achievement being completed, only the necessary information in the observation will be
preserved in the predictor network. To test the effectiveness of our determinant-based loss function,
we add an ablation experiment that replaces the determinant in Eqn. 1 with mean pairwise distances.
The clustering accuracy can be found in Tab. 1. The latent-space baseline only manages to provide
meaningful clustering in two of the easiest environments, while our algorithm does almost-perfect
clustering in all tested environments. The mean distance variant shows slightly worse clustering


                                                                 7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


      Figure 6: Recovered dependency graph comparison. Dashed lines represent differences.
performance than SEA in the Crafter environment but completely fails in the TreeMaze-Hard envi-
ronment, which has the largest amount of achievements.
We note here that even though the determinant loss massively outperforms the latent-space baseline
in our tested environments, it has the advantage of not being dependent on the achievement reward
assumption. In our preliminary testing, we find out that the latent-space baseline separates different
sources of reward better in some environments where the achievement reward assumption does not
hold.

Sample efficient. We further investigate the sample efficiency of our algorithm. We run three
experiments with 1 million, 200 thousand, and 50 thousand environment steps of data, respectively.
The clustering accuracy in Crafter is shown in Fig. 3. Numerically, 1 million steps of data are
sufficient as it reaches > 99% accuracy in all clusters and achievements, while only using 200
thousand steps also reaches > 90% accuracy in 16 clusters/achievements out of all 17 ones.

5.3   S TRUCTURE RECOVERY

In all three TreeMaze environments and Crafter-Limited, our algorithm successfully recovers the
exact dependency graphs. In full Crafter, the graph Hamming distance (defined as the number of
different entries in the adjacency matrix) between our recovered graph and the ground truth graph is
11 out of 272 entries. The detailed graph comparison can be found in Fig. 6.

                                                                               100%
5.4   S UB -P OLICY L EARNING AND E XPLORATION                                             random
                                                                 unlock rate


                                                                                75%        graph
Meta-controller comparison. We first show the effec-
tiveness of the dependency graph-based meta-controller                          50%

in training the sub-policies. The mean easy achievement                         25%
set unlocking rate compared to a random controller is
shown in Fig. 7. As shown in the figure, a graph-based                           0%
                                                                                      0   100000 200000 300000 400000
meta-controller learns the sub-policies much faster than a                                     # episode
random controller.
                                                           Figure 7: Comparison of mean achieve-
Sub-policy learning and exploration. For this part, we ment unlocking rate with a graph-based
choose IMPALA (Espeholt et al., 2018) and PPO (Schul- meta-controller and a random one.
man et al., 2017) as widely-recognized model-free base-
lines, IMPALA + RND (Burda et al., 2019b) as an exploration baseline, DreamerV2 (Hafner et al.,
2021) as the model-based baseline since it achieves the highest reward in the original Crafter pa-
per (Hafner, 2021), and HAL3 (Costales et al., 2022) as a Hierarchical reinforcement learning base-
line.
   3
     Note that HAL has an advantage over the other selected algorithms since it requires the environment to
provide extra information of the achievements, such as achievements completion and affordance signals.


                                                    8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


To evaluate SEA’s ability to master existing tasks and explore new tasks separately, we compare
the mean achievement unlock rate4 in the easy achievement set and the hard achievement set re-
spectively, as shown in Fig. 4. From Fig. 4a, we notice that SEA learns slightly slower than vanilla
IMPALA in the easy set. This is because SEA is not designed to maximize the total reward but to
master each achievement-targeted sub-policy, as our meta-controller does not try to learn an opti-
mal achievement completion route. From Fig. 4a, we can see that SEA successfully discovers the
hard achievements with a significant reaching rate while vanilla IMPALA fails to reach any of them,
which shows the exploration potential of our algorithm. The complete unlocking rate curve can be
found in Fig. 8 in the Appendix.
A detailed numerical comparison with all baselines is shown in Table 2 and 3. We observe that
SEA is the only algorithm that can consistently reach the hard set achievements and at the same
time maintains close-to-optimum easy set achievements reaching rate. SEA is also able to reach the
hardest achievement in Crafter, collect diamond, with a non-negligible probability.

     Table 2: Achievement unlock rate comparison. Standard deviation shown in the parenthesis.

                                 Easy Set                                      Hard Set
                     mean                   median                    mean                median          collect diamond
    IMPALA      93.91% (0.12%)        99.25% (0.35%)            0.00% (0.00%)         0.00% (0.00%)             0.00% (0.00%)
    RND          93.24% (1.08%)       98.58% (0.59%)            0.15% (0.21%)         0.13% (0.18%)             0.00% (0.00%)
    PPO          34.86% (2.19%)       21.13% (5.48%)            0.00% (0.00%)         0.00% (0.00%)             0.00% (0.00%)
    DreamerV2   76.21% (11.19%)       92.00% (1.41%)            0.00% (0.00%)         0.00% (0.00%)             0.00% (0.00%)
    HAL          15.76% (0.75%)        0.60% (0.57%)            0.00% (0.00%)         0.00% (0.00%)             0.00% (0.00%)
    SEA         92.53% (0.54%)         96.84% (0.58%)       49.30% (2.85%)           60.70% (1.67%)             4.21% (3.24%)


                 Table 3: Crafter score5 . Standard deviation shown in the parenthesis.

                   IMPALA             RND            PPO            DreamerV2        HAL            SEA
                  38.54 (0.04)     39.21 (0.91)   6.31 (1.02)       24.79 (9.78)   2.41 (0.18)   75.52 (2.36)



Sample efficiency. For SEA, we use 200 million environment steps to train the original IMPALA
policy for the initial data collecting and 300 million steps for the sub-policy learning and exploration.
For both vanilla IMPALA and IMPALA + RND, we train the agent for 1 billion steps. For PPO, we
only manage to run the agent for 110 million steps due to the time limit. For DreamerV2, we run the
agent for 2.5 million steps. For HAL, we run the agent for 140 million steps. We also note that for
PPO, DreamerV2, and HAL, even though the environment steps do not match SEA, their training
wall clock times are all longer than the 1 billion step IMPALA experiment and we don’t observe
significant improvement for at least the last 1/3 of the training. We refer the reader to Fig. 8 in the
Appendix.

6        C ONCLUSION AND D ISCUSSION
Exploration in procedurally generated environments is particularly hard since state frequency-based
exploration methods are often not effective in such domains. We set our sights on achievement-
based environments and propose Structured Exploration with Achievements (SEA), a multi-stage
algorithm specialized in exploring in such domains. Empirically, SEA successfully recovers the un-
derlying structure of Crafter, a procedurally generated achievement-based environment, and uses the
recovered structure to complete the hard exploration tasks in Crafter. We notice that achievement-
based environments are not common in the reinforcement learning community. However, since
achievement-based environments are easy to design and can help to learn hard exploration tasks
even without a particularly good choice of achievement set, we call on the community to consider
this design choice more often when developing new environments.
     4
     The unlock rate refers to the frequency of unlocking a certain
                                                                  Pachievement.
     5                                                              n
     We follow the definition from Hafner (2021): S := exp( N1      i=1 ln(1 + si )) − 1, where si ∈ [0, 100] is
the percentage unlock rate for each achievement.


                                                                9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


R EFERENCES
Pierre-Luc Bacon, Jean Harb, and Doina Precup. The option-critic architecture. AAAI, 2017.
Adrià Puigdomènech Badia, Pablo Sprechmann, Alex Vitvitskyi, Daniel Guo, Bilal Piot, Steven
  Kapturowski, Olivier Tieleman, Martı́n Arjovsky, Alexander Pritzel, Andew Bolt, and Charles
  Blundell. Never give up: Learning directed exploration strategies. ICLR, 2020.
Marc G. Bellemare, Sriram Srinivasan, Georg Ostrovski, Tom Schaul, David Saxton, and Rémi
 Munos. Unifying count-based exploration and intrinsic motivation. In NIPS, 2016.
Yuri Burda, Harrison Edwards, Deepak Pathak, Amos J. Storkey, Trevor Darrell, and Alexei A.
  Efros. Large-scale study of curiosity-driven learning. ArXiv, abs/1808.04355, 2019a.
Yuri Burda, Harrison Edwards, Amos J. Storkey, and Oleg Klimov. Exploration by random network
  distillation. ICLR, 2019b.
Alberto Camacho, Rodrigo Toro Icarte, Toryn Q. Klassen, Richard Anthony Valenzano, and
  Sheila A. McIlraith. Ltl and beyond: Formal languages for reward function specification in rein-
  forcement learning. In IJCAI, 2019.
Maxime Chevalier-Boisvert, Lucas Willems, and Suman Pal. Minimalistic gridworld environment
 for openai gym. https://github.com/maximecb/gym-minigrid, 2018.
Robby Costales, Shariq Iqbal, and Fei Sha. Possibility before utility: Learning and using hierarchical
  affordances. ICLR, 2022.
Peter Dayan and Geoffrey E. Hinton. Feudal reinforcement learning. In NIPS, 1992.
Adrien Ecoffet, Joost Huizinga, Joel Lehman, Kenneth O. Stanley, and Jeff Clune. First return then
  explore. Nature, 590 7847:580–586, 2021.
Lasse Espeholt, Hubert Soyer, Rémi Munos, Karen Simonyan, Volodymyr Mnih, Tom Ward, Yotam
  Doron, Vlad Firoiu, Tim Harley, Iain Dunning, Shane Legg, and Koray Kavukcuoglu. Impala:
  Scalable distributed deep-rl with importance weighted actor-learner architectures. ICML, 2018.
Benjamin Eysenbach, Abhishek Gupta, Julian Ibarz, and Sergey Levine. Diversity is all you need:
  Learning skills without a reward function. ArXiv, abs/1802.06070, 2019.
David R Ha and Jürgen Schmidhuber. World models. ArXiv, abs/1803.10122, 2018.
Danijar Hafner. Benchmarking the spectrum of agent capabilities. arXiv preprint arXiv:2109.06780,
  2021.
Danijar Hafner, Timothy P. Lillicrap, Mohammad Norouzi, and Jimmy Ba. Mastering atari with
  discrete world models. ICLR, 2021.
Kristian Hartikainen, Xinyang Geng, Tuomas Haarnoja, and Sergey Levine. Dynamical distance
  learning for semi-supervised and unsupervised skill discovery. ICLR, 2020.
Rodrigo Toro Icarte, Toryn Q. Klassen, Richard Anthony Valenzano, and Sheila A. McIlraith. Teach-
  ing multiple tasks to an rl agent using ltl. In AAMAS, 2018a.
Rodrigo Toro Icarte, Toryn Q. Klassen, Richard Anthony Valenzano, and Sheila A. McIlraith. Using
  reward machines for high-level task specification and decomposition in reinforcement learning.
  In ICML, 2018b.
Rodrigo Toro Icarte, Ethan Waldie, Toryn Q. Klassen, Richard Anthony Valenzano, Margarita P.
  Castro, and Sheila A. McIlraith. Learning reward machines for partially observable reinforcement
  learning. In NeurIPS, 2019.
Rodrigo Toro Icarte, Toryn Q. Klassen, Richard Anthony Valenzano, and Sheila A. McIlraith. Re-
  ward machines: Exploiting reward function structure in reinforcement learning. J. Artif. Intell.
  Res., 73:173–208, 2022.

                                                 10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Maximilian Karl, Maximilian Sölch, Justin Bayer, and Patrick van der Smagt. Deep variational
 bayes filters: Unsupervised learning of state space models from raw data. ArXiv, abs/1605.06432,
 2017.
Alex Kulesza. Determinantal point processes for machine learning. Foundations and Trends® in
  Machine Learning, 5(2-3):123–286, 2012. doi: 10.1561/2200000044. URL https://doi.
  org/10.1561%2F2200000044.
Tejas D. Kulkarni, Karthik Narasimhan, Ardavan Saeedi, and Joshua B. Tenenbaum. Hierarchical
  deep reinforcement learning: Integrating temporal abstraction and intrinsic motivation. In NIPS,
  2016.
Daoming Lyu, Fangkai Yang, Bo Liu, and Steven M. Gustafson. Sdrl: Interpretable and data-
  efficient deep reinforcement learning leveraging symbolic planning. In AAAI, 2019.
Ofir Nachum, Shixiang Shane Gu, Honglak Lee, and Sergey Levine. Data-efficient hierarchical
  reinforcement learning. In NeurIPS, 2018.
Ofir Nachum, Shixiang Shane Gu, Honglak Lee, and Sergey Levine. Near-optimal representation
  learning for hierarchical reinforcement learning. ICLR, 2019.
Jack Parker-Holder, Aldo Pacchiano, Krzysztof Choromanski, and Stephen J. Roberts. Effective
  diversity in population-based reinforcement learning. ArXiv, abs/2002.00632, 2020.
Deepak Pathak, Pulkit Agrawal, Alexei A. Efros, and Trevor Darrell. Curiosity-driven exploration by
  self-supervised prediction. 2017 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
  Workshops (CVPRW), pp. 488–489, 2017.
Jacob Rafati and David C. Noelle. Learning representations in model-free hierarchical reinforcement
  learning. AAAI, 2019.
John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy
  optimization algorithms. ArXiv, abs/1707.06347, 2017.
Sungryull Sohn, Hyunjae Woo, Jongwook Choi, and Honglak Lee. Meta reinforcement learning
  with autonomous inference of subtask dependencies. ICLR, 2020.
Bradly C. Stadie, Sergey Levine, and P. Abbeel. Incentivizing exploration in reinforcement learning
  with deep predictive models. ArXiv, abs/1507.00814, 2015.
Richard S. Sutton, Doina Precup, and Satinder Singh. Between mdps and semi-mdps: A framework
  for temporal abstraction in reinforcement learning. Artif. Intell., 112:181–211, 1999.
Haoran Tang, Rein Houthooft, Davis Foote, Adam Stooke, Xi Chen, Yan Duan, John Schulman,
  Filip De Turck, and P. Abbeel. #exploration: A study of count-based exploration for deep rein-
  forcement learning. NIPS, 2017.
Alexander Sasha Vezhnevets, Simon Osindero, Tom Schaul, Nicolas Manfred Otto Heess, Max
  Jaderberg, David Silver, and Koray Kavukcuoglu. Feudal networks for hierarchical reinforcement
  learning. ICML, 2017.
Manuel Watter, Jost Tobias Springenberg, Joschka Boedecker, and Martin A. Riedmiller. Embed to
 control: A locally linear latent dynamics model for control from raw images. NIPS, 2015.
Lunjun Zhang, Ge Yang, and Bradly C. Stadie. World model as a graph: Learning latent landmarks
  for planning. In ICML, 2021.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A                 A DDITIONAL E XPERIMENT R ESULTS


A.1                C RAFTER INDIVIDUAL ACHIEVEMENT LEARNING CURVE


                          collect_coal                collect_diamond               collect_drink                 collect_iron
                 100
 unlock rate %


                 50


                  0


                         collect_sapling               collect_stone                collect_wood                 defeat_skeleton
                 100
 unlock rate %


                 50


                  0


                         defeat_zombie                    eat_cow               make_iron_pickaxe                make_iron_sword
                 100
 unlock rate %


                 50


                  0


                       make_stone_pickaxe             make_stone_sword          make_wood_pickaxe                make_wood_sword
                 100
 unlock rate %


                 50


                  0


                         place_furnace                  place_plant                 place_stone                   place_table
                 100
 unlock rate %


                 50


                  0
                                                0.0      0.5   1.0      1.5   0.0    0.5   1.0       1.5   0.0     0.5   1.0      1.5
                                                         # episode     1e6           # episode      1e6            # episode     1e6
                            wake_up
                 100
 unlock rate %


                                                           SEA
                                                           IMPALA
                 50                                        IMPALA+RND
                                                           PPO
                                                           HAL
                  0
                   0.0     0.5   1.0      1.5
                           # episode     1e6



Figure 8: Achievement unlock rate curve for each individual task in Crafter, excluding DreamerV2.


                                                                         12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                              collect_coal             collect_diamond            collect_drink           collect_iron
                 100

 unlock rate %
                  50


                   0


                            collect_sapling             collect_stone             collect_wood           defeat_skeleton
                 100
 unlock rate %


                  50


                   0


                             defeat_zombie                 eat_cow              make_iron_pickaxe        make_iron_sword
                 100
 unlock rate %


                  50


                   0


                           make_stone_pickaxe          make_stone_sword         make_wood_pickaxe        make_wood_sword
                 100
 unlock rate %


                  50


                   0


                             place_furnace               place_plant               place_stone             place_table
                 100
 unlock rate %


                  50


                   0
                                                   0    2000 4000 6000 8000 0    2000 4000 6000 8000 0   2000 4000 6000 8000
                                                          # episode                 # episode               # episode
                                wake_up
                 100
 unlock rate %


                  50


                                                             DreamerV2
                   0
                       0     2000 4000 6000 8000
                               # episode


                  Figure 9: Achievement unlock rate curve for each individual task in Crafter, DreamerV2.


B                 E NVIRONMENT D ETAILS

B.1                C OMPLETE C RAFTER ACHIEVEMENT LIST

The complete list of Crafter achievements are {collect coal, collect diamond,
collect drink,       collect iron,        collect sapling,     collect stone,
collect wood, defeat skeleton, defeat zombie, eat cow, make iron pickaxe,
make iron sword, make stone pickaxe, make stone sword, make wood pickaxe,
make wood sword, place furnace, place plant, place stone, place table,


                                                                         13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


wake up}.     Of those the 17 achievements {collect coal, collect drink,
collect iron,        collect sapling,       collect stone,        collect wood,
defeat skeleton, eat cow, eat plant, make stone pickaxe, make stone sword,
make wood pickaxe,       make wood sword,     place furnace,       place plant,
place stone, place table, wake up} are the easy set since they are solvable by the
vanilla IMPALA agent. The remaining 4 tasks {collect diamond, defeat zombie,
make iron pickaxe, make iron sword} are the hard set.


B.2     M ODIFICATIONS TO THE ORIGINAL C RAFTER ENVIRONMENT

We make some modifications to the original Crafter environment to make it better suits our setting.
The complete change list is:

        • The health reward is removed since it does not fit into our achievement reward assumption.
          Consequently, the character won’t lose health point in any way.

        • The game ends if no achievement has been unlocked in the last 100 steps.

        • When a creature (including a cow, a zombie and a skeleton) gets attacked by the char-
          acter, it will not lose health point unless the attacking point of the character is greater
          than or equal to the health point of that creature. With this modification, the eat cow,
          defeat skeleton and defeat zombie achievements can be connected to the main
          dependency graph instead of being independent nodes.


C     R EPRODUCEBILITY

C.1     A DDITIONAL ALGORITHM DETAILS

C.1.1    M ETA - CONTROLLER DETAILS

Let the dependency graph be G. The meta-controller maintains a set of the completed achievements
S that are initialized to ∅. At the beginning of an episode and whenever an achievement has been
unlocked, the meta-controller (re)generates a new target achievement.
To generate a new target achievement, if it is the beginning of an episode, the meta-controller ran-
domly selects an achievement with no dependencies according to the dependency graph; Otherwise,
suppose the just completed achievement is u. Let V = {v ∈     / S | w ∈ S, ∀w → v ∈ G} be the
available achievements set. Let CONT(u) = {v ∈ V | u → v ∈ G} be the subset of V that are
direct descendants of u. Let NGHB(u) = {v ∈ V | ∃w ∈ V s.t. v → w ∈ G} be the subset
that are neighbours of u (i.e. on which one or more u’s direct descendants are depended). Let
JUMP (u) = {v ∈ V | v ∈     / CONT(u) ∧ v ∈  / NGHB(u)} be the remaining achievements. Notice
these three subsets partitions V . The meta-controller stochastically chooses the target achievement
according to the following probabilities:

        • With probability 40%, the meta-controller chooses the exploration task;

        • With probability 48%, the meta-controller uniformly randomly chooses an achievement
          from CONT(u);

        • With probability 6%, the meta-controller uniformly randomly chooses an achievement from
          NGHB (u);

        • With probability 6%, the meta-controller uniformly randomly chooses an achievement from
          JUMP (u).


After selecting the next target, the meta-controller updates the completed achievements set S ←
S ∪ {u}.


                                                 14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


C.2       I MPLEMENTATION

Our code is adapted from an open-source implementation of IMPALA, torchbeast6 . The complete
code can be found here7 .

C.3       H YPERPARAMETERS

                        Table 4: IMPALA hyperparameters for different experiments.

                              Hyperparameters             Crafter    TreeMaze
                             Network structure           CNN+LSTM   CNN+LSTM
                                Hidden size                 256        256
                            Initial learning rate          0.0002     0.0002
                                 Batch size                  32         32
                               Unroll length                 80         80
                             Gradient clipping               40         40
                                RMSProp α                   0.99       0.99
                           RMSProp momentem                   0          0
                                RMSProp ϵ                   0.01       0.01
                             Discount rate (γ)              0.99       0.99
                             Normalize reward                Yes        Yes


C.4       I MPLEMENTATION OF ACHIEVEMENT R EPRESENTATION F UNCTION ϕ

ϕ uses the two networks to encode the states, one for the current state st , one for the next state st+1 .
The network structure is the same as the policy network. The encoding of the two states are con-
catenated into the observation vector xobs . xobs is then concatenated with the one-hot representation
of the current action at . The concatenated vector is then fed into a fully-connected layer, resulting
in xrep . The final output of ϕ is xobs + xrep .

D        A DDITIONAL D ISCUSSIONS
D.1       C OMPARISON WITH HRL

Despite sharing similar concepts (achievements and subgoals/subtasks) with HRL, our work has a
different focus. Subgoals and subtasks in HRL normally refer to the intermediate steps that lead to
an ultimate goal/task. Achievements are all equal in nature, although some achievements can be the
subgoals to other achievements. Our algorithm can automatically determine which achievements
can be useful (potentially as subgoals) to other achievements. This lowers the standard for the
achievement design as there is no need to carefully craft a series of intermediate steps that help the
agent to learn. Our achievement setting also allows for multiple ultimate tasks that our algorithm
can solve for in one go.


    6
        https://github.com/facebookresearch/torchbeast
    7
        https://github.com/footoredo/iclr23-sea


                                                         15
