Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


CH I LS: Z ERO - SHOT I MAGE C LASSIFICATION WITH
H IERARCHICAL L ABEL S ETS
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                             A BSTRACT

         Open vocabulary models (e.g. CLIP) have shown strong performance on zero-shot
         classification through their ability generate embeddings for each class based on
         their (natural language) names. Prior work has focused on improving the accuracy
         of these models through prompt engineering or by incorporating a small amount
         of labeled downstream data (via finetuning). In this paper, we aim to tackle clas-
         sification problems with coarsely-defined class labels. We propose Classification
         with Hierarchical Label Sets (or CHiLS), an alternative strategy that proceeds in
         three steps: (i) for each class, produce a set of subclasses, using either existing
         label hierarchies or by querying GPT-3; (ii) perform the standard zero-shot CLIP
         procedure as though these subclasses were the labels of interest; (iii) map the pre-
         dicted subclass back to its parent to produce the final prediction. Across numerous
         datasets (with implicit semantic hierarchies), CHiLS leads to improved accuracy
         yielding gains of over 30% in situations where known hierarchies are available
         and more modest gains when they are not. CHiLS is simple to implement within
         existing CLIP pipelines and requires no additional training cost.


1    I NTRODUCTION
Recently, machine learning researchers have become captivated by the remarkable capabilities of
pretrained open vocabulary models (Radford et al., 2021; Wortsman et al., 2021; Jia et al., 2021;
Gao et al., 2021; Pham et al., 2021; Cho et al., 2022; Pratt et al., 2022). These models, like CLIP
(Radford et al., 2021) and ALIGN (Jia et al., 2021), learn to map images and captions into shared
embedding spaces such that images are close in embedding space to their corresponding captions
but far from randomly sampled captions. The resulting models can then used to assess the relative
compatibility of a given image with an arbitrary set of textual “prompts”. Notably, Radford et al.
(2021) observed that by inserting each class name directly within a natural language prompt, one can
then use CLIP embeddings to assess the compatibility of an images with each among the possible
classes. Thus, open vocabulary models are able to perform zero-shot image classification, and do so
with high rates of success (Radford et al., 2021; Zhang et al., 2021b).
Despite the documented successes, the current interest in open vocabulary models poses a new ques-
tion: How should we represent our classes for a given problem in natural language? As class
names are now part of the inferential pipeline (as opposed to mostly an afterthought in traditional
scenarios) for models like CLIP in the zero-shot setting, CLIP’s performance is now directly tied
to the descriptiveness of the class “prompts” (Santurkar et al., 2022). While many researchers have
focused on improving the quality of the prompts into which class names are embedded (Radford
et al., 2021; Pratt et al., 2022; Zhou et al., 2022b;a; Huang et al., 2022), surprisingly little attention
has been paid to improving the richness of the class names themselves. This can be particularly
crucial in cases where class names are not very informative or are too coarsely-defined to match the
sort of descriptions that might arise in natural captions. Consider, for an example, the classes “large
man-made outdoor things” and “reptiles” in the CIFAR20 dataset (Krizhevsky, 2009).
In this paper, we introduce a new method to tackle zero-shot classification with CLIP models
for problems with coarsely-defined class labels. We refer to our method as Classification with
Hierarchical Label Sets (CHiLS for short). Our method utilizes a hierarchical map to convert each
class into a list of subclasses, performs normal CLIP zero-shot prediction across the union set of
all subclasses, and finally uses the inverse mapping to convert the subclass prediction to the requi-


                                                    1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 1: (Left) Standard CLIP Pipeline for Zero-Shot Classification. For inference, a standard
CLIP takes in input a set of classes and an image where we want to make a prediction and makes a
prediction from that set of classes. (Right) Our proposed method CHiLS for leveraging hierarchical
class information into the zero-shot pipeline. We map each individual class to a set of subclasses,
perform inferences in the subclass space (i.e., union set of all subclasses), and map the predicted
subclass back to its original superclass.


site superclass. We additionally include a reweighting step wherein we leverage the raw superclass
probabilities in order to make our method robust to less-confident predictions at the superclass and
subclass level.
We evaluate CHiLS on a wide array of image classification benchmarks with and without available
hierarchical information. In the former case, leveraging preexisting hierarchies leads to strong ac-
curacy gains across all datasets. In the latter, we show that rather than enumerating the hierarchy by
hand, using GPT-3 to query a list of possible subclasses for each class (whether or not they are actu-
aly present in the dataset) still leads to consistent improved accuracy over raw superclass prediction.
We summarize our main contributions below:
• We propose CHiLS, a new method for improving zero-shot CLIP performance in scenarios with
  ill-defined and/or overly general class structures, which requires no labeled data or training time
  and is flexible to both existing and synthetically generated hierarchies.
• We show that CHiLS consistently performs as well or better than standard practices in situations
  with only synthetic hierarchies, and that CHiLS can achieve up to 30% accuracy gains when
  ground truth hierarchies are available.


2     R ELATED W ORK

2.1   T RANSFER L EARNING

While the focus of this paper is to improve CLIP models in the zero-shot regime, there is a large
body of work exploring improvements to CLIP’s few-shot capabilities. In the standard fine-tuning
paradigm for CLIP models, practitioners discard the text encoder and only use the image embeddings
as inputs for some additional training layers. This however, leads to certain problems.
One particular line of work on improving the fine-tuned capabilities of CLIP models leverages model
weight interpolation. Wortsman et al. (2021) proposes to linear interpolate the weights of a fine-
tuned and a zero-shot CLIP model to improve the fine-tuned model under distribution shifts. This
idea is extended by Wortsman et al. (2022) into a general purpose paradigm for ensembling models’
weights in order to improve robustness. Ilharco et al. (2022) then builds on both these works and
puts forth a method to “patch” fine-tuned and zero-shot CLIP weights together in order to avoid
the issue of catastrophic forgetting. Among all the works in this section, our paper is perhaps most
similar to this vein of work (albeit in spirit), as CHiLS too seeks to combine two different predictive
methods. Ding et al. (2022) also tackles catastrophic forgetting, though they propose an orthogonal
direction and fine-tune both the image encoder and the text encoder, where the latter draws from a
replay vocabulary of text concepts from the original CLIP database.


                                                  2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


There is another line of work that seeks to improve CLIP models by injecting a small amount of
learnable parameters into the frozen CLIP backbone. This has been commonly achieved through
the adapter framework (Houlsby et al., 2019) from parameter-efficient learning; specifically, in Gao
et al. (2021) they fine-tune a small number of additional weights on top of the encoder blocks, which
is then connected with the original embeddings through residual connections. Zhang et al. (2021a)
builds on this method by removing the need for additional training and simply uses a cached model.
In contrast to these works, Jia et al. (2022) forgoes the adapter framework when using a Vision
Transformer backbone for inserting learnable “prompt” vectors into the transformer’s input layers,
which shows superior performance over the aforementioned methods.
Additionally, some have looked at circumventing the entire process of prompt engineering. Zhou
et al. (2022a) and Zhou et al. (2022b) tackle this by treating the tokens within each prompt as learn-
able vectors, which are then optimized within only a few images per class. Huang et al. (2022)
echoes these works, but instead does not utilize any labeled data and learns the prompt represen-
tations in an unsupervised manner. Zhai et al. (2022) completely forgoes the notion of fine-tuning
in the first place, instead proposing to reframe the pre-training process as only training a language
model to match a pre-trained and frozen image model. In all the above situations, some amount of
data, whether labeled or not, is used in order to improve the predictive accuracy of the CLIP model.


2.2   Z ERO -S HOT P REDICTION

The field of Zero-Shot Learning (ZSL) has existed well before the emergence of open vocabularly
models, with its inception traced to Larochelle et al. (2008). With regards to non-CLIP related
methods, the ZSL paradigm has shown success in improving multilingual question answering (Kuo
& Chen, 2022) with large language models (LLMs), and also in image classification tasks where
wikipedia-like context is used in order to perform the classification without access to the training
labels (Bujwid & Sullivan, 2021; Shen et al., 2022).
With CLIP models, ZSL success has been found in a variety of tasks. Namely, Zhang et al. (2021b)
expands the CLIP 2D paradigm for 3D point clouds. Tewel et al. (2021) shows that CLIP models can
be retrofitted to perform the reverse task of image-to-text generation, and Shen et al. (2021) likewise
display’s CLIP’s ability to improve performance on an array of Vision&Language tasks. Both Yu
et al. (2022) and Cho et al. (2022) expand CLIP’s zero-shot abilities through techniques drawn from
reinforcement learning (RL), with the former using CLIP for the task of audio captioning. Gadre
et al. (2022) similarly works with the RL literature and retrofits CLIP to improve the embodied AI
task of object navigation without any additional training. Zeng et al. (2022) shows the capabilities
of composing CLIP-like models and LLMs together to extend the zero-shot capabilities to tasks like
assitive dialogue and open-ended reasoning. Unlike our work here, these prior directions mostly
focus on generative problems or, in the case of Bujwid & Sullivan (2021) and Shen et al. (2022),
require rich external knowledge databases to employ their methods.
In the realm of improving CLIP’s zero-shot capabilities for image classification, we particularly note
the contemporary work of Pratt et al. (2022). Here, authors explore using GPT-3 to generate rich
textual prompts for each class rather than using preexisting prompt templates, and show improve-
ments in zero-shot accuracy across a variety of image classification baselines. In another work, Ren
et al. (2022) proposes leveraging preexisting captions in order to improve performance, though this
is restricted to querying the pre-training set of captions. In contrast, our work explores a comple-
mentary direction of leveraging hierarchy in class names to improve zero-shot performance of CLIP.
with a fixed set of preexisting prompt templates.


2.3   H IERARCHICAL C LASSIFICATION

Our present work is related to the domain of Hierarchical Classification (Silla & Freitas, 2010), i.e.
classification tasks when the set of labels can be arranged in a DAG-like class hierarchy. Methodolo-
gies from this domain have been extensively used for multi-label classification (Dimitrovski et al.,
2011; Liu et al., 2021; Chalkidis et al., 2020), and recent works have shown that this paradigm can
aid in zero-shot learning by attempting to uncover hierarchical relations between classes (Chen et al.,
2021; Mensink et al., 2014) and/or leveraging existing hierarchical information during training (Yi
et al., 2022; Cao et al., 2020). Our line of inquiry is orthogonal to these approaches, as CHiLS is


                                                  3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Algorithm 1 Classification with Hierarchical Label Sets (CHiLS)
input : data point x, class labels C, prompt function T, label set mapping G, CLIP model f
 1: Set Csub ← ∪ci ∈C G(ci )            ▷ Union of subclasses for subclass prediction
 2: y
    bsub = σ(f (x, T(Csub )))                                  ▷ Subclass probabilities
 3: y
    bsup = σ(f (x, T(C)))                                   ▷ Superclass probabilities
 4: for i = 1 to |C| do
 5:   Sci = G(ci )
 6:   for sci ,j ∈ Sci do
 7:       y                bsub [sci ,j ] ∗ y
          bsub [sci ,j ] = y                bsup [ci ]
                            ▷ Combining subclass and superclass prediction probability
 8:   end for
 9: end for
output : G−1 (arg max y      bsub )


easily composable into standard CLIP pipelines, only models unseen class hyponyms (rather than
relationships between known classes), and requires no training of hierarchical embeddings.

3     P ROPOSED M ETHOD
In this paper, we are primarily concerned with the problem of zero-shot image classification in CLIP
models (see App. B for an introduction to CLIP and relavent terminology). For CLIP models, zero-
shot classification involves using both a pretrained image encoder and a pretrained text encoder (see
the left part of Figure 1). To perform a zero-shot classification, we need a predefined set of classes
written in natural language. Let C = {c1 , c2 , . . . , ck } be such a set. Given an image and set of
classes, each class is embedded within a natural language prompt (through some function T(·)) to
produce a “caption” for each class (e.g. one standard prompt mentioned in Radford et al. (2021) is
“A photo of a {}.”). These prompts are then fed into the text encoder and after passing the image
through the image encoder, we calculate the cosine similarity between the image embedding and
each class-prompt embedding. These similarity scores form the output “logits” of the CLIP model,
which can be passed through a softmax to generate the class probabilities.
As noted in Section 2, previous work has focused on improving the T(·) for each class label ci .
With CHiLS, we instead focus on the complementary task of directly modifying the set of classes C
when C is ill-formed or overly general, while keeping T(·) fixed. Our method involves into two main
steps: (1) using hierarchical information to perform inference across subclasses, and (2) leveraging
raw superclass probabilities to combine the best of subclass and superclass prediction probabilities.

3.1   Z ERO -S HOT P REDICTION WITH H IERARCHICAL L ABEL S ETS

Our method CHiLS slightly modifies the standard approach for zero-shot CLIP prediction. As each
class label ci represents some concept in natural language (e.g. the label “dog”), we acquire a
subclass set Sci = {sci ,1 , sci ,2 , . . . , sci ,mi } through some mapping function G, where each sci ,j is
a linguistic hyponym, or subclass, of ci (e.g. corgi for dogs) and mi is the size of the set Sci .
Given a label set Sci for each class, we proceed with the standard process for zero-shot prediction,
but now using the union of all label sets as the set of classes. Through this, CHiLS will now produce
its guess for the most likely subclass. We then leverage the inverse mapping function G−1 to coarse-
grain our prediction back into the corresponding superclass. Our method is detailed more formally
in Algorithm 1.
In our work, we experiment with two scenarios: (i) when hierarchy information is available and can
be readily queried; and (ii) when hierarchy information is not available and the label set for each
class must be generated, which we do so by prompting GPT-3.

3.2   R EWEIGHTING PROBABILITIES WITH S UPERCLASS C ONFIDENCE

While the above method is able to effectively utilize CLIP’s ability to identify relatively fine-grained
concepts, by predicting on only subclass labels we lose any positive benefits of the superclass label,


                                                     4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                    Superclass    CHiLS Accuracy     CHiLS Accuracy
                  Dataset
                                    Accuracy       (Existing Map)     (GPT-3 Map)
                  Nonliving26          79.82       90.67 (+10.85)      81.51 (+1.69)
                  Living17             91.08        93.80 (+2.72)      91.43 (+0.35)
                  Entity13             77.46       92.59 (+15.13)      78.11 (+0.65)
                  Entity30             70.32       88.87 (+18.55)      71.75 (+1.43)
                  CIFAR20              59.54       85.30 (+25.76)      65.90 (+6.36)
                  Food-101             91.82             N/A           91.73 (−0.09)
                  Fruits-360           60.47        60.87 (+0.40)      62.17 (+1.70)
                  Fashion1M            45.78             N/A           47.44 (+1.66)
                  Fashion-MNIST        68.50             N/A           70.85 (+2.35)
                  LSUN-Scene           88.20             N/A           88.97 (+0.77)
                  Office31             89.13             N/A           89.37 (+0.24)
                  OfficeHome           88.85             N/A           88.76 (−0.09)
                  ObjectNet            53.10       85.34 (+32.24)      53.52 (+0.42)
                  EuroSAT              62.10             N/A           62.40 (+0.30)
                  RESISC45             72.13             N/A           72.52 (+0.40)


Table 1: Zero-shot accuracy performance across image benchmarks with superclass labels (base-
line), CHiLS with existing hierarchy (whenever available), and CHiLS with GPT-3 generated hier-
archy. CHiLS improves classification accuracy in all situations with given label sets and all but 2
datasets with GPT-3 generated label sets.

and performance may vary widely based on the quality of the subclass labels. Given recent evidence
(Minderer et al., 2021; Kadavath et al., 2022) that large language models (like the text encoder in
CLIP) are well-calibrated and generally predict correct labels with high probability, we modify our
initial algorithm to leverage this behavior and utilize both superclass and subclass information. We
provide empirical evidence of this property in Appendix A.
Specifically, we include an additional reweighting step within our main algorithm (see lines 4-9 in
Algorithm 1). Here, we reweight each set of subclass probabilities by its superclass probability.
Heuristically, as the prediction is now taken as the argmax over products of probabilities, large
disagreements between subclass and superclass probabilities will be down-weighted (especially if
one particular superclass is confident) and subclass probabilities will be more important in cases
where the superclass probabilities are roughly uniform. We show ablations on the choice of the
reweighting algorithm in Section 4.4.

4     E XPERIMENTS
In this section, we first lay out the experimental set-up. We then discuss, in order, the efficacy of our
proposed method in situations with available class hierarchy information and in situations without
any preexisting hierarchy. After these main results, we present a series of ablations over various
design choices showing where our method is robust and what might be crucial for its performance.

4.1   S ETUP

Datasets. As we are primarily concerned with improving zero-shot CLIP performance in situa-
tions with ill-formed and/or semantically coarse class labels, we test our method on the follow-
ing image benchmarks: the four BREEDS imagenet subsets (living17, nonliving26, entity13, and
entity30) (Santurkar et al., 2021), CIFAR20 (the coarse-label version of CIFAR100) (Krizhevsky,
2009), Food-101 (Bossard et al., 2014), Fruits-360 (Mureşan & Oltean, 2018), Fashion1M (Xiao
et al., 2015), Fashion-MNIST (Xiao et al., 2017), LSUN-Scene (Yu et al., 2015), Office31 (Saenko
et al., 2010), OfficeHome (Venkateswara et al., 2017), ObjectNet (Barbu et al., 2019), EuroSAT
(Helber et al., 2019; 2018), and RESISC45 (Cheng et al., 2017). These datasets constitute a wide
range of different image domains and include datasets with and without available hierarchy informa-
tion. Additionally, the chosen datasets vary widely in the semantic granularity of their classes, from
overly general cases (CIFAR20) to settings with a mixture of general and specific classes (Food-101,
OfficeHome). We also examine CHiLS’s robustness to distribution shift within a dataset by aver-
aging all results for the BREEDS datasets, Office31, and OfficeHome across different shifts (see


                                                   5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Appendix H for more information). We additionally modify the Fruits-360 and ObjectNet datasets
to create existing taxonomies. More details for dataset preparation are detailed in Appendix H.

Model Architecture. Unless otherwise specified, we use the ViTL/14@336px backbone (Radford
et al., 2021) for our CLIP model, and used DaVinci-002 (with temperature fixed at 0.7) for all abla-
tions involving GPT-3. For the choice of the prompt embedding function T(·), for each dataset we
experiment (where applicable) with two different functions: (1) Using the average text embeddings
of the 75 different prompts for each label used for ImageNet in Radford et al. (2021), where the
prompts cover a wide array of captions and (2) Following the procedure that Radford et al. (2021)
puts forth for more specialized datasets, we modify the standard prompt to be of the form “A photo
of a {}, a type of [context].”, where [context] is dataset-dependent (e.g. “food” in the case of food-
101). In the case that a custom prompt set exists for a dataset, as is the case with multiple datasets
that the present work shares with Radford et al. (2021), we use the given prompt set for the latter
option rather than building it from scratch. For each dataset, we use the prompt set that gives us the
best baseline (i.e. superclass) zero-shot performance. More details are in Appendix C.

Choice of Mapping Function G. In our experiments, we primarily look at how the choice of the
mapping function G influences the performance of CHiLS. In Section 4.2, we focus on the datasets
with available hierarchy information. Here, G and G−1 are simply table lookups to find the list of
subclasses and corresponding superclass respectively. In Section 4.3, we explore situations in which
the true set of subclasses in each superclass is unknown. In these scenarios, we use GPT-3 to generate
our mapping function G. Specifically, given some label set size m, superclass name class-name,
and optional context (which we use whenever using the context-based prompt embedding), we query
GPT-3 with the prompt:

Generate a list of m types of the following [context]:                                  class-name

The resulting output list from GPT-3 thus defines our mapping G from superclass to subclass. Unless
otherwise specified, we fix m = 10 for all datasets. Additionally, in 4.4 we explore situations in
which hierarchical information is present but noisy, i.e. the label set for each superclass contains the
true subclasses and erroneous subclasses that are not present in the dataset.

4.2   L EVERAGING AVAILABLE H IERARCHY I NFORMATION .

We first concern ourselves with the scenario in which there is hierarchy information already avail-
able (or readily accessible) for a given dataset. In this situation, the set of subclasses for each
superclass is exactly specified and correct (i.e. every image within each superclass falls into one of
the subclasses). We emphasize that here we do not need information about which example belongs
to which subclass, we just need a mapping of superclass to subclass. For example, each class in the
BREEDS dataset living17 is made up of 4–8 ImageNet subclasses at finer granularity (e.g. “parrot”
includes “african grey” and “macaw”).

Results In Table 1, we can see that our method performs better than using the baseline superclass
labels alone across all 7 of the datasets with available hierarchy information, in some cases leading
to +15% improvement in predictive accuracy.

4.3   CH I LS IN U NKNOWN H IERARCHY S ETTINGS

Though we have seen considerable success in situations with access to the true hierarchical struc-
ture, in some real-world settings our dataset may not include any available information about the
subclasses within each class. In this scenario, we turn to using GPT-3 to approximate the hierarchi-
cal map G (as specified in Section 4.1). It is important to note that GPT-3 may sometimes output
suboptimal label sets, most notably in situations where GPT-3 chooses the wrong wordsense or when
GPT-3 only lists modifiers on the original superclass (e.g. producing the list [red, yellow,
green] for types of apples). In order to account for these issues in an out-of-the-box fashion, we
automatically append the superclass name (if not already present) to each generated subclass label,
and also include the superclass itself within the label set. For a controlled analysis about the effect
of including the superclass itself in the label set, see Appendix D.


                                                   6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                           living17                          fashion1M                          food-101                                           living17                       fashion1M                               food-101


CHiLS+                                                                                                                    CHiLS-
Superclass-                                                                                                               Superclass-


                         Label: wolf                        Label: Downcoat                   Label: falafel                                     Label: snake                    Label: Chiffon                         Label: baklava
                       Superclass: fox                  Superclass: Windbreaker          Superclass: crab cakes                                Superclass: lizard              Superclass: T-Shirt                  Superclass: panna cotta
                     CHiLS: wolf (chanco)            CHiLS: Downcoat (Trench coat)   CHiLS: falafel (chickpea falafel)                        CHiLS: lizard (skink)         CHiLS: T-Shirt (Tank Top)           CHiLS: cannoli (dessert cannoli)
                           living17                          fashion1M                          food-101                                           living17                       fashion1M                               food-101


CHiLS+                                                                                                                    CHiLS-
Superclass+                                                                                                               Superclass+


                       Label: salamander                     Label: Dress                   Label: beef tartare                                 Label: monkey                   Label: Sweater                    Label: spaghetti bolognese
                     Superclass: salamander                Superclass: Dress             Superclass: beef tartare                             Superclass: monkey              Superclass: Sweater               Superclass: spaghetti bolognese
              CHiLS: salamander (Fire salamander)         CHiLS: Dress (Aline)       CHiLS: beef tartare (veal tartare)                       CHiLS: ape (baboon)          CHiLS: Vest (sweater Vest)           CHiLS: lasagna (sauce lasagna)



Figure 2: Selected examples of behavior differences between the superclass performance (which is
our baseline) and CHiLS performance across three different datasets. (Upper left): CHiLS is correct,
superclass prediction is not. (Lower left): Both correct. (Upper right): Both wrong. (Lower Right):
superclass prediction is correct, CHiLS is not.


         Superclass                                          72.28                                                                      Superclass                                                  73.22

 CHiLS (True Map,                                                                                        86.60                              CHiLS                                                       74.42
  no reweighting)

 CHiLS (True Map,                                                                                                              CHiLS (reweighting
     reweighting)                                                                                    85.35                          subclass with                                                72.67
                                                                                                                              aggregate subclass)
  CHiLS (GPT Map,                                                                                                             CHiLS (reweighting
   no reweighting)                                        71.52                                                               aggregate subclass                                                        74.49
                                                                                                                                 with superclass)
  CHiLS (GPT Map,                                                     74.42                                                         Best Possible                                                                    78.52
      reweighting)

                     60                 65          70           75         80                  85                  90                             60                 65          70            75                       80                        85
                                                           Average Accuracy                                                                                                       Average Accuracy


Figure 3: (Left) Average accuracy across datasets for superclass prediction, CHiLS (ours), and
CHiLS without the reweighting step. While when given the true hierarchy omitting the reweight-
ing step can slightly boost performance beyond CHiLS, in situations without the true hierarchy
the reweighting step is crucial to improving on the baseline accuracy. (Right) Average accuracy
across datasets with GPT-generated label sets for different reweighting algorithms. Using aggre-
gate subclass probabilities for reweighting performs noticeably worse than our initial method and
reweighting in superclass space. CHiLS too only performs slightly worse than the contrived best
possible union of subclass and superclass predictions.

Results In this setting, our method is still able to beat the baseline performance in most datasets,
albeit with lower accuracy gains (see Table 1). Thus, while knowing the true subclass hierarchy can
lead to large accuracy gains, it is enough to simply enumerate a list of possible subclasses for each
class with no prior information about the dataset in order to improve the predictive accuracy. In
Figure 2, we show selected examples to highlight CHiLS’s behavior across three datasets.

4.4           A BLATIONS

Is Reweighting Necessary? Though the reweighting step in CHiLS is motivated by the evidence
that CLIP generally assigns higher probability to correct predictions rather than incorrect ones (see
Appendix A for empirical verification), it is not immediately clear whether it is truely necessary.
Averaged across all documented datasets, in Figure 3 (left) we show that in the true hierarchy set-
ting, not reweighting the subclass probabilities can actually slightly boost performance (as the label
sets are adequately tuned to the distribution of images). However, in situations where the true hier-
archy is not present, omitting the reweighting step puts accuracy below the baseline performance.
We attribute this difference in behavior to the fact that reweighting multiplicatively combines the
superclass and subclass predictions, and thus if subclass performance is sufficient on its own (as
is the case when the true hierarchy is available) then combining it with superclass predictions can


                                                                                                                          7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                Superclass   CHiLS Accuracy        CHiLS Accuracy
                 Dataset
                                Accuracy      (Existing Map)    (Existing Map + Noise)
                 nonliving26      79.82       90.67 (+10.85)         89.48 (+9.66)
                 living17         91.08        93.80 (+2.72)         92.47 (+1.39)
                 entity13         77.46       92.59 (+15.13)        90.34 (+12.88)
                 entity30         70.32       88.87 (+18.55)        87.56 (+17.24)

Table 2: CHiLS zero-shot accuracy when G includes all subclasses in the ImageNet hierarchy de-
scended from the respective root node. Even in the presence of noise added to the true label sets,
CHiLS is able to make large accuracy gains.

cause the model to more closely follow the behavior of the underperforming superclass predictor.
Thus, as not having the true hierarchy is considerably more likely in the wild, the reweighting step
is imperative to utilizing CHiLS to its fullest.

Different Reweighting Strategies We too experimented on whether the initial reweighting al-
gorithm is the optimal method for combining superclass and subclass predictions. Namely, we
investigated whether superclass probabilities could be replaced by the sum over the matching sub-
class probabilities, and whether we can aggregate subclass probabilities and reweight them with the
matching superclass probabilities (i.e. performing the normal reweighting step but in the space of su-
perclasses). In Figure 3 (right) we show that replacing the superclass probabilities in the reweighting
step with aggregate subclass probabilities removes any accuracy gains from CHiLS, but that doing
the reweighting step in superclass space does maintain CHiLS accuracy performance. This suggests
that the beneficial behavior of CHiLS may be due to successfully combining two different sets of
class labels. We also display the upper bound for combining superclass and subclass prediction
(i.e. the accuracy when a datum is correctly labeled if the superclass or subclass predictions are
correct) in purple, which we note is impossible in practice, and observe that even the best possible
performance is not much higher than the performance of CHiLS.

Noisy Available Hierarchies While the situation described in Section 4.3 is the most probable in
practice, we additionally investigate the situation in which the hierarchical information is present
but overestimates the set of subclasses. For example, the scenario in which a dataset with the class
“dog” includes huskies and corgis, but CHiLS is provided with huskies, corgis, and Labradors as
possible subclasses, with the last being out-of-distribution. To do this, we return to the BREEDS
datasets presented in Santurkar et al. (2021). As the BREEDS datasets were created so that each
class contains the same number of subclasses (which are ImageNet classes), we modify G such that
the label set for each superclass corresponds to all the ImageNet classes descended from that node
in the hierarchy (see Appendix G for more information). As we can see in Table 2, CHiLS is able to
improve upon the baseline performance even in the presence of added noise in each label set.

Label Set Size In previous works investigating importance of prompts in CLIP’s performance,
it has been documented that the number of prompts used can have a decent effect on the overall
performance (Pratt et al., 2022; Santurkar et al., 2022). Along this line, we investigate how the
size of the subclass set generated for each class effects the overall accuracy by re-running our main
experiments with varying values of m (namely, 1, 5, 10, 15, and 50). In Figure 4 (right), there is
little variation across label set sizes that is consistent over all datasets, though m = 1 has a few very
low performing outliers due to the extremely small label set size. We observe that the optimal label
set size is context-specific, and depends upon the total number of classes present and the semantic
granularity of the classes themselves. Individual dataset results are available in Appendix E.

Model Size In order to examine whether the performance of CHiLS only exists within the best
performing CLIP backbone (e.g. ViT-L/14@336), we measure the average relative change in ac-
curacy performance between CHiLS and the baseline superclass predictions across all datasets for
an array of different CLIP models. Namely, we investigate the RN50, RN101, RN50x4, ViT-B/16,
ViT-B/32, and ViT-L/14@336 CLIP backbones (see Radford et al. (2021) for more information on
the model specifications). In Figure 4 (left), we show that across the 6 specified CLIP backbones,
CHiLS performance leads to relatively consistent relative accuracy gains, with a slight (but not con-
fidently significant) trend showing improved performance for the ResNet backbones over the ViT


                                                   8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                              35                                                 True Map                                  10
                                                                                 GPT-3 Map
                              30
Average Relative Change (%)


                                                                                             Average Relative Change (%)
                                                                                                                            5
                              25
                                                                                                                            0
                              20
                              15                                                                                            5

                              10                                                                                           10
                               5
                                                                                                                           15
                               0
                                    RN50   RN101   RN50x4       ViTB16   ViTB32 ViTL14@336                                      1   5         10         15   50
                                                   CLIP Model Backbone                                                                  Label Set Size


Figure 4: (Left) Average relative change between CHiLS and baseline for true mapping and GPT-
3 generated mapping. Across changes in CLIP backbone size and structure, the effectiveness of
CHiLS at improving performance only varies slightly. (Right) Average relative accuracy change
from the baseline to CHiLS (across all datasets), for varying label set sizes. In all, there is not much
difference in performance across label set sizes.

backbones, which is to be expected given their worse base capabilities. This shows that CHiLS’s
benefits are not an artifact of large model size.

Alternative Aggregating Methods While CHiLS is based on a set-based mapping approach for
subclasses and a linear averaging for prompt templates (based on Radford et al. (2021)’s proce-
dure), we experimented with two alternative ensembling methods for different parts of the CHiLS
pipeline: (1) Using a linear average of subclass embeddings rather than the set-based mapping (that
is, every superclass’s text embedding is the average across all subclass embeddings, each themselves
averaged across every prompt template) and (2) Using a set-based mapping for prompt templates
rather than a linear average (i.e. instead of averaging across prompt templates, predict across each
prompt template separately at inference time and then use embedded class to map back to the set of
superclasses). Note in the latter case we only experiment with how this effects superclass prediction
(where each class maps to a set of the dataset’s chosen prompt embeddings), as using set-based
ensembling for both prompts and subclasses within CHiLS quickly becomes computationally ex-
pensive. In Figure 6 (in Appendix F), we see that using our initial aggregation methods (i.e. linear
averaging for prompts and set mappings for subclasses) achieves greater accuracy.

5                                  C ONCLUSION
In this work, we demonstrated that the zero-shot image classification capabilities of CLIP models
can be improved by leveraging hierarchical information for a given set of classes. When hierarchical
structure is available in a given dataset, our method shows large improvements in zero-shot accuracy,
and even when subclass information isn’t explicitly present, we showed that we can leverage GPT-3
to generate subclasses for each class and still improve upon the baseline (superclass) accuracy.
We remark that CHiLS may be quite beneficial to practitioners using CLIP as an out-of-the-box im-
age classifier. Namely, we show that in scenarios where the class labels may be ill-formed or overly
coarse, even without existing hierarchical data accuracy can be improved with a fully automated
pipeline (via querying GPT-3), yet CHiLS is flexible enough that any degree of hand-crafting label
sets can be worked into the zero-shot pipeline. Our method has the added benefit of being both
completely zero-shot (i.e. no training or fine-tuning necessary) and is resource efficient.

Limitations and Future Work As with usual zero-shot learning, we don’t have a way to validate
the performance of our method. Additionally, we recognize that CHiLS is suited for scenarios in
which a semantic hierarchy most likely exists, and thus may not be particularly useful in classifica-
tion tasks where the classes are already decently fine-grained. We believe that this limitation will
not hinder the applicability of our method, as practitioners would know if their task contains any la-
tent semantic hierarchy and thus choose to use our method or not a priori. Given CHiLS’s empirical
successes, we hope to perform more investigation to develop an understanding of why CHiLS is able
to improve zero-shot accuracy and whether there is a more principled way of reconciling superclass
and subclass predictions.


                                                                                             9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


R EPRODUCIBLITY S TATEMENT
The source code for reproducing the work presented here is available at https://github.com/
anonOpenReview1/clip-hierarchy. We implement our method in PyTorch (Paszke et al.,
2017) and provide an infrastructure to run all the experiments to generate corresponding results.
We have stored all models and logged all hyperparameters and seeds to facilitate reproducibility.
Additionally, all necessary data preprocessing details are present in Appendix H.

R EFERENCES
Andrei Barbu, David Mayo, Julian Alverio, William Luo, Christopher Wang, Dan Gutfreund, Josh
  Tenenbaum, and Boris Katz. Objectnet: A large-scale bias-controlled dataset for pushing the
  limits of object recognition models. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems
  (NeurIPS), 2019.
Lukas Bossard, Matthieu Guillaumin, and Luc Van Gool. Food-101 – mining discriminative com-
  ponents with random forests. In European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV), 2014.
Sebastian Bujwid and Josephine Sullivan. Large-scale zero-shot image classification from rich and
  diverse textual descriptions. In Proceedings of the Third Workshop on Beyond Vision and LAN-
  guage: inTEgrating Real-world kNowledge (LANTERN), 2021.
Zhong Cao, Jiang Lu, Sen Cui, and Changshui Zhang. Zero-shot handwritten chinese character
  recognition with hierarchical decomposition embedding. Pattern Recognition, 2020.
Ilias Chalkidis, Manos Fergadiotis, Sotiris Kotitsas, Prodromos Malakasiotis, Nikolaos Aletras, and
   Ion Androutsopoulos. An empirical study on large-scale multi-label text classification including
   few and zero-shot labels. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.01653, 2020.
Shiming Chen, GuoSen Xie, Yang Liu, Qinmu Peng, Baigui Sun, Hao Li, Xinge You, and Ling
  Shao. Hsva: Hierarchical semantic-visual adaptation for zero-shot learning. 2021.
Gong Cheng, Junwei Han, and Xiaoqiang Lu. Remote sensing image scene classification: Bench-
  mark and state of the art. Proceedings of the IEEE, 2017.
Jaemin Cho, Seunghyun Yoon, Ajinkya Kale, Franck Dernoncourt, Trung Bui, and Mohit Bansal.
  Fine-grained image captioning with clip reward. In Findings of NAACL, 2022.
Jia Deng, Wei Dong, Richard Socher, Li-Jia Li, Kai Li, and Li Fei-Fei. ImageNet: A Large-Scale
   Hierarchical Image Database. In Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2009.
Ivica Dimitrovski, Dragi Kocev, Suzana Loskovska, and Sašo Džeroski. Hierarchical annotation of
   medical images. Pattern Recognition, 2011.
Yuxuan Ding, Lingqiao Liu, Chunna Tian, Jingyuan Yang, and Haoxuan Ding. Don’t stop learning:
  Towards continual learning for the clip model, 2022.
Samir Yitzhak Gadre, Mitchell Wortsman, Gabriel Ilharco, Ludwig Schmidt, and Shuran Song. Clip
  on wheels: Zero-shot object navigation as object localization and exploration. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2203.10421, 2022.
Peng Gao, Shijie Geng, Renrui Zhang, Teli Ma, Rongyao Fang, Yongfeng Zhang, Hongsheng Li,
  and Yu Qiao. Clip-adapter: Better vision-language models with feature adapters. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2110.04544, 2021.
Tianyu Gao, Adam Fisch, and Danqi Chen. Making pre-trained language models better few-shot
  learners. arXiv preprint arXiv:2012.15723, 2020.
Patrick Helber, Benjamin Bischke, Andreas Dengel, and Damian Borth. Introducing eurosat: A
  novel dataset and deep learning benchmark for land use and land cover classification. 2018.
Patrick Helber, Benjamin Bischke, Andreas Dengel, and Damian Borth. Eurosat: A novel dataset
  and deep learning benchmark for land use and land cover classification. IEEE Journal of Selected
  Topics in Applied Earth Observations and Remote Sensing, 2019.


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Neil Houlsby, Andrei Giurgiu, Stanislaw Jastrzebski, Bruna Morrone, Quentin De Laroussilhe, An-
  drea Gesmundo, Mona Attariyan, and Sylvain Gelly. Parameter-efficient transfer learning for nlp.
  In International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2019.
Tony Huang, Jack Chu, and Fangyun Wei. Unsupervised prompt learning for vision-language mod-
  els, 2022.
Gabriel Ilharco, Mitchell Wortsman, Samir Yitzhak Gadre, Shuran Song, Hannaneh Hajishirzi, Si-
  mon Kornblith, Ali Farhadi, and Ludwig Schmidt. Patching open-vocabulary models by interpo-
  lating weights. arXiv preprint arXiv:2208.05592, 2022.
Chao Jia, Yinfei Yang, Ye Xia, Yi-Ting Chen, Zarana Parekh, Hieu Pham, Quoc Le, Yun-Hsuan
  Sung, Zhen Li, and Tom Duerig. Scaling up visual and vision-language representation learning
  with noisy text supervision. In International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2021.
Menglin Jia, Luming Tang, Bor-Chun Chen, Claire Cardie, Serge Belongie, Bharath Hariharan, and
 Ser-Nam Lim. Visual prompt tuning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.12119, 2022.
Saurav Kadavath, Tom Conerly, Amanda Askell, Tom Henighan, Dawn Drain, Ethan Perez,
  Nicholas Schiefer, Zac Hatfield Dodds, Nova DasSarma, Eli Tran-Johnson, Scott Johnston,
  Sheer El-Showk, Andy Jones, Nelson Elhage, Tristan Hume, Anna Chen, Yuntao Bai, Sam
  Bowman, Stanislav Fort, Deep Ganguli, Danny Hernandez, Josh Jacobson, Jackson Kernion,
  Shauna Kravec, Liane Lovitt, Kamal Ndousse, Catherine Olsson, Sam Ringer, Dario Amodei,
  Tom Brown, Jack Clark, Nicholas Joseph, Ben Mann, Sam McCandlish, Chris Olah, and Jared
  Kaplan. Language models (mostly) know what they know, 2022.
Alex Krizhevsky. Learning multiple layers of features from tiny images. Technical report, 2009.
Chia-Chih Kuo and Kuan-Yu Chen. Toward zero-shot and zero-resource multilingual question an-
  swering. IEEE Access, 2022.
Hugo Larochelle, Dumitru Erhan, and Yoshua Bengio. Zero-data learning of new tasks. In Associ-
  ation for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (AAAI), 2008.
Hui Liu, Danqing Zhang, Bing Yin, and Xiaodan Zhu. Improving pretrained models for zero-
  shot multi-label text classification through reinforced label hierarchy reasoning. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2104.01666, 2021.
Thomas Mensink, Efstratios Gavves, and Cees GM Snoek. Costa: Co-occurrence statistics for
  zero-shot classification. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern
  recognition, 2014.
Matthias Minderer, Josip Djolonga, Rob Romijnders, Frances Hubis, Xiaohua Zhai, Neil Houlsby,
 Dustin Tran, and Mario Lucic. Revisiting the calibration of modern neural networks. In Advances
 in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2021.
Horea Mureşan and Mihai Oltean. Fruit recognition from images using deep learning. Acta Univer-
  sitatis Sapientiae, Informatica, 2018.
Adam Paszke, Sam Gross, Soumith Chintala, Gregory Chanan, Edward Yang, Zachary DeVito,
  Zeming Lin, Alban Desmaison, Luca Antiga, and Adam Lerer. Automatic differentiation in
  pytorch. 2017.
Hieu Pham, Zihang Dai, Golnaz Ghiasi, Kenji Kawaguchi, Hanxiao Liu, Adams Wei Yu, Jiahui Yu,
  Yi-Ting Chen, Minh-Thang Luong, Yonghui Wu, et al. Combined scaling for open-vocabulary
  image classification. arXiv preprint arXiv: 2111.10050, 2021.
Sarah Pratt, Rosanne Liu, and Ali Farhadi. What does a platypus look like? generating customized
  prompts for zero-shot image classification, 2022.
Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal,
  Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al. Learning transferable visual
  models from natural language supervision. In International Conference on Machine Learning
  (ICML), 2021.


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Shuhuai Ren, Lei Li, Xuancheng Ren, Guangxiang Zhao, and Xu Sun. Rethinking the openness of
  clip, 2022.
Kate Saenko, Brian Kulis, Mario Fritz, and Trevor Darrell. Adapting visual category models to new
  domains. In European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV), 2010.
Shibani Santurkar, Dimitris Tsipras, and Aleksander Madry. Breeds: Benchmarks for subpopulation
  shift. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2021.
Shibani Santurkar, Yann Dubois, Rohan Taori, Percy Liang, and Tatsunori Hashimoto. Is a caption
  worth a thousand images? a controlled study for representation learning, 2022.
Sheng Shen, Liunian Harold Li, Hao Tan, Mohit Bansal, Anna Rohrbach, Kai-Wei Chang, Zhewei
  Yao, and Kurt Keutzer. How much can clip benefit vision-and-language tasks? arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2107.06383, 2021.
Sheng Shen, Chunyuan Li, Xiaowei Hu, Yujia Xie, Jianwei Yang, Pengchuan Zhang, Anna
  Rohrbach, Zhe Gan, Lijuan Wang, Lu Yuan, Ce Liu, Kurt Keutzer, Trevor Darrell, and Jianfeng
  Gao. K-lite: Learning transferable visual models with external knowledge, 2022.
Carlos Nascimento Silla and Alex Alves Freitas. A survey of hierarchical classification across
  different application domains. Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery, 2010.
Yoad Tewel, Yoav Shalev, Idan Schwartz, and Lior Wolf. Zerocap: Zero-shot image-to-text genera-
  tion for visual-semantic arithmetic, 2021.
Hemanth Venkateswara, Jose Eusebio, Shayok Chakraborty, and Sethuraman Panchanathan. Deep
  hashing network for unsupervised domain adaptation. In Conference on Computer Vision and
  Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2017.
Mitchell Wortsman, Gabriel Ilharco, Jong Wook Kim, Mike Li, Simon Kornblith, Rebecca Roelofs,
 Raphael Gontijo-Lopes, Hannaneh Hajishirzi, Ali Farhadi, Hongseok Namkoong, and Ludwig
 Schmidt. Robust fine-tuning of zero-shot models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2109.01903, 2021.
Mitchell Wortsman, Gabriel Ilharco, Samir Ya Gadre, Rebecca Roelofs, Raphael Gontijo-Lopes,
 Ari S Morcos, Hongseok Namkoong, Ali Farhadi, Yair Carmon, Simon Kornblith, et al. Model
 soups: averaging weights of multiple fine-tuned models improves accuracy without increasing
 inference time. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 23965–23998. PMLR,
 2022.
Han Xiao, Kashif Rasul, and Roland Vollgraf. Fashion-mnist: a novel image dataset for benchmark-
  ing machine learning algorithms, 2017.
J. Xiao, J. Hays, K. A. Ehinger, A. Oliva, and A. Torralba. Sun database: Large-scale scene recog-
   nition from abbey to zoo. In 2010 IEEE Computer Society Conference on Computer Vision and
   Pattern Recognition, 2010.
Tong Xiao, Tian Xia, Yi Yang, Chang Huang, and Xiaogang Wang. Learning from massive noisy
  labeled data for image classification. In Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
  (CVPR), 2015.
Kai Yi, Xiaoqian Shen, Yunhao Gou, and Mohamed Elhoseiny. Exploring hierarchical graph repre-
  sentation for large-scale zero-shot image classification. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.01386, 2022.
Fisher Yu, Ari Seff, Yinda Zhang, Shuran Song, Thomas Funkhouser, and Jianxiong Xiao. Lsun:
  Construction of a large-scale image dataset using deep learning with humans in the loop, 2015.
Youngjae Yu, Jiwan Chung, Heeseung Yun, Jack Hessel, JaeSung Park, Ximing Lu, Prithviraj Am-
  manabrolu, Rowan Zellers, Ronan Le Bras, Gunhee Kim, and Yejin Choi. Multimodal knowledge
  alignment with reinforcement learning, 2022.
Andy Zeng, Maria Attarian, Brian Ichter, Krzysztof Choromanski, Adrian Wong, Stefan Welker,
  Federico Tombari, Aveek Purohit, Michael Ryoo, Vikas Sindhwani, Johnny Lee, Vincent Van-
  houcke, and Pete Florence. Socratic models: Composing zero-shot multimodal reasoning with
  language. arXiv, 2022.


                                               12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Xiaohua Zhai, Xiao Wang, Basil Mustafa, Andreas Steiner, Daniel Keysers, Alexander Kolesnikov,
  and Lucas Beyer. Lit: Zero-shot transfer with locked-image text tuning. In Proceedings of the
  IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2022.
Renrui Zhang, Rongyao Fang, Peng Gao, Wei Zhang, Kunchang Li, Jifeng Dai, Yu Qiao, and Hong-
  sheng Li. Tip-adapter: Training-free clip-adapter for better vision-language modeling. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2111.03930, 2021a.
Renrui Zhang, Ziyu Guo, Wei Zhang, Kunchang Li, Xupeng Miao, Bin Cui, Yu Qiao, Peng Gao, and
  Hongsheng Li. Pointclip: Point cloud understanding by clip. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.02413,
  2021b.
Kaiyang Zhou, Jingkang Yang, Chen Change Loy, and Ziwei Liu. Conditional prompt learning for
  vision-language models. In IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
  (CVPR), 2022a.
Kaiyang Zhou, Jingkang Yang, Chen Change Loy, and Ziwei Liu. Learning to prompt for vision-
  language models. International Journal of Computer Vision (IJCV), 2022b.


                                              13
   Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


   A PPENDIX

   A                E MPIRICAL E VIDENCE OF CLIP C ONFIDENCE

              1.0


              0.8
Probability


              0.6


              0.4


              0.2         Correct Predictions
                          Incorrect Predictions
                                             bo or
                                                    g
                                    bo b ll


                         rcu blish ent

                                          tru ng
                                            arm t
                                                ttle
                                                    s
                                              ch r
                                      l co co ir
                                           mp at
                                          dw uter
                                             fen g
                              le ins h e
                                 est tru at

                                 on bu nt

                                                  nt
                                                    t

                                                   ip


                                                  sh
                                                    f

                                          tru irt
                               win epie t
                                   d i t ce
                                          tru ck
                                           sq ent
                                               roo
                                         dy oa


                                                po



                                        tim men
                                                ca
                                                bu
                                                ba


                                                  c
                                               ba


                                                 in
                                                  a


                                               sh
                              ssi out me

                                             me


                                     ins sk


                                       ns ru

                                              ua
                                     ins ildi
                                             ell


                                     a m


                                             m
                                  ita



                          nti rd


                                 ed
                              dig



                      rca boa


                             ing
                         str
                    me key


                      pe


                                                  (a) nonliving26
              1.0

              0.9

              0.8

              0.7
Probability


              0.6

              0.5

              0.4
                          Correct Predictions
                          Incorrect Predictions
              0.3
                                rd
                     r


                                              t
                          tle



                                             e

                                             r
                                             e


                                             b
                                                                     g
                                                                     lf


                                                                    at
                                                                    ar


                                                                                         mo e
                                                           me fox


                                                            bu le
                                                                  rfly



                                                                                             ey
                                          rro
                    de


                                         ide
                                          ak


                                          us


                                                                                            ap
                                                                 wo
                                        cra

                                                      do


                                                                  et
                                                                 cc
                               liza


                                                                 be


                                                                                           nk
                         tur


                                                              tte
                an


                                      sn


                                      gro

                                       pa


                                                              be
                                      sp


                                                             sti
              am
      sal


                                                        do


                                                   (b) living17

   Figure 5: Distribution of argmax probabilities across ImageNet BREEDS datasets for correctly and
   incorrectly classified data points, with the diamonds representing average probability for each class.
   Correctly classified probabilities are on average higher than the misclassified probabilities.

   The motivation behind the reweighting step of CHiLS primarily comes from the heuristic that LLMs
   make correct predictions with high estimated probabilities assigned to them (Kadavath et al., 2022),
   and that CLIP models themselves are well-calibrated (Minderer et al., 2021). However, we also


                                                        14
   Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


              1.0


              0.8
Probability


              0.6


              0.4


              0.2        Correct Predictions
                         Incorrect Predictions
                    nt

                             d


                                                                  ft
                                                  al

                                                         ry


                                                                             nt

                                                                                  ure
                                    tile

                                             d


                                                                                                         nt


                                                                                               led e
                                                                                                          le

                                                                                                         ce
                                                                                                          r
                          bir


                                            po


                                                                cra
                                                 mm


                                                                                                      hic
                                                        sso


                                                                                                      ctu
                   e


                                                                        me


                                                                                        me


                                                                                                      du
                                 rep
                rm


                                                                                 nit
                                           hro


                                                                                                   ve

                                                                                                  pro
                                                                                                  tru
                                                                       uip


                                                                                       tru
                                                        ce
                                                 ma


                                                                              fur
              ga


                                       art


                                                      ac


                                                                                              es
                                                                                   ins
                                                                    eq


                                                                                            ee
                                                                                         ad
                                                                                         wh
                                                                                        n-m
                                                                                       ma
                                                              (c) entity13
              1.0


              0.8
Probability


              0.6


              0.4


              0.2
                         Correct Predictions
                         Incorrect Predictions
                        ca acead


          mu m instr tense


                    s e ck nt
                           sse es
                           saurine
                     aq arac rian
                      cruatic bnid
                           rni n
                         un insece
                             gu t
                        bo imate


                        qu ildin r
                           ip g


        me me add ent
                            ny e
                                    h


                         g tw t
              ho he armear

                rin hen lian s

              sic oto um il
                      in e t
             sp stru hicle

                       tabipmear
                            lew nt
                                 are
                             ve l
                       ve di el
                          ge sh
                               frue
                                   it
                                too
                         foo men


                   al r v en
                   ic e buarrie


          asu kitc app res
                                  r
                          st ir



                          pr lat


                   g u c


                                  l
                                fis


                               ss
                              tab
                               vo


                ort ne me
                        qu we
                        pa pent


                        u h


                            b
                       ser


               on
            ctr
        ele


                                                              (d) entity30

   verify whether there is some evidence of this behavior in CLIP models. Given that the output of a
   CLIP model is a probability distribution over the provided classes, we care specifically about the
   probability of the argmax class (i.e. the predicted class) when the model is correct and when it is
   incorrect. Across the BREEDS datasets for the standard ImageNet domain, in Figure 5 we show the
   distribution of the correct and incorrect argmax probabilities for each class (i.e. for each class ci , we
   show the output probabilties for ci when it was correctly classified and the output probabilities of
   the predicted classes when the true class is ci ). Whenever CLIP is correct, the associated probability
   is on average much higher than the probabilities associated with misclassification.


                                                                  15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


B    CLIP P RIMER

Open Vocabulary models (as termed in Pham et al. (2021)) refer to models that are able to classify
images by associating them with natural language descriptions of each class. These models are
“open” in the sense that they are to predict on an arbitrary vocabulary of descriptions (as opposed
to a fix set), thus allowing for arbitrary-way image classification. Popular open vocabulary models
include the model of focus CLIP (Radford et al., 2021) and ALIGN (Jia et al., 2021) as examples.
Contrastive Language Image Pretraining (CLIP) is a family of open vocabulary models, and the
focus of the present work. CLIP, which is comprised of a text encoder and an image encoder that
project into the same latent space, is trained in the following way: Given a set of image-caption pairs
(e.g. a photo of a dog with the caption “a photo of a dog.”), CLIP is trained to predict which caption
goes with which image as a contrastive learning objective by comparing the similarity between each
image embedding and each caption embedding.
At inference time (in the zero-shot setting), a naı̈ve method for image classification (which is the
initial baseline tried in Radford et al. (2021)) involves simply passing in the list of class names for a
given dataset, and calculating the similarity between a particular image embedding and each one of
these class embeddings. However, Radford et al. (2021) found that by taking a cue from the recent
literature on prompt engineering for large language models (Gao et al., 2020), CLIP can perform
significantly better as a zero-shot predictor if each class name is included in a natural language
prompt that resembles some sort of image caption (as that is what CLIP was trained on). As an
example, the standard baseline prompt mentioned is “A photo of a {}.”. In our work, we define a
prompt (or prompt template, which we use interchangeably) as any caption-like phrase in natural
language that a class name can be injected into.


C    A DDING C ONTEXT TO P ROMPTS AND GPT-3 Q UERIES


                         Dataset               [context]         Prompt Set Used
                       Nonliving26                N/A                ImageNet
                        Living17                  N/A                ImageNet
                         Entity13                 N/A                ImageNet
                         Entity30                 N/A                ImageNet
                        CIFAR20                   N/A                ImageNet
                        Food-101                “food”            Dataset-Specific
                        Fruits-360              “fruit”           Dataset-Specific
                       Fashion1M         “article of clothing”    Dataset-Specific
                     Fashion-MNIST       “article of clothing”       ImageNet
                      LSUN-Scene                  N/A                ImageNet
                         Office31          “office supply”        Dataset-Specific
                       OfficeHome          “office supply”           ImageNet
                        ObjectNet                 N/A                ImageNet
                        EuroSAT                   N/A             Dataset-Specific
                       RESISC45                   N/A             Dataset-Specific

                   Table 3: Context tokens and prompt sets used for each dataset.

In order to disentangle the effect that well-formed prompt templates have on the success of CHiLS,
for each dataset (besides the BREEDS datasets and ObjectNet as they are already semantically
similar to ImageNet) we compare the ImageNet 75 classes against a dataset-specific set of prompt
templates. In the case of EuroSAT, RESISC45, CIFAR20 and Food-101, we directly use the prompt
template set from Radford et al. (2021). For LSUN-Scene, we use the prompt template set for
SUN397 (Xiao et al., 2010), as the two datasets are semantically similar. For the rest of the datasets
not yet mentioned (namely Fruits360, Fashion1M, Fashion-MNIST, Office31, and OfficeHome) we
add the [context] marker into the standard prompt template as mentioned in Section 4.1. The prompt
sets themselves can be directly found in the code implementation for this project.


                                                   16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


For the GPT-3 Query with additional context, we add the respective [context] token to the query
if the dataset-specific prompt template is used. Note that we did not create [context] tokens for
EuroSAT, LSUN-Scene, or RESISC45 despite testing dataset-specific prompt templates, as there did
not seem to be a concise semantic label to describe the classes in these datasets. In Table 3, we list
the dataset, the [context] token (if applicable), and the final prompt set used for all the experiments.
Here, we found that while dataset-specific prompts often improved baseline performance, they were
not gauranteed to improve performance, as in both Fasion-MNIST and OfficeHome the general
ImageNet prompt set performed better.

D    I NCLUDING S UPERCLASS L ABELS IN L ABEL S ETS

                   CHiLS Accuracy       CHiLS Accuracy       CHiLS Accuracy       CHiLS Accuracy
  Dataset
                    (Existing Map)      (Existing Map+)       (GPT-3 Map)          (GPT-3 Map+)
  Nonliving26       90.67 (+10.85)       89.80 (+9.98)         81.46 (+1.63)        81.51 (+1.69)
  Living17           93.80 (+2.72)       93.62 (+2.54)         91.30 (+0.22)        91.43 (+0.35)
  Entity13          92.59 (+15.13)       92.06 (+14.60)        76.97 (−0.48)        78.11 (+0.65)
  Entity30          88.87 (+18.55)       87.29 (+16.97)        71.80 (+1.48)        71.75 (+1.43)
  CIFAR20           85.30 (+25.76)       81.40 (+21.86)        65.70 (+6.16)        65.90 (+6.36)
  Food-101                N/A                 N/A              91.63 (−0.19)        91.73 (−0.09)
  Fruits-360         60.87 (+0.40)       60.63 (+0.16)         62.48 (+2.01)        62.17 (+1.70)
  Fashion1M               N/A                 N/A              47.51 (+1.73)        47.44 (+1.66)
  Fashion-
                          N/A                  N/A             67.82 (−0.98)        70.85 (+2.35)
  MNIST
  LSUN-Scene             N/A                  N/A              88.80 (+0.60)        88.97 (+0.77)
  Office31               N/A                  N/A              86.58 (−2.71)        89.37 (+0.24)
  OfficeHome             N/A                  N/A              87.88 (−0.97)        88.76 (−0.09)
  ObjectNet         85.34 (+32.24)       81.30 (+28.20)        51.23 (−2.07)        53.52 (+0.42)
  EuroSAT                N/A                  N/A              62.21 (+0.11)        62.40 (+0.30)
  RESISC45               N/A                  N/A              71.64 (-0.48)        72.52 (+0.40)

Table 4: Zero-Shot Accuracy Performance across benchmarks, controlling for the presence of the
superclass label within each respective label set. In the existing map case, adding the superclass
labels removes some of the performance gains of the raw existing map. In the GPT-3 Map case,
adding the superclass is crucial to maintaining performance in most datasets

With CHiLS when the existing map is not available, we append the superclass name to each label
set to account for possible noise in the GPT-generated label set. In Table 4, we show the effect
that this inclusion has in both the existing map and GPT-map cases. Note that in the main paper,
columns 1 and 4 correspond to the main results (i.e. no superclass labels in existing maps and su-
perclass labels in GPT-3 maps). In both cases, the presence of the superclass label more effectively
strikes a balance between subclass and superclass predictions. In the existing map case, this actually
hurts performance, as the subclass labels are optimal in the given dataset. In the GPT-3 map case,
while there are some datasets where removing the superclass label improves performance (namely
Fruits360 and Entity30), in ever other case removing the superclass label hurts performance, some-
times by multiple percentage points.


                                                  17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


E    L ABEL S ET A BLATION ACCURACY

                             CHiLS                    CHiLS                  CHiLS                  CHiLS                  CHiLS
    Dataset
                            (m = 1)                  (m = 5)                (m = 10)               (m = 15)               (m = 50)
    Nonliving26        80.05 (+0.23)               81.12(+1.30)       81.51 (+1.69)              81.79 (+1.97)          79.60 (−0.20)
    Living17           91.47 (+0.39)               92.69 (+1.61)      91.43 (+0.35)              91.55 (+0.48)          91.52 (+0.45)
    Entity13           76.75 (−0.70)               78.15 (+0.70)      78.11 (+0.65)              78.42 (+0.96)          75.82 (−1.63)
    Entity30           72.25 (+1.93)               71.47 (+1.15)      71.75 (+1.43)              73.38 (+3.06)          70.18 (−0.14)
    CIFAR20            63.61 (+4.02)               64.95 (+5.41)      65.90 (+6.36)              62.80 (+3.26)          63.72 (+4.13)
    Food-101           91.57 (−0.25)               91.75 (−0.07)      91.73 (−0.09)              91.51 (−0.31)          91.58 (−0.24)
    Fruits-360         61.18 (+0.47)               62.33 (+1.86)      62.17 (+1.70)              62.51 (+2.04)          61.19 (+0.48)
    Fashion1M          38.57 (−7.21)               45.77 (−0.01)      47.55 (+1.66)              46.93 (+1.15)          41.98 (−3.80)
    Fashion-
                       67.16 (−1.34)               70.93 (+2.44)      70.84 (+2.35)              69.09 (+0.60)          69.98 (+1.49)
    MNIST
    LSUN-Scene         87.20 (−1.00)               86.33 (−1.87)      88.97 (+0.77)              86.80 (−1.40)          85.60 (−2.60)
    Office31           89.46 (+0.36)               88.08 (−1.05)      89.37 (+0.24)              89.03 (−0.10)          90.23 (+1.10)
    OfficeHome         88.06 (−0.79)               89.12 (+0.27)      88.76 (−0.09)              89.06 (+0.21)          88.39 (−0.46)
    ObjectNet          50.12 (−2.98)               53.29 (+0.18)      58.19 (+0.42)              57.66 (+4.56)          58.19 (+5.09)
    EuroSAT            62.59 (+0.49)               62.21 (+0.10)      62.40 (+0.30)              62.89 (+0.79)          61.39 (−0.71)
    RESISC45           73.19 (+1.06)               72.05 (−0.08)      72.52 (+0.40)              72.50 (+0.38)          70.61 (−1.52)

Table 5: Accuracy across different label set sizes generated by GPT-3, with best performing label set
size in each row bolded. In general, there is no consistent trend related to label set size and zero-shot
performance across datasets.

Table 5 displays the raw accuracy scores for CHiLS across different label set sizes.

F    A LTERNATIVE AGGREGATION R ESULTS


                         Superclass (linear                              72.28
                        prompt averaging)


                     Superclass (set-based                          71.00
                         prompt mapping)


                          CHiLS (True Map,                                                                      85.35
                  set-based class mapping)


                         CHiLS (True Map,                                                          81.86
                         linear averaging)


                          CHiLS (GPT Map,                                        74.42
                  set-based class mapping)


                          CHiLS (GPT Map,                                72.40
                         linear averaging)

                                              60     65        70               75          80             85
                                                                         Average Accuracy


Figure 6: Average accuracy across datasets for varying aggregative methods on both the prompt
and subclass steps of the zero-shot pipeline. In general, linear averaging for subclasses performs
worse than our proposed set-based method, while linear averaging for prompts (for raw superclass
prediction) performs better thant using a set-based mapping.

Figure 6 displays the results of our ablation on alternative ways to aggregate subclasses and prompts.


                                                                    18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


G    N OISY AVAILABLE H IERARCHY D ETAILS
The ImageNet (Deng et al., 2009) dataset itself includes a rich hierarchical taxonomy, where every
class is a leaf node of the hierarchy. In the original BREEDS (Santurkar et al., 2021) work, the
authors modify the structure slightly in order to place concepts at semantically-similar levels of
granularity at the same depth, and additional restrict the number of subclasses within each of the
BREEDS datasets in order to balance the data. Thus, it is possible for each BREEDS dataset to
use the dataset with its superclasses and restricted set of subclasses but provide CHiLS with all the
subclass labels present in the ImageNet hierarchy for each superclass (i.e. all leaf nodes descended
from each superclass node). In Table 7, we display a subset of the living17 BREEDS dataset class
structure with the original subclasses and the ImageNet subclasses. Observe that in some cases,
there are many subclass labels provided to CHiLS than is present in the data.

H    DATASET D ETAILS

               Dataset                                 Domains
                              ImageNet, ImageNet-Sketch, ImageNetv2, ImageNet-c
              BREEDS
                             {Fog-1, Contrast-2, Snow-3, Gaussian Blur-4, Saturate-5}
              Office31                      Amazon, DSLR, webcam
             OfficeHome                 Clipart, Art, Real World, Product

                 Table 6: Domains used for BREEDS, Office31, and OfficeHome.


CHiLS Across Domain Shifts For each of the BREEDS datasets (Santurkar et al., 2021), Office31
(Saenko et al., 2010), and OfficeHome (Venkateswara et al., 2017), all results presented are the
average over different domains. The specific domains used are show in Table 6.

Fruits-360 For zero-shot classification with CLIP models, Fruits-360 (Mureşan & Oltean, 2018)
in its raw form is somewhat ill-formed from a class name perspective, as there are classes only
differentiated by a numeric index (e.g. “Apple Golden 1” and “Apple Golden 2”) and classes at
mixed granularity (e.g. “forest nut” and “hazelnut” are separate classes even though hazelnuts are a
type of forest nut). We thus manually rename classes using the structure laid out in Table 9, which
results in a 59-way superclass classification problem, with 102 ground-truth subclasses.

ObjectNet The ObjectNet dataset (Barbu et al., 2019) has partial overlap (113 classes) with the
ImageNet (Deng et al., 2009) hierarchical class structure. From this subset of ObjectNet, we use the
BREEDS hierarchy (Santurkar et al., 2021) to generate a coarse-grained version of ObjectNet that
is shown in Table 8. In this 11-way classification task, the true subclasses are the original ObjectNet
classes.


                                                  19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


     Superclass    Original BREEDS subclasses            All ImageNet subclasses
     salamander European fire salamander, common         European fire salamander, common
                newt, eft, spotted salamander            newt, eft, spotted salamander, ax-
                                                         olotl
     turtle        loggerhead, leatherback turtle, mud   loggerhead, leatherback turtle, mud
                   turtle, terrapin                      turtle, terrapin, box turtle
     lizard        common         iguana,   American     banded gecko, common iguana,
                   chameleon, agama, frilled lizard      American chameleon, whiptail,
                                                         agama, frilled lizard, alligator
                                                         lizard, Gila monster, green lizard,
                                                         African chameleon,           Komodo
                                                         dragon
     snake         thunder snake, ringneck snake, dia-   thunder snake, ringneck snake, hog-
                   mondback, sidewinder                  nose snake, green snake, king
                                                         snake, garter snake, water snake,
                                                         vine snake, night snake, boa con-
                                                         strictor, rock python, Indian cobra,
                                                         green mamba, sea snake, horned
                                                         viper, diamondback, sidewinder
     spider        black and gold garden spider, barn    black and gold garden spider, barn
                   spider, garden spider, black widow    spider, garden spider, black widow,
                                                         tarantula, wolf spider
     grouse        black grouse, ptarmigan, ruffed       black grouse, ptarmigan, ruffed
                   grouse, prairie chicken               grouse, prairie chicken
     parrot        African grey, macaw, sulphur-         African grey, macaw, sulphur-
                   crested cockatoo, lorikeet            crested cockatoo, lorikeet
     crab          Dungeness crab, rock crab, fiddler    Dungeness crab, rock crab, fiddler
                   crab, king crab                       crab, king crab

Table 7: Subset of living17 class hierarchy, showing the difference between the original BREEDS
subclasses and the ImageNet subclasses used for the ablation in Section 4.4: Noisy Available Hier-
archies.

   Table 9: Mapping from original class names to new subclass and superclasses for Fruits-360.

                   Original Class        Cleaned Subclass     Cleaned Superclass
                 Apple Braeburn            braeburn apple             apple
               Apple Crimson Snow       crimson snow apple            apple
                 Apple Golden 1             golden apple              apple
                 Apple Golden 2             golden apple              apple
                 Apple Golden 3             golden apple              apple
               Apple Granny Smith       granny smith apple            apple
                Apple Pink Lady            pink lady apple            apple
                  Apple Red 1                 red apple               apple
                  Apple Red 2                 red apple               apple
                  Apple Red 3                 red apple               apple
               Apple Red Delicious      red delicious apple           apple
               Apple Red Yellow 1         red yellow apple            apple
               Apple Red Yellow 2         red yellow apple            apple
                     Apricot                    apricot              apricot
                    Avocado                    avocado              avocado
                  Avocado ripe                 avocado              avocado
                     Banana                     banana               banana
               Banana Lady Finger        lady finger banana          banana
                   Banana Red                red banana              banana
                     Beetroot                  beetroot             beetroot
                    Blueberry                 blueberry            blueberry
                   Cactus fruit              cactus fruit         cactus fruit

                                               20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                   Cantaloupe 1               melon           melon
                   Cantaloupe 2               melon           melon
                    Carambula                star fruit      star fruit
                   Cauliflower            cauliflower      cauliflower
                     Cherry 1                 cherry          cherry
                     Cherry 2                 cherry          cherry
                  Cherry Rainier         rainier cherry       cherry
                Cherry Wax Black          black cherry        cherry
                 Cherry Wax Red            red cherry         cherry
                Cherry Wax Yellow        yellow cherry        cherry
                     Chestnut                    nut             nut
                    Clementine                orange          orange
                      Cocos                    cocos           cocos
                       Corn                     corn            corn
                    Corn Husk               corn husk       corn husk
                  Cucumber Ripe            cucumber         cucumber
                 Cucumber Ripe 2           cucumber         cucumber
                       Dates                    date            date
                     Eggplant                eggplant        eggplant
                        Fig                      fig             fig
                   Ginger Root             ginger root      ginger root
                    Granadilla             granadilla      passion fruit
                    Grape Blue             blue grape          grape
                    Grape Pink             pink grape          grape
                   Grape White            white grape          grape
                  Grape White 2           white grape          grape
                  Grape White 3           white grape          grape
                  Grape White 4           white grape          grape
                  Grapefruit Pink       pink grapefruit     grapefruit
                 Grapefruit White       white grapefruit    grapefruit
                      Guava                    gauva           gauva
                     Hazelnut                    nut             nut
                   Huckleberry            huckleberry      huckleberry
                       Kaki                     kaki       persimmon
                       Kiwi                     kiwi            kiwi
                     Kohlrabi                kohlrabi        kohlrabi
                    Kumquats                kumquat          kumquat
                      Lemon                   lemon           lemon
                  Lemon Meyer            meyer lemon          lemon
                      Limes                     lime            lime
                      Lychee                  lychee          lychee
                    Mandarine                 orange          orange
                      Mango                   mango           mango
                    Mango Red              red mango          mango
                    Mangostan              mangostan        mangostan
                     Maracuja               maracuja       passion fruit
                Melon Piel de Sapo            melon           melon
                     Mulberry               mulberry         mulberry
                     Nectarine              nectarine        nectarine
                  Nectarine Flat         flat nectarine      nectarine
                    Nut Forest              forest nut           nut
                    Nut Pecan               pecan nut            nut
                    Onion Red               red onion          onion
                Onion Red Peeled            red onion          onion
                   Onion White            white onion          onion
                      Orange                  orange          orange
                      Papaya                  papaya          papaya
                   Passion Fruit          passion fruit    passion fruit
                      Peach                    peach           peach


                                             21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                      Peach 2                  peach          peach
                    Peach Flat             flat peach         peach
                        Pear                    pear           pear
                       Pear 2                   pear           pear
                    Pear Abate             abate pear          pear
                   Pear Forelle           forelle pear         pear
                    Pear Kaiser           kaiser pear          pear
                   Pear Monster          monster pear          pear
                     Pear Red                red pear          pear
                    Pear Stone             stone pear          pear
                  Pear Williams         williams pear          pear
                      Pepino                  pepino         pepino
                  Pepper Green           green pepper        pepper
                  Pepper Orange         orange pepper        pepper
                    Pepper Red            red pepper         pepper
                  Pepper Yellow         yellow pepper        pepper
                      Physalis          groundcherry     groundcherry
               Physalis with Husk       groundcherry     groundcherry
                     Pineapple             pineapple       pineapple
                 Pineapple Mini         mini pineapple     pineapple
                   Pitahaya Red          dragon fruit     dragon fruit
                       Plum                    plum            plum
                      Plum 2                   plum            plum
                      Plum 3                   plum            plum
                   Pomegranate           pomegranate     pomegranate
                 Pomelo Sweetie              pomelo          pomelo
                    Potato Red             red potato         potato
               Potato Red Washed           red potato         potato
                   Potato Sweet          sweet potato         potato
                   Potato White          white potato         potato
                      Quince                  quince          quince
                    Rambutan                rambutan        rambutan
                    Raspberry              raspberry        raspberry
                    Redcurrant             redcurrant      redcurrant
                       Salak                   salak       snake fruit
                    Strawberry            strawberry      strawberry
                Strawberry Wedge          strawberry      strawberry
                     Tamarillo              tamarillo       tamarillo
                      Tangelo                tangelo         tangelo
                     Tomato 1                 tomato         tomato
                     Tomato 2                 tomato         tomato
                     Tomato 3                 tomato         tomato
                     Tomato 4                 tomato         tomato
               Tomato Cherry Red        cherry tomato        tomato
                  Tomato Heart           heart tomato        tomato
                 Tomato Maroon          maroon tomato        tomato
                 Tomato Yellow          yellow tomato        tomato
               Tomato not Ripened       unripe tomato        tomato
                      Walnut                    nut             nut
                   Watermelon                 melon           melon


                                             22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                        Table 8: Class Structure for ObjectNet experiments.

             Superclass                   Subclasses (Original ObjectNet)
                                          {Dress, Jeans, Skirt, Suit jacket,
              garment
                                        Sweater, Swimming trunks, T-shirt}
                                  {Bath towel, Desk lamp, Dishrag or hand towel,
          soft furnishings
                                     Doormat, Lampshade, Paper towel, Pillow}
                                 {Backpack, Dress shoe (men), Helmet, Necklace,
             accessory                Plastic bag, Running shoe, Sandal, Sock,
                                      Sunglasses, Tie, Umbrella, Winter glove}
                              {Coffee/French press, Fan, Hair dryer, Iron (for clothes),
             appliance
                               Microwave, Portable heater, Toaster, Vacuum cleaner}
                              {Cellphone, Computer mouse, Keyboard, Laptop (open),
             equipment               Monitor, Printer, Remote control, Speaker,
                                Still Camera, TV, Tennis racket, Weight (exercise)}
             furniture                             {Bench, Chair}
              toiletry                          {Band Aid, Lipstick}
          wheeled vehicle                         {Basket, Bicycle}
           cooked food                              {Bread loaf}
             produce                          {Banana, Lemon, Orange}
             beverage                              {Drinking Cup}


                                                23
