Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


H IGHWAY R EINFORCEMENT L EARNING
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                           A BSTRACT

         Traditional Dynamic Programming (DP) approaches suffer from slow backward
         credit-assignment (CA): one time step per update. A popular solution for multi-
         step CA is to use multi-step Bellman operators. Existing control methods, how-
         ever, typically suffer from large variance of multi-step off-policy corrections or
         are biased, preventing convergence. To overcome these problems, we introduce
         a novel multi-step Bellman Optimality operator, which quickly transports credit
         information from the future into the past through multiple вҖңhighwaysвҖқ induced by
         various behavioral policies. Our operator is unbiased with respect to the optimal
         value function and converges faster than the traditional Bellman Optimality oper-
         ator. Its computational complexity is linear in the number of behavioral policies
         and lookahead depth. Moreover, it yields a family of novel multi-step off-policy
         algorithms that do not need importance sampling. We derive a convergent multi-
         step off-policy variant of Q-learning called Highway Q-Learning, and also a deep
         function approximation variant called Highway DQN. Experiments on toy tasks
         and visual MinAtar Games (Young & Tian, 2019) illustrate that our algorithms
         outperform similar multi-step methods.


1   I NTRODUCTION
Recent advances in multi-step reinforcement learning (RL) have achieved remarkable empirical suc-
cess (Horgan et al., 2018; Barth-Maron et al., 2018). However, a major challenge of multi-step RL
is to balance the trade-off between traditional вҖңsafeвҖқ one-time-step-per-trial credit assignment (CA)
relying on knowledge stored in a learned Value Function (VF), and large CA jumps across many
time steps. A traditional way of addressing this issue is to impose a fixed prior distribution over
the possible numbers of CA steps, e.g., TD(О») (Sutton & Barto, 2018), GAE(О») (Schulman et al.,
2016). This typically ignores the current state-specific quality of the current VF, which dynamically
improves during learning. Besides, the prior distribution usually has to be tuned case by case.
Multi-step RL should also work for off-policy learning, that is, learning from data obtained by
other behavioral policies. Most previous research on this has focused on Policy Iteration(PI)-based
approaches (Sutton & Barto, 2018), which need to correct the discrepancy between target policy
and behavior policy to evaluate the VF (Precup, 2000; Harutyunyan et al., 2016; Munos et al., 2016;
Sutton & Barto, 2018; Schulman et al., 2016). Classic importance sampling(IS)-based methods is
proven to be unbiased, but suffer from high variance due to the product of IS ratios (Cortes et al.,
2010; Metelli et al., 2018). Recently, several variance reduction methods have been proposed and
shown to be effective in practice, such as Q(О») (Harutyunyan et al., 2016), Retrace (О») (Munos et al.,
2016) and C-trace (Rowland et al., 2020), and so on (Espeholt et al., 2018; Horgan et al., 2018;
Asis et al., 2017). In contrast to PI, Value Iteration (VI) methods propagate the values of the most
promising actions backward one step at a time (Sutton & Barto, 2018; SzepesvaМҒri, 2010). Such
methods can safely use data from any behavioral policy. However, step-by-step value propagation
makes them somewhat ill-suited for general multi-step CA.
Here we provide a new tool for multi-step off-policy learning by extending VI approaches to the
multi-step setting. The foundation of our method is a new Bellman operator, the Highway Operator,
which connects current and future states through multiple вҖңhighways,вҖқ and focuses on the most
promising one. Highways are constructed through various policies looking ahead for multiple steps.
Our operator has the following desirable properties: 1) It yields a new Bellman Optimality Equation
that reflects the latent structure of multi-step CA, providing a novel sufficient condition for the
optimal VF; 2) It effectively assigns future credit to past states across multiple time steps and has


                                                  1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


remarkable convergence properties; 3) It yields a family of novel multi-step off-policy algorithms
that do not need importance sampling, safely using arbitrary off-policy data. Experiments on toy
tasks and visual MinAtar Games (Young & Tian, 2019) illustrate that our Highway RL algorithms
outperform existing multi-step methods.

2       P RELIMINARIES
A Markov Decision Processes (MDP) (Puterman, 2014) is described by the tuple M =
(S, A, Оі, T , Вө0 , R), where S is the state space; A is the action space; Оі вҲҲ [0, 1) is the discount
factor. We assume MDPs with countable S (discrete topology) and finite A. T : S Г— A вҶ’ вҲҶ(S)
is the transition probability function; Вө0 denotes the initial state distribution; R : S Г— A вҶ’ вҲҶ(R)
denotes reward probability function. We use the following symbols to denote related conditional
probabilities: T (sвҖІ |s, a), R(В·|s, a), s, sвҖІ вҲҲ S, a вҲҲ A. We also use r(s, a) вүң ERвҲјR(В·|s,a) [R] for
convenience. In order to make the space of value functions complete (assumption of Banach fixed
point theorem), we assume bounded rewards, which with discounting produce bounded value func-
tions. We denote lвҲһ (X ) the space of bounded sequences with supremum norm вҲҘВ·вҲҘвҲһ with support X
assuming X is countable and has discrete topology. Completeness of our value spaces then follows
from completeness of lвҲһ (N) 1 .
The goal is to find a policy ПҖ : S вҶ’ вҲҶ(A) that yield maximal      PвҲһ  return. The return is defined as
the accumulated discounted reward from time step t, i.e., Gt = n=0 Оі n r(st+n , at+n ). The state-
value function (VF) of a policy ПҖ is defined as the expected return of being in state s and following
policy ПҖ, V ПҖ (s) вүң E [Gt |st = s; ПҖ]. Let О  denote the space of all policies. The optimal VF is V вҲ— =
maxПҖвҲҲО  V ПҖ . It is also convenient to define the action-VF, QПҖ (s, a) вүң E [Gt |st = s, at = a; ПҖ]
and the optimal action-VF is denoted as QвҲ— = maxПҖвҲҲО  QПҖ . The Bellman Expectation/Optimality
Equation and the corresponding operators are as follows:

                B ПҖ V ПҖ = V ПҖ , where (B ПҖ V )(s) вүң EaвҲјПҖ(В·|s),sвҖІ вҲјT (В·|s,a) [r(s, a) + ОіV (sвҖІ )]                         (1)
                    BV вҲ— = V вҲ— , where (BV )(s) вүң max r(s, a) + ОіEsвҖІ вҲјT (В·|s,a) [V (sвҖІ )] .

                                                                                                                         (2)
                                                          a


3       H IGHWAY R EINFORCEMENT L EARNING
Value Iteration (VI) looks ahead for one step to identify a promising value using only short-term
information (see eq. 2). How can we quickly exploit long-term information through larger looka-
heads? Our idea is to exploit the information conveyed by policies. We connect current and future
states through multiple вҖңhighwaysвҖқ induced by policies, allowing for the unimpeded flow of credit
across various lookaheads, and then focus on the most promising highway. Formally, we propose
                                                   О 
the novel Highway Bellman Optimality Operator GN     (Highway Operator in short), defined by
                                                   b



                                     "nвҲ’1                                                                        #
                                      X                                h                                     i
     О                                         t               n
                                                                           r(sn , aвҖІn ) + ОіEsвҖІn+1 V   sвҖІn+1

    GN V (s0 ) вүң max max EП„sn0 вҲјПҖ            Оі r (st , at ) + Оі max                                                  ,
     b
                                                                 вҖІ
                                                                                                                         (3)
                   b nвҲҲN
                 ПҖвҲҲО                                               an
                                       t=0


where О b = {ПҖ1 , В· В· В· , ПҖm В· В· В· , ПҖM |ПҖm вҲҲ О } is a set of behavioral policies, which are used to collect
data; n is called the lookahead depth (also named bootstrapping step in RL literature), and N is
the set of lookahead depths, which we assume always includes 0 (0 вҲҲ N ) unless explicitly stated
otherwise; П„sn0 = (s0 , a0 , s1 , a1 , s2 , a2 , В· В· В· , sn ), and П„sn0 вҲј ПҖ is the trajectory starting from s0 by
executing policy ПҖ for n steps. Fig. 1 (Left) illustrates the backup diagram of this operator. Our
operator can be rewritten using the Bellman Operators:
                                         О                              n
                                        GN V вүң max max (B ПҖ ) BV.                                                        (4)
                                          b
                                                     b nвҲҲN
                                                   ПҖвҲҲО 


As implied by eq. (3) and eq. (4), given some trial, we pick a policy and a possible lookahead (up
to the trial end if N is sufficiently large) that maximize the cumulative reward during the lookahead
    1
        The space of all bounded sequences with supremum norm, which is known to be a complete metric space.


                                                         2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                            action
                           max рқ‘ӣ = 0        state
                            "                                              max
                                                         max                 "
                                                          !
                       рқңӢ#       max рқ‘ӣ = 1                                                            1                                     -1            2
                  max            "                             рқ‘Ҷ!         вҖҰ                  рқ‘Ҷ"                  рқ‘Ҷ#             вҖҰ               рқ‘Ҷ$              рқ‘Ҷ%
                   !
                       рқңӢ#     рқңӢ#
                                       max рқ‘ӣ = 2
                                        "
                                                         max                                                                                            10
                                                          "                            -1
                                                               рқ‘Ҷ(         вҖҰ                  рқ‘Ҷ)                  рқ‘Ҷ'            вҖҰ                рқ‘Ҷ*              рқ‘Ҷ&
                                            рқңӢ"
                   max


                                вҖҰ
                       !
                                                          policy рқңӢ/.0   policy рқңӢ+,-.        reward       state        (undirected) transition    (directed) transition
                                            рқңӢ!

                                                             О 
Figure 1: (Left) Backup diagram of Highway Operator GN          with N = {0, 1, 2}. (Right) An illus-
                                                                                                     b

trative example of вҖңhighwayвҖқ under a simple N -horizon MDP, where N is the horizon between the
start state sA and the end state sZ . With the highway (dashed lines) induced by rolling-out behav-
ioral policies, the start state sA can directly access various deeper horizon information. By taking
maximization over this information, the high credit information can be directly assigned to the pre-
vious states through the highway.


interval plus a dynamic programming-based estimate of the future return. This provides a highway
to quickly transport credit information from the future into the past. ThatвҖҷs why our operator gen-
erally converges faster than the classical Bellman Optimality Operator. See the detailed theoretical
analysis in Section 5. Fig. 1 (Right) illustrates this highway through an example: an N -horizon
MDP problem and two policies. A highway connects the start state sA to information derived from
deeper lookaheads. In this example, our operator converges to the optimal VF within 2 iterations,
while B needs N .
The following result shows that our Highway operator is a contraction on the complete metric space
lвҲһ and admits V вҲ— as a unique fixed point.

                                                   b and N (s.t. 0 вҲҲ N ), we have
Theorem 1 (Properties of Highway Operator) For any О 
1) GNО 
       is a contraction on complete metric space lвҲһ (S), i.e. for any V, V вҖІ вҲҲ lвҲһ (S), we have2
        b

            b вҖІ
   О 
вҲҘGN V вҲ’ GN О 
             V вҲҘ вүӨ вҲҘBV вҲ’ BV вҖІ вҲҘ вүӨ ОівҲҘV вҲ’ V вҖІ вҲҘ;
   b


2) (Highway Bellman Optimality Equation, Highway Equation in short) V вҲ— is the only fixed point
 О 
GN                                           О 
    , that is, for all V вҲҲ lвҲһ (S) holds V = GN V if and only if V = V вҲ— . Formally, we have
  b                                          b


                                                  О  вҲ—                                          n
                                                 GN V вүң max max (B ПҖ ) BV вҲ— = V вҲ— ,                                                                                      (5)
                                                     b
                                                                 b nвҲҲN
                                                               ПҖвҲҲО 



                                                        b k ),k вҲҲ N, the sequence (G О    О 
                                                                                         b kвҲ’1
3) For any V0 вҲҲ lвҲһ (S) and any sequence of policy sets (О                            N в—Ұ GN     в—Ұ
                                                                                     bk

         О 1
. . . в—Ұ GN  )[V0 ],k вҲҲ N converges R-linearly to V вҲ— with convergence rate Оі.
            b



All the proofs are provided in Appendix A. Note that 0 вҲҲ N is necessary for the guarantee of the
fixed point property (Point 2), but not for the contraction property. This theorem implies that our
Highway operator can provide a powerful extension to Bellman Optimality Equation, which can be
potentially applied to various RL control methods. Table 1 summarizes the comparison to classical
Bellman Operators and some advanced operators. More details on the comparison are in Section 5.


4       A LGORITHMS

Here we illustrate three applications of our Highway theory for model-based and model-free RL
algorithms. Although we listed only three instances in this paper, note that our theory can be poten-
tially applied to various RL methods which involve value estimation, such as actor-critic methods.

    2
        We denote by вҲҘ В· вҲҘ the supremum norm throughout the paper.


                                                                                 3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                                                                                                NOT suffering
        Type                                  Operator                   Fixed Point           Guaranteed convergence    Convergence Rate
                                                                                                                                              variance explosion
                                                                                                                                                  of IS ratios

                            Bellman Optimality Operator B (eq. 2)        V вҲ— /QвҲ—                          /                      Оі                   вң“
 Classical Operators                                            вҖІ                вҖІ        вҖІ
                           Bellman Expectation Operator BПҖ (eq. 1)       V ПҖ /QПҖ                          /                      Оі                   вң“
                       вҖ  Multi-Step Bellman Optimality      i (N вүҘ 2)
                                                       Operator                                      For О 
                                                                                                         b s.t.
                                            h                            V вҲ— /QвҲ—                       b ПҖ = ПҖвҲ—                ОіN                    вң“
                                   EПҖвҲјP      (BПҖ )N вҲ’1 B                                         вҲҖПҖ вҲҲ О ,
                                          О 
                                          b
                            (Hessel et al., 2018; Horgan et al., 2018)
 Multi-Step Off-Policy В§ Multi-Step IS-based Bellman Expectation Operator    вҖІ    вҖІ
       Operators
                                               h     вҖІ   i
                                                                          V ПҖ /QПҖ                   For any О ,
                                                                                                            b N                ОіN                    Г—
                                     E ПҖвҲјP       (BМҶПҖ )N
                                                     ПҖ
                                          О b
                                      (Sutton & Barto, 2018)
                                        Q(О») Operator                            вҖІ        вҖІ         For О 
                                                                                                        b s.t.
                                                                         V ПҖ /QПҖ                                                 Оі                   вң“
                                   (Harutyunyan et al., 2016)                                      b ПҖ is close to ПҖ вҖІ
                                                                                              вҲҖПҖ вҲҲ О ,
                                       Retrace(О») Operator                   ПҖвҖІ       ПҖвҖІ             For any О                    Оі                   вң“
                                                                         V           /Q                      b
                                       (Munos et al., 2016)
                                  Highway Operator (eq. 4)
                                                                         V вҲ— /QвҲ—                            b N          Оі (Оі 2 , Оі N under          вң“
                                О 
                                                                                                    For any О ,
                               GN вүң max max (BПҖ )n B                                                                     some conditions)
                                  b
 Highway Operator                          b nвҲҲN
                                         ПҖвҲҲО 
  and its Variants
                           Softmax Highway Operator (eq. 9)
      (Ours)                                                             V вҲ— /QвҲ—                          b N, Оұ
                                                                                                  For any О ,                    Оі                    вң“
                       eО 
                       G          Оұ      Оұ
                                                       (BПҖ )n B
                        N вүң smax smax         max
                         b
                                  ПҖвҲҲО 
                                    b     nвҖІ вҲҲN nвҲҲ{0,nвҖІ }

                              вҖЎ Expectation Highway Operator
                              N
                                                                         V вҲ— /QвҲ—                            b N
                                                                                                    For any О ,                   Оі                   вң“
                            GО 
                             b вүң EПҖвҲјP               max (BПҖ )n B
                                              О 
                                              b     nвҲҲN



                                      b denote the set of behavioral policies; P is a distribution over
Table 1: Properties of the operators. О                                          О 
                                                                                b
О  and P (ПҖ) is the probability of selecting ПҖ; ПҖ вҖІ denotes the target policy of policy evaluation. вҖ 
b
               О 
               b
                                                                                      вҖІ
and вҖЎ: Please refer to Appendix A.2 for details. В§: BМҶПҖПҖ is the importance sampling-based (IS-based)
Bellman Expectation Operator (see Appendix A.4).


4.1     M ODEL - BASED R EINFORCEMENT L EARNING

Highway Value Iteration. From the new operator, we can naturally derive a new Value Iteration
                                                                                                 О 
algorithm, (Algorithm B.1). Specifically, for a finite S, the update using the Highway Operator GN
                                                                                                 b

(eq. 3) can be written as

                                                                                          PART3
                                  z"                           }| "   "            ## #{
                                     X n h           i
                                                 iвҲ’1              n
                   vk+1 = max max         (ОіTПҖ )       rПҖ + (ОіTПҖ ) max ra + ОіTa vk      ,                                                                    (6)
                            b nвҲҲN
                          ПҖвҲҲО                                | {z } a
                                     i=0
                                     |      {z          }    PART2
                                                              PART1


where vk is a |S| Г— 1 column vector of VF; ra and rПҖ are |S| Г— 1 column           P vectors of rewardsa
for action a and policy ПҖ respectively, where [ra ]s = r(s, a), [rПҖ ]s =            a ПҖ(a|s)r(s, a). T
and TПҖ are |S| Г— |S| matrices of transition       probabilities   for action a and policy  ПҖ respectively,
where [Ta ]s,sвҖІ = T  (sвҖІ |s, a), [TПҖ ]s,s                     вҖІ
                                              P
                                         вҖІ =
                                                a ПҖ(a|s)T  (s   |s, a). The  computational  complexity of
                                            2
each iteration is O |A| + О  |N | |S| . Two strategies can be adopted to accelerate the update
                                b
process. First, the matrix in PART 1 and PART 2 in eq. (6) can be computed and reused for each ПҖ
and n, as they are fixed during the iteration process. Second, PART 3 can be computed in parallel
for each policy ПҖ вҲҲ О b and n вҲҲ N .


4.2     O FF -P OLICY L EARNING IN MODEL - FREE R EINFORCEMENT L EARNING

In model-free RL, it is convenient to use Q instead of V . The corresponding operator3 is defined as

   3                              О 
     We use the same notation GN    to denote the operator w.r.t. the the VF V and the action VF Q when there
                                                b

is no ambiguity. Similarly, for the Bellman operators, we will reuse the same symbols.


                                                                             4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                          " n                                                        #
                                                           X
     О 
    GN Q(s0 , a0 ) вүң max max E                                       t
                                                                    Оі rt + Оі   n+1
                                                                                        max Q(        sn+1 , aвҖІn+1   ) ,
     b
                       b nвҲҲN
                     ПҖвҲҲО 
                                       П„sn+1
                                          0 ,a0
                                                вҲјПҖ                                       вҖІ
                                                                                         an+1                               (7)
                                                              t=0
                                                          |                             {z                            }
                                                                                   Gn+1
                                                                                    Q   (П„sn+1
                                                                                            0 ,a0 )



where Gn+1 n+1                                 n+1
       Q (П„s0 ,a0 ) is the n + 1-step return; П„s0 ,a0 вүң (s0 , a0 , r0 , s1 , a1 , r1 , В· В· В· , sn+1 ). This oper-
                                                                 О                                                      n
ator can also be represented by the Bellman Operators, i.e., GN     Q вүң maxПҖ maxn (B ПҖ ) BQ; and
                                                                                     b

it converges to the optimal action VF QвҲ— with any set of behavioral policies О ,
                                                                                           b вҲ—
                                                                                 b i.e., G О         вҲ—
                                                                                           NQ = Q
(similar to Theorem 1, see APPENDIX Theorem 6 for a formal statement). This means that it can
utilize any off-policy data collected by arbitrary policy, without additional corrections. We propose
two methods for the tabular VF and VF approximation, named Highway Q-Learning and Highway
DQN respectively.
                                     (m)
Highway Q-Learning. Let Ds0 ,a0 = {П„sn+1 0 ,a0
                                               |П„sn+1
                                                   0 ,a0
                                                         вҲј ПҖm } denote the trajectory data collected by
the policy ПҖm . The k-th VF Qk is updated in the following way:

                                                                         (m)
                            Qk+1 (s0 , a0 ) = max maxE        b Ds0 ,a0 [Gn+1 (П„ n+1 )],                 (8)
                                                                          Qk    s0 ,a0
                                              mвҲҲMs0 ,a0 nвҲҲN
                      n                  o
                              (m)
where Ms0 ,a0 вҠҶ m |Ds0 ,a0 | =     Мё 0 is a subset of indexes of the dataset that are not empty under
               (m)
            b Ds0 ,a0 [В·] =
(s0 , a0 ); E                   1
                                    P
                                                 (m)  [В·] is the empirical averaged value. Note that all we
                               (m)
                           Ds0 ,a0      П„ n+1 вҲҲD
                                           s0 ,a0    s0 ,a0

                                                                                                  (m)
need to do is saving the trajectory data into the corresponding datasets Ds0 ,a0 , and then search over
them, without having to know the form of ПҖm or save the ПҖm into the set of behavioral policies О .    b
The algorithm, Highway Q-Learning, is presented in Appendix B Algorithm B.3.
Highway DQN. For large-scale space or continuous MDPs, the VF is usually approximated. Due to
the estimation noise involved in function approximation (Van Hasselt et al., 2016), our method may
lead to overestimation by the two maximization operations (over policies and lookahead depths).
However, as we show below, this issue can be easily solved through a minor modification.
We propose a new variant of eq. (7), named Softmax Highway Operator, as follows
                                                                 h                 i
                О                                                    n+1 n+1
              GeN Q (s0 , a0 ) вүң smaxОұ smax  Оұ
                                                max                G   (П„        )   ,
                b
                                         вҖІ          вҖІ
                                                      EП„
                                                    n вҲҲN
                                                         n+1
                                                         s ,a вҲјПҖ    Q    s0 ,a 0                                            (9)
                                           ПҖвҲҲО 
                                             b                nвҲҲ{0,n }         0    0


where the softmax operator smaxОұ with the temperature parameter Оұ is defined as
                                      X        exp (Оұf (x))
                       smaxОұ f (x) вүң       P                 вҖІ
                                                                 f (x) ,                                                   (10)
                         xвҲҲX                 xвҖІ вҲҲX exp (Оұf (x ))
                                                    xвҲҲX

smaxОұ reduces to max when Оұ вҶ’ вҲһ. We have the following theorem.

                          b and any N , we have GeО  QвҲ— = QвҲ— and (вҲҖQ вҲҲ lвҲһ (S Г— A)) :
Theorem 2 For any Оұ, any О ,
                                                                          b
                                                  N
   О 
вҲҘGeN Q вҲ’ QвҲ— вҲҘ вүӨ ОівҲҘQ вҲ’ QвҲ— вҲҘ.
   b


                                                                                         О 
The operator in eq. (9) is derived in the following way. First, the Highway Q Operator GN  in eq. (7)
                                                                                                                      b

                                            О                                         ПҖ  n
can be rewritten as an equivalent form, GN Q вүң maxПҖвҲҲО      b maxn вҲҲN maxnвҲҲ{0,nвҖІ } (B ) BQ. Then,
                                             b
                                                                    вҖІ

we replace the first two max operators maxПҖ maxnвҖІ with the softmax operators smaxОұ             Оұ
                                                                                       ПҖ smaxnвҖІ .

                                                           О 
The above modification of Softmax Highway Operator GeN       is necessary to a) remain unbiased w.r.t.
                                                                         b
  вҲ—                                        4
Q (as shown in APPENDIX Theorem 2) ; b) alleviate the overestimation issue and improve ex-
ploration with the softmax operation, which has been shown effective in recent RL literature (Fox
et al., 2015; Haarnoja et al., 2017; Schulman et al., 2017; Song et al., 2019).
                                                                                                     вҲ—
   4
     Note another variant smaxОұ          Оұ     ПҖ n
                                 ПҖ smaxn (B ) BQ (without maxnвҲҲ{0,nвҖІ } ) is generally biased w.r.t. Q .
Please refer to Appendix A.3 for the detail of the reason.


                                                               5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Based on the above theoretically justified operator, we propose the following objective function for
updating the action VF QОё (s, a) parametrized by the parameter Оё:

                          X
                                                                              (m)   h                i 2
            L (Оё) =                      QОё (s0 , a0 ) вҲ’ smaxОұ smaxОұ
                                                                     max   b Ds0 ,a0 Gn+1
                                                                           E          QОёвҖІ (П„ n+1
                                                                                            s0 ,a0 )     ,    (11)
                                                                 вҖІ
                                                      mвҲҲMs0 ,a0 n вҲҲN     вҖІ
                                                                       nвҲҲ{0,n }
                       (s0 ,a0 )вҲҲD
                                 b


 where QОёвҖІ is the target network parametrized by ОёвҖІ , occasionally copied from Оё; D b = {(s0 , a0 )}) is
the sampled batch data of state-action (s0 , a0 ) pairs. The computational complexity of the method
implied by the equation above is close to the one of existing eligibility trace-based methods (Schul-
man et al., 2016; Munos et al., 2016), which also need to compute n-step returns GnQ for each n.
The resulting algorithm is called Highway DQN, presented in APPENDIX Algorithm B.4.
In practice, our algorithm balances the trade-off between accuracy and sample efficiency by deciding
the number of trials per policy, the size of the search space (of behavioral policies and lookahead
depths), and the softmax temperature. While more trials per policy may improve the estimation
accuracy, they may also cost more samples and reduce sample efficiency. On the other hand, while a
larger search space may increase efficiency, it might incur overestimation issues when the estimate
is biased, leading to high variance.
In summary, our Highway Q-Learning and Highway DQN can recycle any trajectory data collected
by some arbitrary policy, and utilize the multiple-step trajectory data that do not require Importance
Sampling-based corrections (as stated in Theorem 1 and 2).

5       T HEORETICAL A NALYSIS
                                                                               О 
In this section, we study the theoretical properties of Highway operator5 GN     and show its superiority
                                                                                        b
                                                        ПҖ
over classical Bellman operators, e.g., B and B . For convenience, our analysis is in the space of
                               О 
state VF, i.e., the operators GN , B, B ПҖ , . . . are assumed to be mappings on lвҲһ (S).
                               b


                                        О 
First, we compare our Highway Operator GN to the Bellman Optimality Operator B.
                                                          b


Theorem 3 (Comparison to Bellman Optimality Operator B) For all V, V0 вҲҲ lвҲһ (S) holds:
    О 
1) GN V вҲ’ V вҲ— вүӨ вҲҘBV вҲ’ V вҲ— вҲҘ;
        b


2) Assume V0 вүӨ V вҲ— . For any s we have GN        О 
                                                    V0 (s) вҲ’ V вҲ— (s) вүӨ |BV0 (s) вҲ’ V вҲ— (s)|, where the
                                                              b
                                                                                    n
                                                      b such that arg maxnвҲҲN B ПҖвҖІ BV0 (s) > 0.
strict inequality holds as long as there exists ПҖ вҖІ вҲҲ О 

The first point of the theorem implies that our operator converges at the same rate as the Bellman
Optimality Operator in the worst case. The second point shows a state-wise convergence comparison
under the case of V0 вүӨ V вҲ— . Our operator generally converges faster than the Bellman Optimality
Operator as long as one behavioral policy finds a better path by looking forward for n steps (n > 0).
Note that the condition V0 вүӨ V вҲ— can be easily satisfied by setting V0 = minsвҖІ ,aвҖІ r(sвҖІ , aвҖІ ). Moreover,
as long as V0 вүӨ V вҲ— , we have (GN
                                b в—Ұk
                                О 
                                  ) V0 вүӨ V вҲ— for any k (see Lemma 2 in Appendix).
Then, we show the relation of our Highway operator with the Multi-step Bellman Expectation op-
        ПҖ
erator BN вүң (B ПҖ )в—ҰN , which is adopted in Generalized Policy Iteration (GPI) (see APPENDIX
Algorithm B.2). GPI needs to balance the evaluation-improvement trade-off by adapting hyper-
parameter N in (B ПҖ )в—ҰN . Our Highway operator provides an optimal solution for deciding such
hyperparameter N in terms of approaching the optimal VF.

Theorem 4 (Comparison to Multi-Step Bellman Expectation Operator) Assume that the VF Vk вүӨ
                 О  k           ПҖ
                             B k
                 b
             G
V вҲ— . Let Vk+1
            N
               and Vk+1
                      N
                        denote the k + 1-th VF of Highway Value Iteration with hyperparameter
    5
     Note that, unless otherwise stated, the results hold for any set of behavioral policies О 
                                                                                             b and set of lookahead
depths N . For convenience, we analyze under fixed О . However, these results can also be extended to the case
                                                        b
of dynamically changing О    b (as shown Highway Value Iteration in Algorithm B.1, where О      b k could change over
different k-th iterations as new policies are added to the set of behavioral policies).


                                                                  6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


N and Generalized Policy Iteration with hyperparameter N . We have
                                         О                         ПҖ
                                           k                    B k
                                         b
                                     G
                                     N
                                   Vk+1 вҲ’ V вҲ— вүӨ min Vk+1
                                                       N +1
                                                            вҲ’VвҲ—                                             (12)
                                                      N вҲҲN


Next, we show that by assuming that some of the behavioral policies act optimally within a few time
steps, our Highway operator can achieve better convergence rates.
                                                                                                  вҖІ
Assumption A(О ,   b n) Given set of behavioral policies О ,     b a lookahead depth n. Let S ПҖ denote the
                                                                                                   s,n
                                                           вҖІ
set of all possible visited states by executing policy ПҖ for n steps from state s. For each s вҲҲ S, there
exists at least one policy ПҖ вҖІ вҲҲ О  b such that ПҖ вҖІ (sвҖІ ) = ПҖ вҲ— (sвҖІ ) for any sвҖІ вҲҲ S ПҖвҖІ where ПҖ вҲ— refers to an
                                                                                   s,n
                                                                                    ПҖвҖІ
optimal policy. Note the quantification order: (вҲҖs вҲҲ S, вҲғПҖ вҖІ вҲҲ О ,        b вҲҖsвҖІ вҲҲ Ss,n  ) : ПҖ вҖІ (sвҖІ ) = ПҖ вҲ— (sвҖІ ).

Theorem 5 (Better Contraction Rate) Assume N вҲ’1 вҲҲ N , О                           b N вҲ’1), and
                                                        b satisfies Assumption A(О ,
V0 вҲҲ lвҲһ (S) and V0 вүӨ V , the convergence rate of GN is Оі , i.e., вҲҘGN V вҲ’ V вҲҘ вүӨ Оі N вҲҘV вҲ’ V вҲ— вҲҘ;
                      вҲ—                           О      N          О        вҲ—
                                                  b                b



This theorem implies that when the set of behavioral policies О     b satisfies Assumption A(О ,b N вҲ’ 1),
               О                                   N
our operator GN has a convergence rate of Оі . Note that, in Assumption A(О ,         b N вҲ’ 1), О  b is not
                b

required to include an optimal policy ПҖ вҲ— . Instead, it only requires that, for each state, there exists
one policy that behaves well within a period (N вҲ’ 1 consecutive steps), and the well-behaved policy
could be varying towards different starting from each state. Note that this condition is much weaker
than having some optimal or near-optimal policies included in the behavioral policy set. Specifically,
Assumption A(О    b вҖІ , 1) can be satisfied by constructing a О 
                                                             b вҖІ = {ПҖa |a вҲҲ A, (вҲҖs вҲҲ S) : ПҖa (a|s) = 1},
                                     2
yielding a convergence rate of Оі .
Note that although the operator (B)в—ҰN also leads to a convergence rate of Оі N , our Highway operator
 О                                                                                О 
GN  differs essentially from it. A major difference is that Highway operator GN     applies Multi-step
 b                                                                               b

Bellman Expectation Operator (B ПҖ )в—Ұn instead of applying Multi-step Bellman Optimality Operator
                                      в—Ұn
(B)в—ҰN . In the model-free case, (B ПҖ ) V can utilize the n-step trajectory data generated by ПҖ with
                                                                      вҖІ
minor cost (just by accumulating rewards within n-step, i.e., nвҖІ Оі n rt+nвҖІ + Оі n V (st+n )). While
                                                               P
(B)в—ҰN can only utilize the 1-step data and needs to update the VF N times (implying by eq. 2).

6    R ELATED W ORK

Multi-step RL methods has been studied in RL for a long history, including multi-step SARSA (Sut-
ton & Barto, 2018), Tree Backup (Precup, 2000), Q(Пғ) (Asis et al., 2017), and Monte Carlo methods
(which can be regarded as вҲһ-step learning). О»-return assign exponentially decaying weights de-
pends on the decay factor О» (Sutton & Barto, 2018; Schulman et al., 2016; White & White, 2016).
Sahil et al. (2017) proposed a more general form called weighted returns, which assigns weights to
all n-step returns. Roughly, the lookahead depth, the decay factor, and the weights represent the
prior knowledge or bias regarding appropriate CA intervals, usually tuned in a case-by-case man-
ner. Our method instead adaptively adjusts the lookahead depth in line with the quality of the data
and the learned VF. Another similar work related to CA is RUDDER (Arjona-Medina et al., 2019),
which trains an LSTM to re-assign credits to previous actions. Our methods derive a simple but
sound principle for transporting the credit with minor cost.
Existing off-policy learning methods usually use additional corrections for off-policy data. Classical
importance sampling (IS)-based methods suffer from high variance due to the products of IS ratios
(Cortes et al., 2010; Metelli et al., 2018). Several variance reduction techniques have been proposed.
Munos et al. (2016)вҖҷs Retrace(О») reduces the variance by clipping the IS ratios, and has achieved
great success in practice. Other work ignores IS: TB(О») (Precup, 2000) corrects the off-policy data
by computing expectations w.r.t. data and estimated VF, using the probabilities of the target policy.
Harutyunyan et al. (2016)вҖҷs Q(О») corrects the off-policy data by adding an off-policy correction
term. Our method provides an alternative IS-free tool for off-policy learning. Similar to Retrace(О»),
it can safely use arbitrary off-policy data. Moreover, it is very efficient, offering a faster convergence
rate under mild conditions. More research is needed, however, to understand how the variance of
our method compares to that of advanced IS-based variance reduction methods like Retrace(О»).


                                                       7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                       105                                                         105

                                                                       104


                                                            episodes


                                                                                                                        episodes
                                                                                                                                   104
                                                                       103
                                                                                     RUDDER
                                                                                     Q( )                                          103
                                                                       102                                                                                   RUDDER
                                                                                     Monte Carlo                                                             Q( )
                                                                                     Highway Q learning (our)                      102                       SARSA( )
                                                                       101                                                                                   Highway Q Learning (our)


                                                                       100                                                         101
                                                                              100     200          300      400   500                    7.5   10.0   12.5   15.0   17.5    20.0    22.5   25.0
                                                                                    delay of reward                                                   delay of reward

                   (a) Multi-Room Environment                                (b) Choice                                            (c) Trace Back

Figure 2: (a) shows results of model-based algorithms in Multi-Room environments. The x-axis
is the number of rooms. The y-axes for the three figures are total iteration, total samples, and
total running time required by the algorithm, respectively. (b) and (c) in Choice and Trace Back
environments: number of episodes required to solve the task, as a function of the delay of reward.
Average over 100 seeds, 1 standard deviation.



Searching over various policies and (or) lookahead depths to improve the convergence of RL systems
is an active field. Barreto et al. (2020) search over various policies while using only a fixed lookahead
depth until the end of the trial. He et al. (2017) first propose to search over various lookahead depths
along the trajectory data, but they do not search over various policies. Moreover, they employ the
lookahead returns to construct additional inequality bounds on the VF. Our work instead contributes
to a novel Bellman operator on updating the VF directly and provides a thorough theoretical analysis
of the convergence properties. We also address that greedy operations (Barreto et al., 2020; He et al.,
2017) may cause overestimation, by proposing a novel softmax operation to alleviate this issue in
an unbiased fashion. Compared to previous methods searching over the product of original policy
space and action space (Efroni et al., 2018; 2019; 2020; Jiang et al., 2018; Tomar et al., 2020), ours
has a smaller search space (i.e., a limited set of policies). In summary, this paper contributes to a
theoretically-justified Bellman operator which searches both policies and lookahead depths, leading
to more flexibility and scalability against different settings and applications.
Our method can also be viewed as combining the best of both worlds: (1) direct policy search based
on policy gradients (Williams, 1992) or evolutionary computation (Rechenberg, 1971) (where looka-
head equals trial lengthвҖ”no runtime-based identification of useful subprograms and subgoals), and
(2) dynamic programming-based (Bellman, 1957) identification of useful subgoals during runtime.
This naturally and safely combines best subgoals/sub-policies (Schmidhuber, 1991) derived from
data collected by arbitrary previously encountered policies. It can be viewed as a soft hierarchical
chunking method (Schmidhuber, 1992) for rapid CA, with a sound Bellman-based foundation.


7   E XPERIMENTS

We designed our experiments to evaluate the algorithms under different cases and investigate their
properties. Please refer to Appendix C for additional details of the experiment settings.
Model-based Toy Tasks. We first evaluate on a model-based task: Multi-Room environments with
different number of rooms. The agent needs to go through many rooms and reach the goal to get
a reward. We compare our Highway Value Iteration to classical Value Iteration (VI) and Policy
Iteration (PI). The algorithms are evaluated until convergence. As shown in the three plots of Fig. 2
(a), our Highway Value Iteration outperforms VI and PI in terms of number of iterations required,
total number of samples (total number of queries to the MDP model), and computation time.
Model-free Toy Tasks. To evaluate credit assignment efficiency, we evaluate the algorithms on two
toy tasks involving delayed rewards (Arjona-Medina et al., 2019), in which a reward is only provided
at the end of each trial. We compare our method to classical eligibility trace methods including Q(О»),
SARSA(О»), Monte Carlo methods; and also the advanced credit assignment method RUDDER.
As shown in Fig. 2 (b) and (c), our method significantly outperforms all competitors on both tasks.
For example, on Trace Back, our method requires only 20 episodes to solve the task, while the sec-
ond best algorithm RUDDER requires more than 1000. Notably, the costs of Highway Q-Learning
do not observably increase with the reward delays. In contrast, other methods such as Q(О») require
exponentially increasing numbers of trials.


                                                   8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                             Highway DQN                                    Multi-Step DQN                                  Maxmin DQN                                 DQN                           Retrace
              30        Breakout                                      Seaquest                                          Asterix                                       Freeway                                   Space Invaders
                                                             30                                              40                                             60                                            200
              20                                                                                             30                                                                                           150
                                                             20                                                                                             40


     scores


                                                    scores


                                                                                                    scores


                                                                                                                                                   scores


                                                                                                                                                                                                 scores
                                                                                                             20                                                                                           100
              10                                             10                                                                                             20
                                                                                                             10                                                                                            50
               0                                              0                                               0                                              0                                              0
                   1      2      3       4     5                  1      2      3       4      5                  1      2      3       4     5                  1      2      3       4    5                   1      2      3       4    5
                       Timestep (Г—106)        1e6
                                                                      Timestep (Г—106)         1e6
                                                                                                                      Timestep (Г—106)        1e6
                                                                                                                                                                     Timestep (Г—106)       1e6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Timestep (Г—106)       1e6


Figure 3: Episode rewards during the training on MinAtar Games (Young & Tian, 2019). Average
over 5 seeds, 1 standard deviation.


                                             (a) Varying lookahead depths                                                           (b) Varying replay buffer sizes

Figure 4: The performance of Highway DQN and Multi-Step DQN using (a) varying lookahead
depth and (b) varying replay buffer sizes. Average over 5 seeds, 1 standard deviation.



MinAtar Games. We evaluate our algorithms on benchmark tasks from MinAtar (Young & Tian,
2019). We compare to several advanced multi-step off-policy methods, including Multi-Step DQN
(Horgan et al., 2018; Barth-Maron et al., 2018) and Retrace(О») Munos et al. (2016). All multi-step
methods are implemented on top of Maxmin DQN (Lan et al., 2020), which chooses the smallest Q-
value among multiple target Q networks. All the compared methods adopt the same implementations
to ensure that we measure differences between algorithms, not implementations.
Fig. 3 shows the performance of the algorithms. Highway DQN significantly outperforms all com-
petitors in terms of both reward and sample efficiency on almost all the tasks. Compared to the
advanced Retrace(О»), our method performs significantly better on 3 of 5 tasks while performing on
par with it on the remaining 2 tasks.
Ablation Study. We conducted the following ablation studies to investigate properties of Highway
DQN. (1) Lookahead depth (N = {0, 1, В· В· В· , N вҲ’1} for Highway DQN and N for Multi-step DQN).
As shown in Fig. 4a, compared to Multi-step DQN, our Highway DQN shows strong robustness
against variations of the lookahead depth. This is because Highway DQN can adaptively choose
the lookahead depth. (2) Replay buffer size. As shown in Fig. 4b, when the memory size increases
to 8 Г— 105 (orange line), our Highway DQN shows a performance improvement, while Multi-Step
DQN shows a degradation. (3) For the results with varying softmax Temperature Оұ and number of
target networks, please refer to APPENDIX Appendix C.4 for more details.



8   C ONCLUSIONS

We introduced a novel multi-step Bellman Optimality Equation for efficient multi-step credit as-
signment (CA) in reinforcement learning (RL). We proved that its solution is the optimal value
function and that the corresponding policy adjustments generally converge faster than the traditional
Bellman Optimality operator. Our Highway RL methods combine the best of direct policy search
(where CA is performed without trying to identify useful environmental states or subgoals dur-
ing runtime), and standard RL, which finds useful states/subgoals through dynamic programming.
Highway RL quickly and safely extracts useful sub-policies derived from data obtained through
previously tested policies. The derived algorithms have several advantages over existing off-policy
algorithms. Their feasibility and effectiveness were experimentally illustrated on a series of stan-
dard benchmark datasets. Future work will theoretically analyze the algorithmвҖҷs behavior in the
model-free case.


                                                                                                                         9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


E THICS S TATEMENT

This paper provides a new operator for off-policy learning-based methods. The authors do not find
any particular concerns w.r.t the potential ethical or societal consequence.

R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT

The      code     is    available at https://anonymous.4open.science/r/
Highway-Reinforcement-Learning-4202 and more implementation details can be
found at Appendix B and C.

R EFERENCES
Jose A. Arjona-Medina, Michael Gillhofer, Michael Widrich, Thomas Unterthiner, Johannes Brand-
  stetter, and Sepp Hochreiter. Rudder: Return decomposition for delayed rewards. In H. Wallach,
  H. Larochelle, A. Beygelzimer, F. d'AlcheМҒ-Buc, E. Fox, and R. Garnett (eds.), Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, volume 32. Curran Associates, Inc., 2019.

Kristopher De Asis, J. Fernando Hernandez-Garcia, G. Zacharias Holland, and Richard S. Sutton.
  Multi-step reinforcement learning: A unifying algorithm. In AAAI, pp. 2902вҖ“2909, 2017.

AndreМҒ Barreto, Shaobo Hou, Diana Borsa, David Silver, and Doina Precup. Fast reinforcement
  learning with generalized policy updates. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 117
  (48):30079вҖ“30087, 2020.

Gabriel Barth-Maron, Matthew W Hoffman, David Budden, Will Dabney, Dan Horgan, Dhruva Tb,
  Alistair Muldal, Nicolas Heess, and Timothy Lillicrap. Distributed distributional deterministic
  policy gradients. arXiv preprint arXiv:1804.08617, 2018.

Richard Bellman. Dynamic Programming. Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ, USA, 1st
  edition, 1957.

Maxime Chevalier-Boisvert, Lucas Willems, and Suman Pal. Minimalistic gridworld environment
 for openai gym. https://github.com/maximecb/gym-minigrid, 2018.

Corinna Cortes, Yishay Mansour, and Mehryar Mohri. Learning bounds for importance weighting.
  In Advances in neural information processing systems, pp. 442вҖ“450, 2010.

Yonathan Efroni, Gal Dalal, Bruno Scherrer, and Shie Mannor. Beyond the one-step greedy ap-
  proach in reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 1387вҖ“
  1396. PMLR, 2018.

Yonathan Efroni, Gal Dalal, Bruno Scherrer, and Shie Mannor. How to combine tree-search methods
  in reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence,
  volume 33, pp. 3494вҖ“3501, 2019.

Yonathan Efroni, Mohammad Ghavamzadeh, and Shie Mannor. Online planning with lookahead
  policies. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:14024вҖ“14033, 2020.

Lasse Espeholt, Hubert Soyer, Remi Munos, Karen Simonyan, Vlad Mnih, Tom Ward, Yotam
  Doron, Vlad Firoiu, Tim Harley, Iain Dunning, et al. Impala: Scalable distributed deep-rl with im-
  portance weighted actor-learner architectures. In International conference on machine learning,
  pp. 1407вҖ“1416. PMLR, 2018.

Roy Fox, Ari Pakman, and Naftali Tishby. Taming the noise in reinforcement learning via soft
  updates. arXiv preprint arXiv:1512.08562, 2015.

Tuomas Haarnoja, Haoran Tang, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. Reinforcement learning with
  deep energy-based policies. International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), pp. 1352вҖ“
  1361, 2017.


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Anna Harutyunyan, Marc G Bellemare, Tom Stepleton, and ReМҒmi Munos. Q (О») with off-policy
  corrections. In International Conference on Algorithmic Learning Theory, pp. 305вҖ“320. Springer,
  2016.
Frank S. He, Yang Liu, Alexander G. Schwing, and Jian Peng. Learning to play in a day: Faster
  deep reinforcement learning by optimality tightening. In International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2017. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=rJ8Je4clg.
Matteo Hessel, Joseph Modayil, Hado Van Hasselt, Tom Schaul, Georg Ostrovski, Will Dabney, Dan
 Horgan, Bilal Piot, Mohammad Azar, and David Silver. Rainbow: Combining improvements in
 deep reinforcement learning. In Thirty-second AAAI conference on artificial intelligence, 2018.
Dan Horgan, John Quan, David Budden, Gabriel Barth-Maron, Matteo Hessel, Hado Van Hasselt,
  and David Silver. Distributed prioritized experience replay. arXiv preprint arXiv:1803.00933,
  2018.
Daniel Jiang, Emmanuel Ekwedike, and Han Liu. Feedback-based tree search for reinforcement
  learning. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 2284вҖ“2293. PMLR, 2018.
Qingfeng Lan. A pytorch reinforcement learning framework for exploring new ideas. https:
  //github.com/qlan3/Explorer, 2019.
Qingfeng Lan, Yangchen Pan, Alona Fyshe, and Martha White. Maxmin q-learning: Controlling the
  estimation bias of q-learning. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2020.
  URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=Bkg0u3Etwr.
Alberto Maria Metelli, Matteo Papini, Francesco Faccio, and Marcello Restelli. Policy optimization
  via importance sampling. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pp. 5442вҖ“5454,
  2018.
ReМҒmi Munos, Tom Stepleton, Anna Harutyunyan, and Marc Bellemare. Safe and efficient off-policy
   reinforcement learning. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pp. 1054вҖ“1062,
   2016.
Doina Precup. Eligibility traces for off-policy policy evaluation. Computer Science Department
  Faculty Publication Series, pp. 80, 2000.
Martin L Puterman. Markov decision processes: discrete stochastic dynamic programming. John
 Wiley & Sons, 2014.
I. Rechenberg. Evolutionsstrategie - Optimierung technischer Systeme nach Prinzipien der biolo-
   gischen Evolution. Dissertation, 1971. Published 1973 by Fromman-Holzboog.
Mark Rowland, Will Dabney, and ReМҒmi Munos. Adaptive trade-offs in off-policy learning. In
 International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pp. 34вҖ“44. PMLR, 2020.
Sharma Sahil, Raguvir J Girish, Ramesh Srivatsan, and Ravindran Balaraman. Learning to
  mix n-step returns: Generalizing lambda-returns for deep reinforcement learning. CoRR,
  abs/1705.07445, 2017. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1705.07445.
Tom Schaul, John Quan, Ioannis Antonoglou, and David Silver. Prioritized experience replay. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1511.05952, 2015.
J. Schmidhuber. Learning to generate sub-goals for action sequences. In T. Kohonen, K. MaМҲkisara,
   O. Simula, and J. Kangas (eds.), Artificial Neural Networks, pp. 967вҖ“972. Elsevier Science Pub-
   lishers B.V., North-Holland, 1991.
J. Schmidhuber. Learning complex, extended sequences using the principle of history compression.
   Neural Computation, 4(2):234вҖ“242, 1992.
John Schulman, Philipp Moritz, Sergey Levine, Michael I Jordan, and Pieter Abbeel. High-
  dimensional continuous control using generalized advantage estimation. international conference
  on learning representations, 2016.


                                               11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


John Schulman, Xi Chen, and Pieter Abbeel. Equivalence between policy gradients and soft q-
  learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1704.06440, 2017.
Zhao Song, Ron Parr, and Lawrence Carin. Revisiting the softmax bellman operator: New benefits
  and new perspective. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 5916вҖ“5925. PMLR,
  2019.
Richard S Sutton and Andrew G Barto. Reinforcement learning: An introduction. MIT press, 2018.
Csaba SzepesvaМҒri. Algorithms for reinforcement learning. Synthesis lectures on artificial intelli-
  gence and machine learning, 4(1):1вҖ“103, 2010.
Manan Tomar, Yonathan Efroni, and Mohammad Ghavamzadeh. Multi-step greedy reinforcement
 learning algorithms. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 9504вҖ“9513. PMLR,
 2020.
Hado Van Hasselt, Arthur Guez, and David Silver. Deep reinforcement learning with double q-
  learning. In Thirtieth AAAI conference on Artificial Intelligence, 2016.
Martha White and Adam M. White. A greedy approach to adapting the trace parameter for temporal
 difference learning. CoRR, abs/1607.00446, 2016. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1607.
 00446.
R. J. Williams. Simple statistical gradient-following algorithms for connectionist reinforcement
  learning. Machine Learning, 8:229вҖ“256, 1992.
Kenny Young and Tian Tian. Minatar: An atari-inspired testbed for more efficient reinforcement
  learning experiments. 2019. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1903.03176.


A        T HEOREM P ROOFS
                                                        О 
A.1         P ROOF OF PROPERTIES OF H IGHWAY O PERATOR GN
                                                                       b


                                                   b and N (s.t. 0 вҲҲ N ), we have
Theorem 1 (Properties of Highway Operator) For any О 
1) GNО 
       is a contraction on complete metric space lвҲһ (S), i.e. for any V, V вҖІ вҲҲ lвҲһ (S), we have6
        b

            b вҖІ
   О 
вҲҘGN V вҲ’ GN О 
             V вҲҘ вүӨ вҲҘBV вҲ’ BV вҖІ вҲҘ вүӨ ОівҲҘV вҲ’ V вҖІ вҲҘ;
   b


2) (Highway Bellman Optimality Equation, Highway Equation in short) V вҲ— is the only fixed point
 О 
GN                                           О 
    , that is, for all V вҲҲ lвҲһ (S) holds V = GN V if and only if V = V вҲ— . Formally, we have
  b                                          b


                                     О  вҲ—                           n
                                    GN V вүң max max (B ПҖ ) BV вҲ— = V вҲ— ,                             (13)
                                     b
                                                 b nвҲҲN
                                               ПҖвҲҲО 


                                                                                               О 
                                                        b k ),k вҲҲ N, the sequence (G О k в—Ұ G kвҲ’1 в—Ұ
3) For any V0 вҲҲ lвҲһ (S) and any sequence of policy sets (О 
                                                                                           b   b
                                                                                    N      N
         О 1
. . . в—Ұ GN  )[V0 ],k вҲҲ N converges R-linearly to V вҲ— with convergence rate Оі.
            b



Proof: 1) The contraction property can be obtained:

                             О  вҖІ                               n                       n
                      О 
                     GN V вҲ’ GN V = max max (B ПҖ ) BV вҲ’ max max (B ПҖ ) BV вҖІ
                       b        b
                                               b nвҲҲN
                                             ПҖвҲҲО                              b nвҲҲN
                                                                           ПҖвҲҲО 
                                                               n             ПҖ n   вҖІ
                                         вүӨ max max вҲҘ(B ПҖ ) BV вҲ’ (B ) BV вҲҘ
                                             b nвҲҲN
                                           ПҖвҲҲО 
                                         вүӨ max max Оі n вҲҘBV вҲ’ BV вҖІ вҲҘ
                                             b nвҲҲN
                                           ПҖвҲҲО 
                                         вүӨ вҲҘBV вҲ’ BV вҖІ вҲҘ
                                         вүӨ Оі вҲҘV вҲ’ V вҖІ вҲҘ
    6
        We denote by вҲҘ В· вҲҘ the supremum norm throughout the paper.


                                                          12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                               О 
2) By application of the Banach fixed point theorem to point 1., the operator GN must have a unique
                                                                                                          b

                                                    вҲ—                       О 
fixed point. Therefore, it suffices to verify that V is a fixed point of GN . Our operator can be
                                                                            b

rewritten as
                                     О                      n
                                   GN  V вүң max max (B ПҖ ) BV.
                                     b
                                                           b nвҲҲN
                                                         ПҖвҲҲО 
                                                                                                      n
Using the fact that B ПҖ V вҲ— вүӨ BV вҲ— = V вҲ— and B ПҖ monotony we obtain (B ПҖ ) BV вҲ— вүӨ V вҲ— for any ПҖ
and n вүҘ 0 (with the equality when n = 0), which implies
                                                                 n
                                               max max (B ПҖ ) BV вҲ— = V вҲ— .
                                                 b nвҲҲN
                                               ПҖвҲҲО 


                              О k                 О О 1                     О k                  О 1           О 
3) From 1) and 2) follows: вҲҘ(GN  в—Ұ GNkвҲ’1 в—Ұ . . . GN  )[V0 ] вҲ’ V вҲ— вҲҘ = вҲҘ(GN  в—Ұ GNkвҲ’1 в—Ұ . . . GN  )[V0 ] вҲ’
                                         b       b            b                                  b        b           b

 О k вҲ—                  О    О 1
GN V вҲҘ вүӨ ОівҲҘ(GNkвҲ’1 в—Ұ . . . GN  )[V0 ] вҲ’ V вҲ— вҲҘ. By repeating the same argument we end up with
 b                     b                 b

   О k        О          О 1
вҲҘ(GN  в—Ұ GNkвҲ’1 в—Ұ . . . GN  )[V0 ] вҲ’ V вҲ— вҲҘ вүӨ Оі k вҲҘV0 вҲ’ V вҲ— вҲҘ from which the statement follows.
     b       b                 b


                                                                                                                            в–Ў
                         b and any N , we have GeО  QвҲ— = QвҲ— and (вҲҖQ вҲҲ lвҲһ (S Г— A)) :
Theorem 2 For any Оұ, any О ,
                                                                             b
                                                 N
  О       вҲ—             вҲ—
вҲҘGN Q вҲ’ Q вҲҘ вүӨ ОівҲҘQ вҲ’ Q вҲҘ.
 e b


Proof:                                                             h              i
                       О 
                     GeN Q (s0 , a0 ) вүң smaxОұ smaxОұ
                                                    maxвҖІ EП„sn+1      Gn+1 n+1
                                                                      Q (П„s0 ,a0 ) ,                                      (14)
                       b
                                                вҖІ     n вҲҲN   ,a вҲјПҖ
                                             ПҖвҲҲО 
                                               b             nвҲҲ{0,n }            0    0


This operator can be represented as
                                     О                             n
                                   GeN Q вүң smaxОұ smaxОұ
                                                       maxвҖІ (B ПҖ ) BQ.
                                     b
                                                   вҖІ      n вҲҲN       nвҲҲ{0,n }
                                                  ПҖвҲҲО 
                                                    b

                                                                         n
First, following the proof in Theorem 1, we have (B ПҖ ) BQвҲ— вүӨ QвҲ— , for any ПҖ and n вүҘ 0 (with
equality when n = 0). Then, we have
                                                                             n
                                     smaxОұ smax
                                             вҖІ
                                                Оұ
                                                  maxвҖІ (B ПҖ ) BQвҲ— = QвҲ—
                                         ПҖвҲҲО 
                                           b     n вҲҲN    nвҲҲ{0,n }


                                                          b and N , denoted by P s,a and P s,a such
Given an action VF Q, let us define two distribution over О                      О b        N
that
                                                 n                                                            n
         EПҖвҲјP s,a ,nвҖІ вҲјP s,a maxвҖІ (B ПҖ ) BQ (s, a) = smaxОұ smax
                                                             вҖІ
                                                               Оұ
                                                                 maxвҖІ (B ПҖ ) BQ (s, a)
                 О 
                 b         N   nвҲҲ{0,n }                               ПҖвҲҲО 
                                                                        b            n вҲҲN     nвҲҲ{0,n }

It follows
                                         n
       О 
     GeN Q вҲ’ QвҲ— = smaxОұ smaxОұ
                              maxвҖІ (B ПҖ ) BQ вҲ’ QвҲ—
       b
                          вҖІ              n вҲҲN    nвҲҲ{0,n }
                               ПҖвҲҲО 
                                 b

                                                                  n                                               n
                       = EПҖвҲјP b ,nвҖІ вҲјPN              max (B ПҖ ) BQ вҲ’ EПҖвҲјP b ,nвҖІ вҲјPN                      max (B ПҖ ) BQвҲ—
                                     О            nвҲҲ{0,nвҖІ }                                О           nвҲҲ{0,nвҖІ }
                                               ПҖ n                n
                       вүӨ max max вҲҘ(B ) BQ вҲ’ (B ПҖ ) BQвҲ— вҲҘ
                             b nвҲҲN
                           ПҖвҲҲО 
                       вүӨ Оі вҲҘQ вҲ’ QвҲ— вҲҘ .

                                                                                                                            в–Ў

Corollary 1 Assume Q0 вҲҲ lвҲһ (S Г— A) and О k ,k вҲҲ N be a sequence of sets of behavioral policies
                     О       О               О 
then the sequence (GeN  в—Ұ GeNkвҲ’1 в—Ұ. . .в—Ұ GeN  )[Q0 ],k вҲҲ N converges R-linearly to QвҲ— with convergence
                     bk     b              b1

rate Оі.

Proof: The proof follows from just proved point Theorem 2 and proceeds analogically to proof of
Theorem 1 point 3).                                                                          в–Ў

                                                             13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Theorem 3 (Comparison to Bellman Optimality Operator B) For all V, V0 вҲҲ lвҲһ (S) holds:
    О 
1) GN V вҲ’ V вҲ— вүӨ вҲҘBV вҲ’ V вҲ— вҲҘ;
      b


2) Assume V0 вүӨ V вҲ— . For any s we have GN        О 
                                                    V0 (s) вҲ’ V вҲ— (s) вүӨ |BV0 (s) вҲ’ V вҲ— (s)|, where the
                                                       b
                                                                                    n
                                                      b such that arg maxnвҲҲN B ПҖвҖІ BV0 (s) > 0.
strict inequality holds as long as there exists ПҖ вҖІ вҲҲ О 

Proof: 1) has been proved in Theorem 1.
              О 
2) Note that GN V0 вүҘ BV0 . Further, if V0 вүӨ V вҲ— , then GN
                                                        О 
                                                          V0 вүӨ V вҲ— and BV0 вүӨ V вҲ— (as they are both
                     b                                             b

monotonic). Putting all together we obtain

                                     0 вүӨ V вҲ— вҲ’ GN
                                                О 
                                                  V0 вүӨ V вҲ— вҲ’ BV0 ,
                                                       b


from which the desired inequality follows.                                                                  в–Ў

Theorem 4 (Comparison to Multi-Step Bellman Expectation Operator) Assume that the VF Vk вүӨ
               О  k        ПҖ
                         B k
               b
           G
V вҲ— . Let Vk+1
            N
               and Vk+1
                      N
                        denote the k + 1-th VF of Highway Value Iteration with hyperparameter
N and Generalized Policy Iteration with hyperparameter N . We have
                                         О                               ПҖ
                                           k                           B k
                                         b
                                     G
                                    N
                                  Vk+1 вҲ’ V вҲ— вүӨ min Vk+1
                                                      N +1
                                                           вҲ’VвҲ—                                            (15)
                                                           N вҲҲN


Proof: First, for any N вҲҲ N , ПҖ вҖІ вҲҲ О ,
                                    b and any s вҲҲ S,
                                                         вҖІ  N
                                             n
                               max max (B ПҖ ) BVk (s) вүҘ B ПҖ   BVk (s)
                                 b nвҲҲN
                               ПҖвҲҲО 


According to Algorithm B.1, we know that ПҖk вҲҲ О 
                                              b k Then, for any s we have
                                     О 
                                    GN Vk (s) вҲ’ V вҲ— (s)
                                      b


                                                             n
                                   = max max (B ПҖ ) BVk (s) вҲ’ V вҲ— (s)
                                          ПҖвҲҲО b nвҲҲN
                                           вҲ—                                n
                                   = V (s) вҲ’ max max (B ПҖ ) BVk (s)
                                                     b nвҲҲN
                                                   ПҖвҲҲО 
                                                     вҲ—                      n
                                   = min min (V (s) вҲ’ (B ПҖ ) BVk (s))
                                           b nвҲҲN
                                         ПҖвҲҲО 
                                                            n
                                   = min min |(B ПҖ ) BVk (s) вҲ’ V вҲ— (s)|
                                           b nвҲҲN
                                         ПҖвҲҲО 
                                                ПҖk n
                                   вүӨ min |(B ) BVk (s) вҲ’ V вҲ— (s)|
                                         nвҲҲN
                                                       N +1
                                   = min (B ПҖk )                Vk (s) вҲ’ V вҲ— (s)
                                         N вҲҲN
                                                   ПҖ
                                                B k
                                            N +1
                                   = min Vk+1    вҲ’ V вҲ— (s)
                                         N вҲҲN


from which the conclusion follows.
                                                                                                            в–Ў
                                                                                       ПҖвҖІ
                                                           b a lookahead depth n. Let Ss,n
Assumption A(О ,   b n)    Given set of behavioral policies О ,                              denote the
                                                        вҖІ
set of all possible visited states by executing policy ПҖ for n steps from state s. For each s вҲҲ S, there
                                                                                   ПҖвҖІ
exists at least one policy ПҖ вҖІ вҲҲ О  b such that ПҖ вҖІ (sвҖІ ) = ПҖ вҲ— (sвҖІ ) for any sвҖІ вҲҲ Ss,n where ПҖ вҲ— refers to an
                                                                                     вҖІ
                                                                    вҖІ    b вҲҖs вҲҲ Ss,n ) : ПҖ вҖІ (sвҖІ ) = ПҖ вҲ— (sвҖІ ).
                                                                              вҖІ    ПҖ
optimal policy. Note the quantification order: (вҲҖs вҲҲ S, вҲғПҖ вҲҲ О ,

Theorem 5 (Better Contraction Rate) Assume N вҲ’1 вҲҲ N , О                           b N вҲ’1), and
                                                        b satisfies Assumption A(О ,
V0 вҲҲ lвҲһ (S) and V0 вүӨ V , the convergence rate of GN is Оі , i.e., вҲҘGN V вҲ’ V вҲҘ вүӨ Оі N вҲҘV вҲ’ V вҲ— вҲҘ;
                      вҲ—                           О      N          О        вҲ—
                                                  b                b


                                                           14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Proof: 1) First, if О                                     b N вҲ’ 1), that is, starting from any s, there
                    b satisfies assumption Assumption A(О ,
exists at least one ПҖ вҲҲ О  executing the optimal actions for N вҲ’ 1 steps, then we have
                         b
                                       О                           nвҖІ
                                      GN V = max max (B ПҖ ) BV
                                       b
                                                 вҖІb n вҲҲN
                                                ПҖвҲҲО 
                                                           N вҲ’1
                                            вүҘ max (B ПҖ )          BV
                                                ПҖвҲҲО 
                                                  b
                                               вҲ—  N вҲ’1
                                            вүҘ BПҖ       BV.

                                                                       вҲ—    N вҲ’1
Second, if V вүӨ V вҲ— , then GN
                           О 
                             V вүӨ V вҲ— (GN
                                       О 
                                         is monotonic) and B ПҖ                     BV вүӨ V вҲ— .
                              b             b


Finally, with the results above, we have
                                              вҲ—  N вҲ’1
                         О 
                        GN V вҲ’VвҲ— вүӨ           BПҖ       BV вҲ’ V вҲ—
                          b


                                              вҲ—  N вҲ’1       вҲ—  N вҲ’1
                                       =     BПҖ       BV вҲ’ B ПҖ      BV вҲ—

                                       вүӨ Оі N вҲҘV вҲ’ V вҲ— вҲҘ .

                                                                                                         в–Ў
To utilize the better convergence rates obtained in theorem 5, we have to be a bit more careful than
in theorem 1 point 3) and take care of the monotony requirements in theorem 5. This is done in the
following lemma.

Lemma 1 Assume a sequence of operators Tk , k вҲҲ N on LвҲһ (S), where all Tk satisfy (вҲҖV вҲҲ
LвҲһ (S), V вүӨ V вҲ— ) : вҲҘTk V вҲ’ V вҲ— вҲҘ вүӨ Оі вҖІ вҲҘV вҲ’ V вҲ— вҲҘ with common convergence rate Оі вҖІ and common
limit V вҲ— . Further assume all Tk are monotonic and have fixed point V вҲ— . Then for any V0 вҲҲ
lвҲһ (S), V0 вүӨ V вҲ— the sequence (Tk в—Ұ TkвҲ’1 в—Ұ . . . T1 )[V0 ],k вҲҲ N converges R-linearly to V вҲ— with
convergence rate Оі вҖІ .

Proof: Assuming V0 вҲҲ lвҲһ (S), V0 вүӨ V вҲ— and monotony and fixed point of operators T1 , . . . , TkвҲ’1
implies: V := (TkвҲ’1 в—Ұ TkвҲ’2 в—Ұ . . . T1 )[V0 ] вүӨ V вҲ— . Now we can apply the inequality with Оі вҖІ to get
вҲҘ(Tk в—Ұ TkвҲ’1 в—Ұ . . . T1 )[V0 ] вҲ’ V вҲ— вҲҘ вүӨ Оі вҖІ вҲҘ(TkвҲ’1 в—Ұ . . . T1 )[V0 ] вҲ’ V вҲ— вҲҘ. By repeating the same argument
we end up with вҲҘ(Tk в—Ұ TkвҲ’1 в—Ұ . . . T1 )[V0 ] вҲ’ V вҲ— вҲҘ вүӨ Оі вҖІk вҲҘV0 вҲ’ V вҲ— вҲҘ from which the statement follows.
                                                                                                       в–Ў
Let us denote О k (k вҲҲ N) the sequence of behavioral policies generated by Algorithm B.1. In Al-
                b
gorithm B.1 the set of behavioral policies О   b k changes by adding a greedy policy every K iterations.
Regardless of the sets О k , the algorithm converges to the optimal value function form theorem 1
                          b
point 3). This means that more and more close to optimal policies are added to О      b k set with growing
iteration number k. When assumption Assumption A(В·, n) gets satisfied for some n at iteration k0 ,
then due to monotony of the sequence О     b k ,k вҲҲ N (i.e. the set О 
                                                                   b k can just grow over time) Assump-
tion A(В·, n) is satisfied for the whole suffix О k ,k вүҘ k0 . We can then use lemma 1 on corresponding
                                                b
                                 О 
suffix of operator sequence GN      ,k вүҘ k0 with Оі вҖІ = Оі n+1 to claim better convergence rate (Оі n+1 ) of
                                 bk

the corresponding suffix of value functions Vk ,k вүҘ k0 . When S is finite this gives us monotonic im-
provement of the convergence rate of the sequence Vk ,k вҲҲ N as Assumption A(В·, n) gets eventually
satisfied for bigger and bigger n.

Theorem 6 (Highway Bellman Optimality Equation (Highway Equation) w.r.t. action VF Q) For
    b and N , we have
any О 
    О 
1. GN is a contraction on complete metric space lвҲһ (S Г— A), i.e. for any Q, QвҖІ вҲҲ lвҲһ (S Г— A), we
     b

                b вҖІ
have вҲҘGNО 
          Q вҲ’ GNО 
                  Q вҲҘ вүӨ вҲҘBQ вҲ’ BQвҖІ вҲҘ вүӨ ОівҲҘQ вҲ’ QвҖІ вҲҘ;
        b


2. QвҲ— is the only fixed point GN
                               О 
                                 . That is,
                                  b

                                                 О  вҲ—
                                                GN Q = QвҲ— ,                                            (16)
                                                 b



                                                      15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                      О 
and for all Q вҲҲ lвҲһ (S Г— A) holds Q = GN Q if and only if Q = QвҲ— .
                                                 b


                  О 
Proof: Note that GN w.r.t action VF Q can also be represented by the Bellman Operators w.r.t Q,
                    b

i.e.,
                                   О                     n
                                  GN Q вүң max max (B ПҖ ) BQ.
                                   b
                                                       b nвҲҲN
                                                     ПҖвҲҲО 

Except for the change of value spaces (lвҲһ (S Г— A) instead of lвҲһ (S)) the proof is the same as for
Theorem 1).                                                                                    в–Ў

                                   О k        О            О 1
Lemma 2 If V0 вүӨ V вҲ— , then (GN        в—Ұ GNkвҲ’1 в—Ұ . . . в—Ұ GN  )V0 вүӨ V вҲ— for any k and any sequence of
                                   b         b                          b

policy sets О 1 , О 2 , . . . , О k .
            b    b            b

           О 
Proof: As GN                                                  b we have (G О 1 )V0 вүӨ (G О 1 )V вҲ— =
             is monotonic (for any set of behavioral policies О ),
                b                                                                                  b       b
                                                                          N           N
                         О 2                                     О 2    О 1         О 2
V вҲ— . Further, applying GN  again to the both sides we obtain (GN  в—Ұ GN  )V0 вүӨ (GN  )V вҲ— = V вҲ— .
                           b                                                     b        b            b

Repeting the argument further k вҲ’ 2 times we get the result.
                                                                                                               в–Ў

A.2    P ROOF OF PROPERTIES OF M ULTI - STEP B ELLMAN O PTIMALITY OPERATOR

Recent works combined multi-step trajectory data and estimated the values of the most promising
actions without any correction for the off-policy data (Horgan et al., 2018; Barth-Maron et al., 2018).
The underlying operator is defined as
                 О 
                   Q (s0 , a0 ) вүңEПҖвҲјP b (B ПҖ )N вҲ’1 BQ(s0 , a0 )

               BN
                 b
                                       О 
                                                   "N вҲ’1                               #
                                                    X                                              (17)
                                                                                   вҖІ
                                =EПҖвҲјP b ,П„sN ,a вҲјПҖ       Оі t rt + Оі N max
                                                                       вҖІ
                                                                          Q (sN , aN )
                                         О        0   0                               aN
                                                               t=0

where PО  b is a distribution over О  and PО 
                                  b
                                         b (ПҖ) is the probability of selecting ПҖ. Here we use ПҖ вҲј PО 
                                                                                                   b
      N
and П„s0 ,a0 вҲј ПҖ to formulate the procedure of prioritized experience replay (Schaul et al., 2015;
Horgan et al., 2018), which samples the trajectory data collected by various behavioral policies
according to a prior distribution. Although these methods have shown promising results in practice,
below we will show that this operator is generally biased w.r.t. the optimal action VF QвҲ— . In
other words, the corresponding fixed point QвҲ— О b is different from the optimal VF QвҲ— , and unbiased
                                                         BN
learning only happens when all behavioral policies are optimal.

                                                                            О 
Theorem 7 (Properties of the Multi-step Bellman Optimality Operator BN        ) For any N вүҘ 2,
                                                                                              b

                  О 
1) The operator BN is a contraction on complete metric space lвҲһ (S Г— A), i.e., for any two vectors
                   b

Q, QвҖІ вҲҲ lвҲһ (S Г— A), вҲҘBN
                                   b вҖІ
                          О 
                            Q вҲ’ BNО 
                                     Q вҲҘ вүӨ Оі N вҲҘQ вҲ’ QвҖІ вҲҘ.
                          b

2) Let QвҲ— О b denote the fixed point of BN
                                                   b вҲ—
                                        О           О 
                                          , i.e., BN Q О b = QвҲ— О b , we have QвҲ— О b вүӨ QвҲ— .
                                        b
           BN                                                      BN       BN                BN
3) QвҲ— О b = QвҲ— if and only if any ПҖ вҲҲ О ,
                                     b P (ПҖ) > 0 satisfies ПҖ(s) = ПҖ вҲ— (s) for any s вҲҲ U := {s1 вҲҲ
                                        О 
      BN                                b
S|вҲғs0 , a0 , T (s1 |s0 , a0 ) > 0} and ПҖ вҲ— an optimal policy.

Before giving the proof of the above theorem, weвҖҷd like to mention a variant of our Highway Oper-
ator, named Expectation Highway Operator, defined as

                         N                              ПҖ nвҲ’1
                       GО b Q(s0 , a0 ) вүң EПҖвҲјP b max(B )       BQ(s0 , a0 )                   (18)
                                                         О     nвҲҲN

Compared to the above Multi-Step Bellman Optimality Operator in eq. (17), our operator uses max-
imization over lookahead depths instead of a fixed lookahead depth. ItвҖҷs interesting to note that this
operator is unbiased w.r.t. QвҲ— for any set of behavioral policies О .
                                                                  b Formally, we have the following
theorem.


                                                              16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                  b any P , and any N ,
Theorem 8 For any О ,     О 
                         b
     N                                                                                     вҖІ
1) G О 
     b is a contraction on complete metric space lвҲһ (S Г— A), i.e., for any two vectors Q, Q вҲҲ
                                    N        N вҖІ              вҖІ
lвҲһ (S Г— A), (вҲҖQ вҲҲ lвҲһ (S Г— A)) : вҲҘG О b Q вҲ’ GО  b Q вҲҘ вүӨ ОівҲҘQ вҲ’ Q вҲҘ;
     N вҲ—      вҲ—
2) G О 
     b Q =Q .

We now give the proofs of Theorem 7 and 8 respectively.
Proof of Theorem 7:
For simplicity, we will use P instead of PО 
                                          b.

1)

                                О  вҖІ                                  N вҲ’1              N вҲ’1
                         О 
                       вҲҘBN Q вҲ’ BN Q вҲҘ вүӨ EПҖвҲјP (B ПҖ )                         BQ вҲ’ (B ПҖ )       BQвҖІ
                           b         b


                                              вүӨ Оі N вҲҘQ вҲ’ QвҖІ вҲҘ
                                             О                                              О 
2) Applying BanachвҖҷs fixed point theorem to BN using the contraction result, we know that BN has
                                                            b                                                    b

only one fixed point.
Following the proof in Theorem 1, we have (B ПҖ )N вҲ’1 BQвҲ— вүӨ QвҲ— for any ПҖ and N вүҘ 2. This implies
that
                               QвҲ— вүҘ EПҖ (B ПҖ )N вҲ’1 BQвҲ— = BN
                                                           b вҲ—
                                                           О 
                                                             Q .                          (19)
                   О 
Using monotony of BN (Q вүӨ QвҖІ implies BN О 
                                          Q вүӨ BN  О  вҖІ
                                                    Q ), we get the monotonic sequence QвҲ— вүҘ
                           b                            b             b

BN Q вүҘ (BN ) Q вүҘ В· В· В· which converges to the fixed point QвҲ— О b based on the contraction property
 b вҲ—
 О         О b 2 вҲ—
                                                                                  BN
and Banach fixed point theorem :
                          QвҲ— вүҘ BN
                                О  вҲ—     О  2 вҲ—
                                  Q вүҘ (BN                 О  k вҲ—
                                          ) Q вүҘ В· В· В· вүҘ (BN ) Q вҶҳ QвҲ—BО b .                                            (20)
                                    b               b                         b
                                                                                              N



3) For the implication вҖқвҮҗ=вҖқit suffices to show for all ПҖ вҲҲ О ,            b P(ПҖ) > 0 B ПҖ QвҲ— = QвҲ— . Since then
we get
                              b вҲ—
                            BNО 
                                Q = EПҖвҲјP (B ПҖ )N вҲ’1 QвҲ— = EПҖвҲјP QвҲ— = QвҲ—
and the implication is proved. Thus let us fix ПҖ вҲҲ О ,        b P(ПҖ) > 0 and s0 вҲҲ S, a0 вҲҲ A the following
holds B ПҖ QвҲ— (s0 , a0 ) = Es1 вҲјT (В·|s0 ,a0 ) Ea1 вҲјПҖ(В·|s1 ) [r(s0 , a0 ) + ОіQвҲ— (s1 , a1 )]. Since in the first expec-
tation we just care about s1 for which T (s1 |s0 , a0 ) > 0, we can assume s1 вҲҲ U . As ПҖ on U can be
replaced by the optimal policy ПҖ вҲ— from the assumption, we get
         B ПҖ QвҲ— (s0 , a0 ) = Es1 вҲјT (В·|s0 ,a0 ) Ea1 вҲјПҖ(В·|s1 ) [r(s0 , a0 ) + ОіQвҲ— (s1 , a1 )]
                          = Es1 вҲјT (В·|s0 ,a0 ) Ea1 вҲјПҖвҲ— (В·|s1 ) [r(s0 , a0 ) + ОіQвҲ— (s1 , a1 )] = QвҲ— (s0 , a0 ).

The remaining implication вҖқ=вҮ’вҖқ will be proved by contradiction. Assume that the conclusion does
not hold, i.e. there exist ПҖ вҲҲ О ,   b P(ПҖ) > 0 and s1 вҲҲ U such that P(ПҖ) > 0 and ПҖ(В·|s1 ) is not
optimal. Since s1 вҲҲ U there exists s0 вҲҲ S, a0 вҲҲ A such that T (s1 |s0 , a0 ) > 0. First we aim to
prove inequality
                                       B ПҖ QвҲ— (s0 , a0 ) < QвҲ— (s0 , a0 ).
Since ПҖ(В·|s1 ) assigns positive probability to non-optimal action, it is easy to obtain (especially for
finite A) that
                                     Ea1 вҲјПҖ(В·|s1 ) QвҲ— (s1 , a1 ) < V вҲ— (s1 ).
For other states different from s1 we can still have equality but the countable sum leaves the inequal-
ity strict
                 (B ПҖ QвҲ— )(s0 , a0 ) = r(s0 , a0 ) + EsвҖІ1 вҲјT (В·|s0 ,a0 ) Ea1 вҲјПҖ(В·|sвҖІ1 ) QвҲ— (sвҖІ1 , a1 )
                                         < r(s0 , a0 ) + EsвҖІ1 вҲјT (В·|s0 ,a0 ) V вҲ— (sвҖІ1 ) = QвҲ— (s0 , a0 ).
Now since (B ПҖ )N вҲ’2 QвҲ— вүӨ QвҲ— we get
                        (B ПҖ )N вҲ’1 BQвҲ— = (B ПҖ )N вҲ’1 QвҲ— = B ПҖ (B ПҖ )N вҲ’2 QвҲ— вүӨ B ПҖ QвҲ— .


                                                                17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Using previous result we obtain

                     ((B ПҖ )N вҲ’1 BQвҲ— )(s0 , a0 ) вүӨ B ПҖ QвҲ— (s0 , a0 ) < QвҲ— (s0 , a0 ),
                                         b using P(ПҖ) > 0 we get
and applying expectation with finite set О 
                                     О  вҲ—
                                    BN Q (s0 , a0 ) < QвҲ— (s0 , a0 ),
                                      b


which can be combined with eq. (20) to show
                                     QвҲ—BО b (s0 , a0 ) < QвҲ— (s0 , a0 ).
                                          N



                                                                                                  в–Ў
We now give proof of Theorem 8.
Proof of Theorem 8: 1) We first prove the contraction property,

             N      N вҖІ                         ПҖ n                ПҖ n  вҖІ
             b Q вҲ’ GО 
          вҲҘG О       b Q вҲҘ вүӨ EПҖвҲјPО        max (B ) BQ вҲ’ EПҖвҲјPО b max (B ) BQ
                                              nвҲҲN                               nвҲҲN
                                     b

                                                     ПҖ n              ПҖ n   вҖІ
                            вүӨ EПҖвҲјPО b max вҲҘ(B ) BQ вҲ’ (B ) BQ вҲҘ
                                          nвҲҲN
                                            вҖІ
                            вүӨ Оі вҲҘQ вҲ’ Q вҲҘ
                                              n
2) Similar to the proof in Theorem 1, (B ПҖ ) BQвҲ— вүӨ QвҲ— for any ПҖ and n вүҘ 0 (and the equality holds
when n = 0), we have

                              N вҲ—                      ПҖ n   вҲ—
                             GО 
                              b Q  вүң   EПҖвҲјPО     max (B  )  BQ    = QвҲ—
                                                     nвҲҲN
                                             b



                                                                                                  в–Ў

A.3   D ISCUSSION ABOUT S OFTMAX H IGHWAY O PERATOR

The Softmax Highway Operator is defined by

                              О 
                            GeN Q вүң smaxОұ smax Оұ
                                                 maxвҖІ (B ПҖ )n BQ,
                              b
                                            вҖІ     n вҲҲN     nвҲҲ{0,n }
                                          ПҖвҲҲО 
                                            b


If we remove the maxnвҲҲ{0,nвҖІ } in the above operator, i.e.,

                                      smaxОұ smax
                                              вҖІ
                                                Оұ
                                                  (B ПҖ )n BQ
                                          ПҖвҲҲО 
                                            b       n вҲҲN

then the above operator is biased w.r.t. QвҲ— . This operator can be regarded as an extension to the
multi-step Bellman Optimality Operator BnО  , average over various n with weights smax Оұ
                                                                                        (В·). There-
                                          b
                                                                                   вҖІ    n вҲҲN
fore, it has similar biased property to BnО  . However, simply adding maxnвҲҲ{0,nвҖІ } with minor compu-
                                          b

tational cost, our Softmax Highway operator is unbiased while alleviating the overestimation issue
and improving the exploration.

A.4   M ULTI -S TEP I MPORTANCE S AMPLING - BASED B ELLMAN E XPECTATION O PERATOR

In this section, we describe the classical off-policy learning method based on importance sampling
(IS). IS-based off-policy methods evaluate the value function of a policy ПҖ вҖІ (called target policy)
using the data collected by a different policy ПҖ (called behavior policy). The underlying opera-
tor, called Importance Sampling-based Bellman Expectation Operator (Sutton & Barto, 2018), is
defined as follows,
                                                           вҖІ вҖІ вҖІ
                 ПҖвҖІ                                       ПҖ (a |s )                 вҖІ вҖІ
               BМҶПҖ Q(s, a) вүң EsвҖІ вҲјT (В·|s,a),aвҖІ вҲјПҖ(В·|sвҖІ )             (r(s, a) + ОіQ(s , a ))    (21)
                                                          ПҖ(aвҖІ |sвҖІ )

                                                      18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


To utilize the multi-step data collected by different behavior policies, the above operator can be ex-
tended to a multi-step version with a set of behavioral policies (we call Multi-Step IS-based Bellman
Expectation Operator) (Sutton & Barto, 2018), which is defined as
                                            h     вҖІ
                                                                     i
                 ПҖ,О 
               (BN   Q)(s0 , a0 ) вүң EПҖвҲјP b (BМҶПҖПҖ )N Q(s0 , a0 )
                   b
                                         О 

                                                                                                  (22)
                                                    " N вҲ’1                                      #
                                                      X
                                  = EПҖвҲјP b ,П„sN вҲјПҖ         Оі t О¶ 1:t rt + Оі N О¶ 1:N Q(sN , aN )
                                              О    0
                                                           t=0

where N is the lookahead depth/bootstrapping step; П„sN0 = (s0 , a0 , s1 , a1 , s2 , a2 , В· В· В· , sN ); П„sN0 вҲј ПҖ
                                                                                                    вҖІ
                                                                                        Qt            (atвҖІ |stвҖІ )
is the trajectory starting from s0 by executing policy ПҖ for N steps; and О¶ 1:t вүң tвҖІ =1 ПҖПҖ(a                      is
                                                                                                        tвҖІ |stвҖІ )
the product of IS ratios. The products of IS ratios could cause high variance.

B     M ETHOD
B.1     A LGORITHMS

B.1.1     H IGHWAY VALUE I TERATION
The Highway Value Iteration algorithm is presented as Algorithm B.1.

B.1.2     H IGHWAY Q-L EARNING
The Highway Q-Learning algorithm is presented as Algorithm B.3.

B.1.3     H IGHWAY DQN
The Highway DQN algorithm is presented as Algorithm B.4.

C     E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS
The code of this paper is publicly-available at https://anonymous.4open.science/r/
Highway-Reinforcement-Learning-4202.

C.1     E XPERIMENTS WITH M ODEL - BASED A LGORITHMS

C.1.1     D ETAILS OF E NVIRONMENTS
Multi-Room is a grid world environment with multiple rooms connected by doors. The agentвҖҷs
goal is to reach a goal square in the opposite corner and get a reward (r = 1000). In addition,
the agent will get a small reward r = 0.001 when it finds the exit door of the room. We use the
implementations based on the gym-minigrid (Chevalier-Boisvert et al., 2018).


Algorithm B.1 Highway Value Iteration
                                              b 0 ; the set of lookahead depths N ; interval for adding
    Input: Initial set of behavioral policies О 
    new policy K .
    Initialize: Initial VF V0 вҲҲ R|S| , Пө.
    for k = 1, 2, . . . do
      if (k вҲ’ 1) mod K == 0 then
         ПҖk (s) = arg maxa [r(s, a) + ОіEsвҖІ [VkвҲ’1 (sвҖІ )]]
         О 
         bk = О b kвҲ’1 вҲӘ {ПҖk }
      end if
              О 
      Vk вҶҗ GN    VkвҲ’1
              bk

      if вҲҘVk вҲ’ VkвҲ’1 вҲҘвҲһ вүӨ Пө then break end if
    end for


                                                        19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Algorithm B.2 Generalized Policy Iteration (Sutton & Barto, 2018)
  Input: the lookahead depth N .
  Initialize: Initial VF V0 вҲҲ R|S| , Пө.
  for k = 1, 2 . . . do
      ПҖk (s) = arg maxa [r(s, a) + ОіEsвҖІ [VkвҲ’1 (sвҖІ )]]
                    в—ҰN
    Vk вҶҗ (B ПҖk ) VkвҲ’1
    if вҲҘVk вҲ’ VkвҲ’1 вҲҘвҲһ вүӨ Пө then break end if
  end for


Algorithm B.3 Highway Q-Learning
 1: Input: Set of lookahead depths N ; Number of behavior policies M (for computing target Q value); Epochs
    of running algorithm Irun ; Number of behavior policies M (for computing target Q value); Number of
    searched behavior policies M ; Epochs of rolling-out policy Irollout ; Epochs of updating value function
    Iupdate ; Initial value function Q0 вҲҲ R|S|Г—|A| ; Exploration rate Пө.
 2: Initialize: k = 0; State-action replay buffer D = вҲ…; .
 3: for m = 1, В· В· В· , Irun do
 4:    Set ПҖm to be Пө-greedy policy with Qk
         (m)
 5:    Ds,a вҶҗ вҲ…, for all (s, a) вҲҲ S Г— A
 6:    for j = 1, В· В· В· , Irollout do
 7:       Collect a trajectory П„ = (s0 , a0 , r0 , s1 , a1 , r1 , В· В· В· , sT ) with ПҖm .
 8:       for t = 0, 1, В· В· В· , T вҲ’ 1 do
                                                                        (m)
 9:          Add (st , at , rt , st+1 , at+1 , rt+1 , В· В· В· , sT ) to Dst ,at
10:           Add (st , at ) to D
11:       end for
12:    end for
13:    for j = 1, В· В· В· , Iupdate do
14:       Sample a (s0 , a0 ) from D.
15:       Update the value function by the following rules
                                                                     (m)
                                                                  b Ds0 ,a0 Gn+1  n+1

                               Qk+1 (s0 , a0 ) =     max      max E          Qk (П„s0 ,a0 )
                                                   mвҲҲMs0 ,a0 nвҲҲN

                                 (m)
                           b Ds0 ,a0 [В·] =     1          X
                     where E                  (m)
                                                                        [В·]
                                             Ds,a    n+1       (m)
                                                    rs 0 ,a0
                                                             вҲҲDs0 ,a0
                                                                                          вҖІ
                                                                               n                     o
                              Ms0 ,a0 = {m1 , В· В· В· , mM }, mi вҲј U nif orm      mвҖІ |Ds(m
                                                                                       0 ,a0
                                                                                            )
                                                                                              | Мё= 0


16:      k =k+1
17:   end for
18: end for


C.1.2     D ETAILS OF A LGORITHMS

We compare our Highway Value Iteration to Policy Iteration and Value Iteration. For Policy It-
eration, the lookahead step is set by N = 10 (see Algorithm B.2). For our Highway Value
Iteration method, the interval of adding policy is set by K = 7; the set of lookahead depths
N = {0, 1, 2, В· В· В· , 9}; the size of behavioral policies is set by |О |
                                                                     b = 5. The error bound
(вҲҘVk вҲ’ VkвҲ’1 вҲҘвҲһ вүӨ Пө) for all algorithms is set by Пө = 10вҲ’10 .


C.2     E XPERIMENTS OF M ODEL - FREE A LGORITHMS IN T OY TASKS

Here we present the details of model-free-algorithms in artificial tasks. We adopt the experimental
setting of Arjona-Medina et al. (2019).


                                                        20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Algorithm B.4 Highway DQN
  Input: Set of lookahead depths N ; Number of behavior policies M (for computing target Q value); Epochs
  of running algorithm Irun ; Epochs of rolling-out policy Irollout ; Epochs of updating value function Iupdate ;
  Batch size of updating value function b; Initial parameter Оё of Q function; Exploration rate Пө; Temperature
  hyperparameter Оұ for softmax function smaxОұ .
  Initialize: State-action replay buffer D = вҲ…; Initialize parameter ОёвҖІ of target Q function, ОёвҖІ вҶҗ Оё.
  for m = 1, В· В· В· , Irun do
     Set ПҖm to be Пө-greedy policy with QОё
       (m)
     Ds,a вҶҗ вҲ…, for all (s, a) вҲҲ S Г— A
     for j = 1, В· В· В· , Irollout do
        Collect a trajectory П„ = (s0 , a0 , r0 , s1 , a1 , r1 , В· В· В· , sT ) with ПҖm
        for t = 0, 1, В· В· В· , T вҲ’ 1 do
                                                                                   (m)
           Add (st , at , rt , st+1 , at+1 , rt+1 , st+2 , at+2 , В· В· В· , sT ) to Dst ,at
           Add (st , at ) to D
        end for
     end for
     for j = 1, В· В· В· , Iupdate do
        Sample a mini-batch D     b = {(s, a)} from D.
        Update Оё by minimizing the following loss function:
                                 X                                                         (m) h               i 2
                     L (Оё) =              QОё (s, a) вҲ’ smaxОұ smax            Оұ
                                                                                 max    b Ds,a Gn+1
                                                                                        E        Q    (П„ n+1
                                                                                                         s,a )     (23)
                                                                       вҖІ             вҖІ            Оё вҖІ
                                                     mвҲҲMs,a n вҲҲN           nвҲҲ{0,n }
                             (s,a)вҲҲD
                                   b

                                 (m)
                           b Ds0 ,a0 [В·] =      1          X
                     where E                   (m)
                                                                         [В·]
                                              Ds,a    n+1       (m)
                                                     rs 0 ,a0
                                                              вҲҲDs0 ,a0
                                                                                                  вҖІ
                                                                                       n                    o
                              Ms0 ,a0 = {m1 , В· В· В· , mM }, mi вҲј U nif orm              mвҖІ |Ds(m
                                                                                               0 ,a0
                                                                                                    )
                                                                                                      | Мё= 0


    end for
    ОёвҖІ вҶҗ Оё every C timesteps
  end for


                                                           Door


                                  Goal                                           Door

                               вҖў each move: -0.01
                               вҖў achieving goal: 1000
                               вҖў achieving the exit
                                 door: 0.001
                               вҖў achieving the entry
                                                                         Start
                                 door: -1


                 Figure 5: The illustration of the Minimalistic Gridworld Environment



                                                          21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


C.2.1    D ETAILS OF E NVIRONMENTS

We evaluate the model-free algorithms on two toy tasks involving delayed rewards (Arjona-Medina
et al., 2019), where a reward is only provided at the end of each trial and is associated with the
previous actions. For example, in task вҖңTrace Back,вҖқ the final reward depends on the first two
actions. Each task is run with 100 random seeds. In task вҖңChoice,вҖқ the stochastic reward depends
on the first action at the beginning; the final reward depends on the first two actions. Please refer to
Arjona-Medina et al. (2019) for more details.

C.2.2    A LGORITHMIC D ETAILS

The following methods are compared:

        вҖў RUDDER with reward redistribution for Q-value estimation, and RUDDER applied on top
          of Q-learning.
        вҖў Q-learning with eligibility traces according to Watkins (Q(О»)).
        вҖў SARSA with eligibility traces (SARSA(О»)).
        вҖў Monte Carlo.

For RUDDER, we use the default setting of Arjona-Medina et al. (2019). For Q(О») and SARSA(О»),
the hyperparameter of eligibility traces is О» = 0.9. For Q(О»), we use WatkinsвҖҷ implementation.
The algorithms are evaluated until the task is solved. For MC, Q-values are the exponential moving
average of the episode return. In all experiments, an Пө-greedy policy with Пө = 0.2 is adopted.
For our Highway Q-Learning, the set of lookahead depths N is set by {0, 1, 2, В· В· В· , N вҲ’ 1}, where
N = T вҲ’ t is set to be the length until the end (T is the length of trajectory and t the timestep of
current state). Epochs of rolling-out policy is set by Irollout = 1. Epochs of updating value function
is set by Iupdate = T .

C.3     E XPERIMENTS OF M ODEL - FREE A LGORITHMS IN M INATAR TASKS

C.3.1    E NVIRONMENTAL D ETAILS

This paper uses 5 games in MinAtar (Young & Tian, 2019), including Asterix, Breakout, Free-
way, Seaquest, and Space Invaders. The details of the environments can be found at https:
//github.com/kenjyoung/MinAtar.

C.3.2    D ETAILS OF A LGORITHMS

We implement our and competing methods by extending the implementation of Maxmin DQN Lan
(2019). The hyperparameters of training deep neural network are provided in Table 2.
We reuse the hyper-parameters and settings of neural networks in the Maxmin DQN paper (Lan
et al., 2020). For Maxmin DQN, the best number of target networks (a hyperparameter) was chosen
from [2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9] and the best learning rates were chosen from [3Г—10вҲ’3 ; 3Г—10вҲ’4 ; 3Г—10вҲ’5 ].
The set of lookahead depths of our Highway DQN is set by {0, 1, В· В· В· , N вҲ’ 1}, and the lookahead
depth/bootstrapping step of Multi-Step DQN and Retrace(О») is set by N . For our Highway DQN,
Multi-Step DQN and Multi-Step SARSA, the best hyperparameter N was chosen from [4, 8, 12];
the best learning rate from [3 Г— 10вҲ’3 ; 3 Г— 10вҲ’4 ], and the best number of target networks was chosen
from [2, 4, 6]. For Retrace(О»), О» is set by 1 according to the suggestion of Retrace(О») paper (Munos
et al., 2016). For our Highway DQN, the best hyperparameter of softmax temperature Оұ was chosen
from {0.1, 0.5}. Epochs of rolling-out policy is set by Irollout = 1.
In practice, we adopt several measures to accelerate the computation of Highway DQN. We cache
the Q values generated by the target network for data (s, a) such that they can be reused when the
data is sampled again for training until the target network is updated. With the cached Q values, all
we need is a softmax over |N | Г— |K| numbers, which is typically fast on GPUs.


                                                  22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


          Hyperparameter                                                                                                                        Value
             Optimizer                                                                                                                     RMSprop
             Batch size                                                                                                                            32
                                                                                                                                            Gym:5
          Gradient Clipping
                                                                                                                                           MinAtari:1
                                                                                                                                      Gym:200
 Target network update frequency
                                                                                                                                    MinAtari:1000
                                                                               Gym: Fully-connected layer (64,64)
                                                                               MinAtari:
      Hidden units of Q network
                                                                                  Conv. layer(out channels=16, kernel size=3, stride=1)
                                                                                  Conv. layer(out channels=16, kernel size=3, stride=1)
         Activation function                                                                                                                    ReLU
                                                                                                                                       Gym:104
             Buffer size
                                                                                                                                      MinAtari:105
          Discount factor Оі                                                                                                                     0.99
          Exploration rate Пө                                                                                statr:1.0; end: 0.1; decay type: linear

Table 2: Hyperparameters of the implemented algorithms. We reused hyperparameters and settings
of neural networks in the Maxmin DQN paper (Lan et al., 2020).


                      180
                                   SpaceInvaders                   18
                                                                               SpaceInvaders                          200
                                                                                                                                   SpaceInvaders                               SpaceInvaders
                                                                                                                                                                   30
                      160                                                                                             175
                                                                   16
                      140                                                                                             150                                          25
                                                            Q Values


                      120                                          14                                                 125
                                                                                                                                                            Q Values
                 scores


                                                                                                                 scores


                                                                                                                                                                   20
                      100                                                                                             100
                                                                   12                                                                                              15
                          80                                                                                              75
                          60                                       10                                                     50                                       10
                          40                                                                                              25
                                                                       8                                                                                               5
                               1       2    3        4      5              1       2    3        4      5                      1       2    3        4      5              1       2    3        4      5
                                   Timestep (Г—106)       1e6
                                                                               Timestep (Г—106)       1e6
                                                                                                                                   Timestep (Г—106)       1e6
                                                                                                                                                                               Timestep (Г—106)       1e6


                 (a) Varying softmax temperatures.                                                               (b) Varying number of target net-
                                                                                                                 work.

Figure 6: (a) Performance (left) and Q values (right) of Highway DQN using varying softmax
temperatures Оұ. (b) Corresponding results using varying numbers of target networks. Average
over 5 seeds, 1 standard deviation.


C.4    A DDITIOANL RESULTS ON A BLATION S TUDY

We evaluate our Highway DQN with varying softmax temperature Оұ and number of target networks.
As shown in Fig. 6a and Fig. 6b, appropriate softmax temperature Оұ and number of target networks
can reduce the overestimation of Q values and benefit the performance of the algorithm.


                                                                                                            23
