Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


FAIR G RAPH M ESSAGE PASSING WITH T RANSPARENCY
  Anonymous authors
  Paper under double-blind review



                                             A BSTRACT

         Recent advanced works achieve fair representations and predictions through regu-
         larization, adversarial debiasing, and contrastive learning in graph neural networks
         (GNNs). These methods implicitly encode the sensitive attribute information in
         the well-trained model weight via backward propagation. In practice, we not only
         pursue a fair machine learning model but also lend such fairness perception to the
         public. For current fairness methods, how the sensitive attribute information usage
         makes the model achieve fair prediction still remains a black box. In this work, we
         first propose the concept transparency to describe whether the model embraces the
         ability of lending fairness perception to the public or not. Motivated by the fact that
         current fairness models lack of transparency, we aim to pursue a fair machine learn-
         ing model with transparency via explicitly rendering sensitive attribute usage for fair
         prediction in forward propagation . Specifically, we develop an effective and trans-
         parent Fair Message Passing (FMP) scheme adopting sensitive attribute information
         in forward propagation. In this way, FMP explicitly uncovers how sensitive at-
         tributes influence final prediction. Additionally, FMP scheme can aggregate useful
         information from neighbors and mitigate bias in a unified framework to simultane-
         ously achieve graph smoothness and fairness objectives. An acceleration approach
         is also adopted to improve the efficiency of FMP. Experiments on node classifi-
         cation tasks demonstrate that the proposed FMP outperforms the state-of-the-art
         baselines in terms of fairness and accuracy on three real-world datasets. The code
         is available in https://anonymous.4open.science/r/FMP-AD84.



1    I NTRODUCTION

Graph neural networks (GNNs) (Kipf & Welling, 2017; Veličković et al., 2018; Wu et al., 2019;
Han et al., 2022a;b) are widely adopted in various domains, such as social media mining (Hamilton
et al., 2017), knowledge graph (Hamaguchi et al., 2017) and recommender system (Ying et al., 2018),
due to remarkable performance in learning representations. Graph learning, a topic with growing
popularity, aims to learn node representation containing both topological and attribute information
in a given graph. Despite the outstanding performance in various tasks, GNNs often inherit or even
amplify societal bias from input graph data (Dai & Wang, 2021). The biased node representation
largely limits the application of GNNs in many high-stake tasks, such as job hunting (Mehrabi et al.,
2021) and crime ratio prediction (Suresh & Guttag, 2019). Hence, bias mitigation that facilitates the
research on fair GNNs is in an urgent need.
Many existing works achieving fair prediction in graph either rely on regularization (Jiang et al.,
2022), adversarial debiasing (Dai & Wang, 2021), or contrastive learning (Zhu et al., 2020; 2021b;
Agarwal et al., 2021; Kose & Shen, 2022). These methods adopt sensitive attribute information in
training loss refinement. In this way, such sensitive attribute can be implicitly encoded in well-trained
model weight through backward propagation. However, only achieving fair model is insufficient
in practice since the fairness should also lend perception to the public (e.g., the auditors, or the
maintainers of machine learning systems). In other words, the influence of sensitive attributes should
be easily probed for public. We name such property for public probing as transparency. Specifically,
we provide the following formal statement on transparency in fairness:
            Transparency in fairness: Onlookers can verify the released fair model with
• Transparent influence: How and if the sensitive attribute information influence fair model prediction.


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


• Less is more: The required resources to obtain the influence of sensitive attributes only includes
  well-trained model and test data samples 1 .

From auditors’ perspective, even though the fairness metric for machine learning model is low, such
fair model is still untrustful if the auditors cannot understand how the sensitive attributes are adopted
to achieve fair prediction given the well-trained model. From maintainer’s perspective, it is important
to understand how the model provide fair prediction. Such understanding could help maintainers
improve models and further convince auditors in terms of fairness. In summary, transparency aims
to make fairness implementation understandable. The transparency aims to make the process of
achieving fair model via sensitive attribute informations white-box 2 . Therefore, the maintainers
and auditors both get benefits from model transparency. More importantly, similar to intrinsic
explainability of the model 3 , the fairness with transparency property is binary, i.e., the prediction
model either embrace the fairness with transparency or not.
Based on the formal statement on transparency in fairness, the key rule to determinate whether a
fair model is transparent is that the model prediction difference under the cases with and without
sensitive attribute information can be identified given the well-trained fair model and test data samples.
Unfortunately, many existing fairness works, including regularization, adversarial debiasing, and
contrastive learning, do not satisfy transparency requirements in practice. For example, the fair model
trained based on existing works are not with transparent influence. This is because the sensitive
attribute is implicitly encoded in well-trained model weight. Therefore, it is intractable to infer
how sensitive attribute influence the well-trained model weight without access the dynamic model
training process. Additionally, for fair model obtained from existing works, the required resources
for transparent influence includes training data and training strategy so that the influence of sensitive
attributed can be probed via detecting well-trained model weight difference. In a nutshell, the current
fair models based on loss refinement lack of transparency. A natural question is raised:
                           Can we find fair prediction model with transparency?
In this work, we provide a positive answer via chasing transparency and fairness in message passing
of GNNs. The key idea of achieving transparency is to explicitly adopt sensitive attribute in message
passing (forward propagation). Specifically, we design an fair and transparent message passing
scheme for GNNs, called fair message passing (FMP). First, we formulate an optimization problem
that integrates fairness and prediction performance objectives. Then, we solve the formulated problem
via Fenchel conjugate and gradient descent to generate fair-and-predictive representation. We also
interpret the gradient descent as aggregation first and them debiasing. Finally, we integrate FMP
in graph neural networks to achieve fair and accurate prediction for node graph classification task.
Further, we demonstrate the superiority of FMP by examining its effectiveness and efficiency, where
we adopt the property of softmax function to accelerate the gradient calculation over primal variables.
In short, the contributions can be summarized as follows:
• We consider fairness problem from a new perspective, named transparency, i.e., the sensitive
  attribute should be easily probed for public. We point out that many existing fairness method cannot
  achieve transparency.
• We propose FMP to achieve fairness with transparency via using sensitive attribute information in
  message passing. Specifically, we use gradient descent to chasing graph smoothness and fairness
  in a unified optimization framework. An acceleration method is proposed to reduce gradient
  computational complexity with theoretical and empirical validation.
• The effectiveness and efficiency of FMP are experimentally evaluated on three real-world datasets.
  The results show that compared to the state-of-the-art, our FMP exhibits a superior trade-off between
  prediction performance and fairness with negligibly computation overhead.

    1
      A naive way for many existing works (e.g., adding fair regularization, adversarial debiasing, et.al.) to obtain
the influence of sensitive attribute is to train fair and unfair model with/without the sensitive attribute information,
and then get the prediction difference. Therefore, the required resources includes training data and additional
(unfair) model training.
    2
      Similar with the goal of model explainability, only achieving accurate prediction is insufficient, and chasing
explainability can help experts understand how the model provide prediction and convince users.
    3
      Decision tree is intrinsic explainable while deep neural networks is not.


                                                           2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


2     P RELIMINARIES

2.1   N OTATIONS

We adopt bold upper-case letters to denote matrix such as X, bold lower-case letters such as x to
denote vectors, calligraphic font such as X to denote set. Given a matrix X ∈ Rn×d , the i-th row
and j-th column are denoted as Xi and X·,j , and the elementq  in i-th row and j-th column is Xi,j .
                                                                         2
                                                                 P                        P
We use the Frobenius norm, l1 norm of matrix X as ||X||F =          i,j Xi,j and ||X||1 =  ij |Xij |,
respectively. Given two matrices X, Y ∈ Rn×d , the inner product is defined as ⟨X, Y⟩ = tr(X⊤ Y),
where tr(·) is the trace of a square matrix. SF (X) represents softmax function with a default
normalized column dimension. Let G = {V, E} be a graph with the node set V = {v1 , · · · , vn }
and the undirected edge set E = {e1 , · · · , em }, where n, m represent the number of node and edge,
respectively. The graph structure G can be represented as an adjacent matrix A ∈ Rn×n , where
Aij = 1 if existing edge between node vi and node vj . N (i) denotes the neighbors of node vi and
Ñ (i) = N (i) ∪ {vi } denotes the self-inclusive neighbors. Suppose that each node is associated
with a d-dimensional feature vector and a (binary) sensitive attribute, the feature for all nodes and
sensitive attribute are denoted as Xori = Rn×d and s ∈ {−1, 1}n . Define the sensitive attribute
incident vector as ∆s = ||11>0
                            >0 (s)        1>0 (−s)
                               (s)||1 − ||1>0 (−s)||1 to normalize each sensitive attribute group, where
1>0 (s) is an element-wise indicator function.

2.2   GNN S AS G RAPH S IGNAL D ENOISING

A GNN model is usually composed of several stacking GNN layers. Given a graph G with N nodes,
a GNN layer typically contains feature transformation Xtrans = ftrans (Xori ) and aggregation
Xagg = fagg (Xtrans |G), where Xori ∈ Rn×din , Xtrans , Xagg ∈ Rn×dout represent the input and
output features. The feature transformation operation transforms the node feature dimension, and
feature aggregation, updates node features based on neighbors’ features and graph topology. Recent
works (Ma et al., 2021b; Zhu et al., 2021a) have established the connections between many feature
aggregation operations in representative GNNs and a graph signal denoising problem with Laplacian
regularization. Here, we only introduce GCN/SGC as an examples to show the connection from a
perspective of graph signal denoising. The more discussions are elaborated in Appendix G. Feature
aggregation in Graph Convolutional Network (GCN) or Simplifying Graph Convolutional Network
                                                      1       1
(SGC) is given by Xagg = ÃXtrans , where Ã = D̃− 2 ÂD̃− 2 is a normalized self-loop adjacency
matrix Â = A + I, and D̃ is degree matrix of Ã. Recent works (Ma et al., 2021b; Zhu et al., 2021a)
provably demonstrate that such feature aggregation is equivalent to one-step gradient descent to
minimize tr(F⊤ I − Ã)F with initialization F = Xtrans .


3     FAIR M ESSAGE PASSING

In this section, we propose a new message passing scheme to aggregate useful information from
neighbors while debiasing representation bias. Specifically, we formulate fair message passing as an
optimization problem to pursue smoothness and fair node representation simultaneously. Together
with an effective and efficient optimization algorithm, we derive the closed-form fair message
passing. Finally, the proposed FMP is shown to be integrated in fair GNNs at three stages, including
transformation, aggregation, and debiasing step, as shown in Figure 1.

3.1   T HE O PTIMIZATION F RAMEWORK

To achieve graph smoothness prior and fairness in the same process, a reasonable message passing
should be a good solution for the following optimization problem:

                       λs              1
                 min      tr(FT L̃F) + ||F − Xtrans ||2F + λf ||∆s SF (F)||1 .                      (1)
                  F
                       |2              2
                                      {z               } |         {z

                                                                           }
                                     hs (F)                     hf ∆s SF (F)



                                                   3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


where L̃ represents normalized Laplacian matrix, hs (·) and hf (·) denotes the smoothness and fairness
objectives 4 , respectively, and Xtrans ∈ Rn×dout is the transformed dout -dimensional node features
and F ∈ Rn×dout is the aggregated node features of the same matrix size. The first two terms
preserve the similarity of connected node representation and thus enforces graph smoothness. The
last term enforces fair node representation so that the average predicted probability between groups of
different sensitive attributes can remain constant. The regularization coefficients λs and λf adaptively
control the trade-off between graph smoothness and fairness.

Smoothness objective hs (·). The adjacent matrix in existing graph message passing schemes is
normalized for improving numerical stability and achieving superior performance. Similarly, the
                                                                                       1       1
graph smoothness term requires normalized Laplacian matrix, i.e., L̃ = I− Ã, Ã = D̂− 2 ÂD̂− 2 , and
Â = A + I. From edge-centric view, smoothness objective enforces connected node representation
                                                          F
to be similar since tr(FT L̃F) = (vi ,vj )∈E || √dFi+1 − √ j ||2F , where di = k Aik represents
                                 P                                                P
                                                      i         dj +1
the degree of node vi .

Fairness objective hf (·). The fairness objective measures the bias for node representation after
aggregation. Recall sensitive attribute incident vector ∆s indicates the sensitive attribute group and
group size via the sign and absolute value summation. Recall that the sensitive attribute incident
vector as ∆s = ||11>0
                   >0 (s)        1>0 (−s)
                      (s)||1 − ||1>0 (−s)||1 and SF (F) represents the predicted probability for node
classification task, where SF (F)ij = P̂ (yi = j|X). Furthermore,
                                                                  we can show that our fairness

objective is actually equivalent to demographic parity, i.e., ∆s SF (F)     = P̂ (yi = j|si =
                                                                                    j
1, X) − P̂ (yi = j|si = −1, X). Please see proof in Appendix B. In other words, our fairness
objective, l1 norm of ∆s SF (F) characterizes the predicted probability difference between two
groups with different sensitive attribute. Therefore, our proposed optimization framework can pursue
graph smoothness and fairness simultaneously.

3.2     A LGORITHM FOR FAIR M ESSAGE PASSING

For smoothness objective, many existing popular message passing scheme can be derived based on
gradient descent with appropriate step size choice (Ma et al., 2021b; Zhu et al., 2021a). However,
directly computing the gradient of the fairness term makes the closed-form gradient complicated
since the gradient of l1 norm involves the sign of elements in the vector.

3.2.1    B I - LEVEL O PTIMIZATION P ROBLEM F ORMULATION .
To solve this optimization problem in a more effective and efficient manner, Fenchel conjugate
(Rockafellar, 2015) is introduced to transform the original problem as bi-level optimization problem.
Fenchel conjugate (Rockafellar, 2015) (a.k.a. convex conjugate) is the key tool to transform the
original problem into bi-level optimization problem. For the general convex function h(·), its
                                             △
conjugate function is defined as h∗ (U) = sup⟨U, X⟩ − h(X). Based on Fenchel conjugate, the
                                                 X
fairness objective can be transformed as variational representation hf (p) = sup⟨p, u⟩ − h∗f (u),
                                                                                        u
where p = ∆s SF (F) ∈ R1×dout is a predicted probability vector for classification. Furthermore,
the original optimization problem is equivalent to
                              min max hs (F) + ⟨p, u⟩ − h∗f (u)                              (2)
                                  F    u

where u ∈ R1×dout and h∗f (·) is the conjugate function of fairness objective hf (·).

3.2.2    P ROBLEM S OLUTION
Motivated by Proximal Alternating Predictor-Corrector (PAPC) (Loris & Verhoeven, 2011; Chen
et al., 2013), the min-max optimization problem (2) can be solved by the following fixed-point
   4
     Such smoothness objetive is the the most common-used one in existing methods (Ma et al., 2021b; Belkin
& Niyogi, 2001; Kalofolias, 2016). The various other smoothness objectives could be considered to improve the
performance of FMP and we leave it for future work.


                                                     4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


equations
                               (
                                   F = F − ∇hs (F) − ∂⟨p,u⟩
                                                       ∂F ,                                          (3)
                                   u = proxh∗ u + ∆s SF (F) .
                                             f


where proxh∗ (u) = arg min ||y − u||2F + h∗f (u). Similar to “predictor-corrector" algorithm (Loris
             f             y
& Verhoeven, 2011), we adopt iterative algorithm to find saddle point for min-max optimization
problem. Specifically, starting from (Fk , uk ), we adopt a gradient descent step on primal variable F
to arrive (F̄k+1 , uk ) and then followed by a proximal ascent step in the dual variable u. Finally, a
gradient descent step on primal variable in point (F̄k+1 , uk ) to arrive at (Fk+1 , uk ). In short, the
iteration can be summarized as
                                                                k
                                                                   ⟩
                          F̄
                              k+1
                                   = Fk − γ∇hs (Fk ) − γ ∂⟨p,u
                                                             ∂F          ,
                                                                    F k
                              k+1               k               k+1
                             u     = proxβh∗ u + β∆s SF (F̄          ) ,                              (4)
                                           f
                          F̄k+1 = Fk − γ∇h (Fk ) − γ ∂⟨p,uk+1 ⟩
                         
                         
                                                 s             ∂F          .
                                                                      Fk

where γ and β are the step size for primal and dual variables. Note that the close-form for ∂⟨p,u⟩
                                                                                              ∂F   ∈
Rn×dout and proxβh∗ (·) are still not clear, we will provide the solution one by one.
                     f



Proximal Operator. As for the proximal operators, we provide the close-form in the following
proposition:

Proposition 1 (Proximal Operators) The proximal operators proxβh∗f (u) satisfies

                        proxβh∗f (u)j = sign(u)j min |uj |, λf ,                                     (5)
where sign(·) and λf are element-wise sign function and hyperparameter for fairness objective. In
other words, such proximal operator is element-wise projection onto l∞ ball with radius λf .

                                                                                  1
FMP Scheme. Similar to works (Ma et al., 2021b; Liu et al., 2021), choosing γ = 1+λ s
                                                                                      and
     1
β = 2γ , we have

    Fk − γ∇hs (Fk ) =    (1 − γ)I − γλs L̃ Fk + γXtrans = γXtrans + (1 − γ)ÃFk , (6)
Therefore, we can summarize the proposed FMP as two phases, including propagation with skip
connection (Step ❶) and bias mitigation (Steps ❷-❺). For bias mitigation, Step ❷ updates the
aggregated node features for fairness objective; Steps ❸ and ❹ aim to learn and “reshape" perturbation
vector in probability space, respectively. Step ❺ explicitly mitigate the bias of node features based on
gradient descent on primal variable. The mathematical formulation is given as follows:
                     k+1
                        X      = γXtrans + (1 − γ)ÃXk ,               Step ❶
                     agg
                    
                    
                           k+1      k+1      ∂⟨p,uk ⟩
                     F̄       = Xagg − γ ∂F               ,           Step ❷
                    
                    
                    
                                                      Fk
                          k+1      k                 k+1
                        ū     = u + β∆s SF (F̄  ),                    Step ❸
                          k+1              k+1                  k+1
                        u      = min    |ū    |, λ    · sign(ū    ), Step ❹
                    
                                                   f
                    
                    
                    
                                                   k+1
                     Fk+1 = Xk+1 − γ ∂⟨p,u ⟩
                    
                                                             .         Step ❺
                    
                                    agg           ∂F
                                                         Fk

where Xk+1
         agg represents the node features with normal aggregation and skip connection with the
transformed input Xtrans .

3.2.3   G RADIENT C OMPUTATION ACCELERATION
The softmax property is also adopted to accelerate the gradient computation. Note that p = ∆s SF (F)
and SF (·) represents softmax over column dimension, directly computing the gradient ∂⟨p,u⟩∂F based
                                                     ∂p
on chain rule involves the three-dimensional tensor ∂F  with gigantic computation complexity. Instead,
we simplify the gradient computation based on the property of softmax function in the following
theorem.


                                                     5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


               Input               Prediction            Propagation                     Debiasing


                           𝑋!"#                 𝑋$"%&'                    𝑋%((
                                      MLP


                                  Male Perturbation                Female Perturbation

                                                      Softmax


                                                     Jacobian
                                                  Transformation


Figure 1: The model pipeline consists of three steps: MLP (feature transformation), propagation with
skip connection and debiasing via low-rank perturbation in probability space.

Theorem 1 (Gradient Computation) The gradient over primal variable ∂⟨p,u⟩
                                                                     ∂F satisfies

                       ∂⟨p, u⟩
                               = Us ⊙ SF (F) − Sum1 (Us ⊙ SF (F))SF (F).                               (7)
                         ∂F
           △
where Us = ∆⊤s u, ⊙ represents element-wise product and Sum1 (·) represents the summation over
column dimension with preserved matrix shape.

3.3   D ISCUSSION ON FMP

In this section, we provide the interpretation and analyze the transparency, efficiency, and effectiveness
of proposed FMP scheme. Specifically, we interprete FMP as two phrases, including conventional
aggregation and bias mitigation, and the computation complexity of FMP is lower than backward
gradient calculation.

Interpretation Note that the gradient of fairness objective over node features F satisfies ∂⟨p,u⟩
                                                                                              ∂F    =
 ∂⟨p,u⟩ ∂SF (F)       ∂⟨p,u⟩       ⊤
∂SF (F)    ∂F    and  ∂SF (F)  = ∆ s u, such gradient calculation  can be interpreted  as three steps:
Softmax transformation, perturbation in probability space, and debiasing in representation space.
Specifcally, we first map the node representation into probability space via softmax transformation.
Subsequently, we calculate the gradient of fairness objective in probability space. It is seen that
the perturbation ∆⊤s u actually poses low-rank debiasing in probability space, where the nodes with
different sensitive attribute embrace opposite perturbation. In other words, the dual variable u
represents the perturbation direction in probability space. Finally, the perturbation in probability
space will be transformed into representation space via Jacobian transformation ∂SF   (F)
                                                                                    ∂F .

Transparency The proposed FMP explicitly uses the sensitive attribute information in Steps ❷-❺
during forward propagation. In other words, if we aims to identify the influence of sensitive attributes
for FMP, it is sufficient to check the difference between the input and output for debiasing step. It is
worth mentioning that the required information for identifying the influence of sensitive attributes are
naturally from the forward propagation. However, for the fair model from existing works (e.g, adding
regularization and adversarial debiasing), note that the sensitive attribute information is implicitly
encoded in the well-trained model weight, the sensitive attribute perturbation inevitably lead to
variability of well-trained model weight. Therefore, it is required to retrain the model for probing the
influence of sensitive attribute perturbation. The key drawback of these methods is due to encoding
the sensitive attributes information into well-trained model weights. From aditors’ perspective, it is
quite hard to identify the influence of sensitive attributes only given well-trained fair model. Instead,


                                                          6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                       Table 1: Comparative Results with Baselines on Node Classification.

                          Pokec-z                             Pokec-n                                   NBA
Models
           Acc (%) ↑    ∆DP (%) ↓ ∆EO (%) ↓     Acc (%) ↑   ∆DP (%) ↓ ∆EO (%) ↓        Acc (%) ↑     ∆DP (%) ↓      ∆EO (%) ↓
 MLP      70.48 ± 0.77 1.61 ± 1.29 2.22 ± 1.01 72.48 ± 0.26 1.53 ± 0.89 3.39 ± 2.37   65.56 ± 1.62   22.37 ± 1.87   18.00 ± 3.52
 GAT      69.76 ± 1.30 2.39 ± 0.62 2.91 ± 0.97 71.00 ± 0.48 3.71 ± 2.15 7.50 ± 2.88 57.78 ± 10.65 20.12 ± 16.18 13.00 ± 13.37
 GCN      71.78 ± 0.37 3.25 ± 2.35 2.36 ± 2.09 73.09 ± 0.28 3.48 ± 0.47 5.16 ± 1.38   61.90 ± 1.00   23.70 ± 2.74   17.50 ± 2.63
 SGC      71.24 ± 0.46 4.81 ± 0.30 4.79 ± 2.27 71.46 ± 0.41 2.22 ± 0.29 3.85 ± 1.63   63.17 ± 0.63   22.56 ± 3.94   14.33± 2.16
APPNP 66.91 ± 1.46 3.90 ± 0.69 5.71 ± 1.29 69.80 ± 0.89 1.98 ± 1.30 4.01 ± 2.36       63.80 ± 1.19   26.51 ± 3.33   20.00 ± 4.56
 FMP      70.50 ± 0.50 0.81 ± 0.40 1.73 ± 1.03 72.16 ± 0.33 0.66 ± 0.40 1.47 ± 0.87   73.33 ± 1.85   18.92 ± 2.28   13.33 ± 5.89


our designed FMP explicitly adopts the sensitive attribute information in the forward propagation
process, which naturally avoid the dilemma that sensitive attributes are encoded into well-trained
model weight. In a nutshell, FMP encompasses with higher transparency since (1) the sensitive
attribute is explicitly adopted in forward propagation; (2) It is not necessary to retrain model for
probing influence of sensitive attribute.

Efficiency FMP is an efficient message passing scheme. The computation complexity for the
aggregation (sparse matrix multiplications) is O(mdout ), where m is the number of edges in the
graph. For FMP, the extra computation mainly focus on the perturbation calculation, as shown
in Theorem 1, with the computation complexity O(ndout ). The extra computation complexity is
negligible in that the number of nodes n is far less than the number of edges m in the real-world
graph. Additionally, if directly adopting autograd to calculate the gradient via back propagation, we
                                               ∂p
have to calculate the three-dimensional tensor ∂F  with computation complexity O(n2 dout ). In other
words, thanks to the softmax property, we achieve an efficient fair message passing scheme.

Effectiveness The proposed FMP explicitly achieves graphs smoothness prior and fairness via
alternative gradient descent. In other words, the propagation and debiasing forward in a white-box
manner and there is not any trainable weight during forwarding phrase. The effectiveness of the
proposed FMP is also validated in the experiments on three real-world datasets.


4       E XPERIMENTS

In this section, we conduct experiments to validate the effectiveness and efficiency of proposed FMP.
We firstly validate that graph data with large sensitive homophily enhances bias in GNNs via synthetic
experiments. Moreover, for experiments on real-world datasets, we introduce the experimental
settings and then evaluate our proposed FMP compared with several baselines in terms of prediction
performance and fairness metrics.

4.1       E XPERIMENTAL S ETTINGS

Datasets. We conduct experiments on real-world datasets Pokec-z, Pokec-n, and NBA (Dai & Wang,
2021). Pokec-z and Pokec-n are sampled, based on province information, from a larger Facebook-like
social network Pokec (Takac & Zabovsky, 2012) in Slovakia, where region information is treated as
the sensitive attribute and the predicted label is the working field of the users. NBA dataset is extended
from a Kaggle dataset 5 consisting of around 400 NBA basketball players. The information of players
includes age, nationality, and salary in the 2016-2017 season. The players’ link relationships is from
Twitter with the official crawling API. The binary nationality (U.S. and overseas player) is adopted as
the sensitive attribute and the prediction label is whether the salary is higher than the median.

Evaluation Metrics. We adopt accuracy to evaluate the performance of node classification task.
As for fairness metric, we adopt two quantitative group fairness metrics to measure the prediction
bias. According to works (Louizos et al., 2015; Beutel et al., 2017), we adopt demographic parity
∆DP = |P(ŷ = 1|s = −1) − P(ŷ = 1|s = 1)| and equal opportunity ∆EO = |P(ŷ = 1|s =
    5
        https://www.kaggle.com/noahgift/social-power-nba


                                                              7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                     Pokec-n                   Pokec-z                      NBA


Figure 2: DP and Acc trade-off performance on three real-world datasets compared with adding
regularization (Top) and adversarial debiasing (Bottom). The trade-off curve more close to right
bottom corner means better trade-off performance 6
−1, y = 1) − P(ŷ = 1|s = 1, y = 1)|, where y and ŷ represent the ground-truth label and predicted
label, respectively.

Baselines. We compare our proposed FMP with representative GNNs, such as GCN (Kipf &
Welling, 2017), GAT (Veličković et al., 2018), SGC (Wu et al., 2019), and APPNP (Klicpera et al.,
2019), and MLP. For all models, we train 2 layers neural networks with 64 hidden units for 300
epochs. Additionally, We also compare adversarial debiasing and adding demographic regularization
methods to show the effectiveness of the proposed method.

Implementation Details. We run the experiments 5 times and report the average perfor-
mance for each method. We adopt Adam optimizer with 0.001 learning rate and 10−5
weight decay for all models. For adversarial debiasing, we adopt train classifier and adver-
sary with 70 and 30 epochs, respectively. The hyperparameter for adversary loss is tuned in
{0.0, 1.0, 2.0, 5.0, 8.0, 10.0, 20.0, 30.0}. For adding regularization, we adopt the hyperparameter set
{0.0, 1.0, 2.0, 5.0, 8.0, 10.0, 20.0, 50.0, 80.0, 100.0}.

4.2   E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS

Comparison with existng GNNs. The accuracy, demographic parity and equal opportunity metrics
of proposed FMP for Pokec-z, Pokec-n, NBA dataset are shown in Table 1 compared with MLP, GAT,
GCN, SGC and APPNP. The detailed statistical information for these three dataset is shown in Table
3. From these results, we can obtain the following observations:
• Many existing GNNs underperorm MLP model on all three datasets in terms of fairness metric. For
  instance, the demographic parity of MLP is lower than GAT, GCN, SGC and APPNP by 32.64%,
  50.46%, 66.53% and 58.72% on Pokec-z dataset. The higher prediction bias comes from the
  aggregation within the-same-sensitive-attribute nodes and topology bias in graph data.
• Our proposed FMP consistently achieve lowest prediction bias in terms of demographic parity
  and equal opportunity on all datasets. Specifically, FMP reduces demographic parity by 49.69%,
  56.86% and 5.97% compared with the lowest bias among all baselines in Pokec-z, Pokec-n, and
  NBA dataset. Meanwhile, our proposed FMP achieves the best accuracy in NBA dataset, and
  comparable accuracy in Pokec-z and Pokec-n datasets. In a nutshell, proposed FMP can effectively
  mitigate prediction bias while preserving the prediction performance.

Comparison with adversarial debiasing and regularization. To validate the effectiveness of
proposed FMP, we also show the prediction performance and fairness metric trade-off compared
with fairness-boosting methods, including adversarial debiasing (Fisher et al., 2020) and adding
regularization (Chuang & Mroueh, 2020). Similar to (Louppe et al., 2017), the output of GNNs is the
input of adversary and the goal of adversary is to predict the node sensitive attribute. We also adopt
several backbones for these two methods, including MLP, GCN, GAT and SGC. We randomly split


                                                  8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


50%/25%/25% for training, validation and test dataset. Figure 2 shows the pareto optimality curve
for all methods, where right-bottom corner point represents the ideal performance (highest accuracy
and lowest prediction bias). From the results, we list the following observations as follows:
• Our proposed FMP can achieve better DP-Acc trade-off compared with adversarial debiasing and
  adding regularization for many GNNs and MLP. Such observation validates the effectiveness of the
  key idea in FMP: aggregation first and then debiasing. Additionally, FMP can reduce demographic
  parity with negligible performance cost due to transparent and efficient debiasing.
• Message passing in GNNs does matter. For adding regularization or adversarial debiasing, different
  GNNs embrace huge distinctionwhich implies that appropriate message passing manner potentially
  leads to better trade-off performance. Additionally, many GNNs underperforms MLP in low label
  homophily coefficient dataset, such as NBA. The rationale is that aggregation may not always bring
  benefit in terms of accuracy when the neighbors have low probability with the same label.


5    R ELATED W ORKS

Graph neural networks. GNNs generalizing neural networks for graph data have already been
shown great success for various real-world applications. There are two streams in GNNs model
design, i.e., spectral-based and spatial-based. Spectral-based GNNs provide graph convolution
definition based on graph theory, which is utilized in GNN layers together with feature transformation
(Bruna et al., 2013; Defferrard et al., 2016; Henaff et al., 2015). Graph convolutional networks
(GCN) (Kipf & Welling, 2017) simplifies spectral-based GNN model into spatial aggregation scheme.
Since then, many spatial-based GNNs variant are developed to update node representation via
aggregating its neighbors’ information, including graph attention network (GAT) (Veličković et al.,
2018), GraphSAGE (Hamilton et al., 2017), SGC (Wu et al., 2019), APPNP (Klicpera et al., 2019), et
al (Gao et al., 2018; Monti et al., 2017). Graph signal denoising is another perspective to understand
GNNs. Recently, there are several works show that GCN is equivalent to the first-order approximation
for graph denoising with Laplacian regularization (Henaff et al., 2015; Zhao & Akoglu, 2019). The
unified optimization framework are provided to unify many existing message passing schemes (Ma
et al., 2021b; Zhu et al., 2021a).


Fairness-aware learning on graphs. Many works have been developed to achieve fairness in
machine learning community (Jiang et al., 2022; Chuang & Mroueh, 2020; Zhang et al., 2018; Du
et al., 2021; Yurochkin & Sun, 2020; Creager et al., 2019; Feldman et al., 2015). A pilot study on fair
node representation learning is developed based on random walk (Rahman et al., 2019). Additionally,
adversarial debiasing is adopt to learn fair prediction or node representation so that the well-trained
adversary can not predict the sensitvie attribute based on node representation or prediction (Dai &
Wang, 2021; Bose & Hamilton, 2019; Fisher et al., 2020). A Bayesian approach is developed to learn
fair node representation via encoding sensitive information in prior distribution in (Buyl & De Bie,
2020). Work (Ma et al., 2021a) develops a PAC-Bayesian analysis to connect subgroup generalziation
with accuracy parity. (Laclau et al., 2021; Li et al., 2021) aim to mitigate prediction bias for link
prediction. Fairness-aware graph contrastive learning are proposed in (Agarwal et al., 2021; Köse &
Shen, 2021). However, aforementioned works ignore the requirement of transparency in fairness. In
this work, we develop an efficient and transparent fair message passing scheme explicitly rendering
sensitive attribute usage.


6    C ONCLUSION

In this work, we consider fairness problem from a new perspective, named transparency, i.e., the
influence of sensitive attribute should be easily probed to public. We point out that existing fairness
model in graph lack of transparency due to implicitly encoding sensitive attribute information in well-
trained model weight. Additionally, integrated in a unified optimization framework, we develop an
efficient, effective and transparent FMP to learn fair node representations while preserving prediction
performance. Experimental results on real-world datasets demonstrate the effectiveness and efficiency
compared with state-of-the-art baselines in node classification tasks.


                                                  9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


R EFERENCES
Chirag Agarwal, Himabindu Lakkaraju, and Marinka Zitnik. Towards a unified framework for fair
  and stable graph representation learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2102.13186, 2021.
Mikhail Belkin and Partha Niyogi. Laplacian eigenmaps and spectral techniques for embedding and
 clustering. Advances in neural information processing systems, 14, 2001.
Alex Beutel, Jilin Chen, Zhe Zhao, and Ed H Chi. Data decisions and theoretical implications when
  adversarially learning fair representations. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.00075, 2017.
Avishek Bose and William Hamilton. Compositional fairness constraints for graph embeddings. In
  International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 715–724. PMLR, 2019.
Joan Bruna, Wojciech Zaremba, Arthur Szlam, and Yann LeCun. Spectral networks and locally
  connected networks on graphs. arXiv preprint arXiv:1312.6203, 2013.
Maarten Buyl and Tijl De Bie. Debayes: a bayesian method for debiasing network embeddings. In
 International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 1220–1229. PMLR, 2020.
Peijun Chen, Jianguo Huang, and Xiaoqun Zhang. A primal–dual fixed point algorithm for convex
  separable minimization with applications to image restoration. Inverse Problems, 29(2):025011,
  2013.
Ching-Yao Chuang and Youssef Mroueh. Fair mixup: Fairness via interpolation. In International
  Conference on Learning Representations, 2020.
Ching-Yao Chuang and Youssef Mroueh. Fair mixup: Fairness via interpolation. In International
  Conference on Learning Representations, 2021.
Elliot Creager, David Madras, Jörn-Henrik Jacobsen, Marissa Weis, Kevin Swersky, Toniann Pitassi,
  and Richard Zemel. Flexibly fair representation learning by disentanglement. In International
  conference on machine learning, pp. 1436–1445. PMLR, 2019.
Enyan Dai and Suhang Wang. Say no to the discrimination: Learning fair graph neural networks with
  limited sensitive attribute information. In Proceedings of the 14th ACM International Conference
  on Web Search and Data Mining, pp. 680–688, 2021.
Michaël Defferrard, Xavier Bresson, and Pierre Vandergheynst. Convolutional neural networks on
 graphs with fast localized spectral filtering. Advances in neural information processing systems,
 29:3844–3852, 2016.
Mengnan Du, Subhabrata Mukherjee, Guanchu Wang, Ruixiang Tang, Ahmed Hassan Awadallah,
 and Xia Hu. Fairness via representation neutralization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.12674, 2021.
Michael Feldman, Sorelle A Friedler, John Moeller, Carlos Scheidegger, and Suresh Venkatasubra-
 manian. Certifying and removing disparate impact. In proceedings of the 21th ACM SIGKDD
 international conference on knowledge discovery and data mining, pp. 259–268, 2015.
Joseph Fisher, Arpit Mittal, Dave Palfrey, and Christos Christodoulopoulos. Debiasing knowledge
  graph embeddings. In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
  Language Processing (EMNLP), pp. 7332–7345, 2020.
Hongyang Gao, Zhengyang Wang, and Shuiwang Ji. Large-scale learnable graph convolutional
  networks. In Proceedings of the 24th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge
 Discovery & Data Mining, pp. 1416–1424, 2018.
Takuo Hamaguchi, Hidekazu Oiwa, Masashi Shimbo, and Yuji Matsumoto. Knowledge trans-
  fer for out-of-knowledge-base entities: A graph neural network approach. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1706.05674, 2017.
William L Hamilton, Rex Ying, and Jure Leskovec. Inductive representation learning on large graphs.
 In Proceedings of the 31st International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems,
 pp. 1025–1035, 2017.


                                               10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Xiaotian Han, Zhimeng Jiang, Ninghao Liu, and Xia Hu. G-mixup: Graph data augmentation for
  graph classification. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 1–9. PMLR, 2022a.

Xiaotian Han, Zhimeng Jiang, Ninghao Liu, Qingquan Song, Jundong Li, and Xia Hu. Geometric
  graph representation learning via maximizing rate reduction. In Proceedings of the ACM Web
  Conference 2022, pp. 1226–1237, 2022b.

Mikael Henaff, Joan Bruna, and Yann LeCun. Deep convolutional networks on graph-structured data.
 arXiv preprint arXiv:1506.05163, 2015.

Zhimeng Jiang, Xiaotian Han, Chao Fan, Fan Yang, Ali Mostafavi, and Xia Hu. Generalized
  demographic parity for group fairness. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2022.

Vassilis Kalofolias. How to learn a graph from smooth signals. In Artificial Intelligence and Statistics,
  pp. 920–929. PMLR, 2016.

Thomas N. Kipf and Max Welling. Semi-supervised classification with graph convolutional networks.
  In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2017.

Johannes Klicpera, Aleksandar Bojchevski, and Stephan Günnemann. Predict then propagate:
  Graph neural networks meet personalized pagerank. In International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2019.

O Deniz Kose and Yanning Shen. Fair node representation learning via adaptive data augmentation.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.08549, 2022.

Öykü Deniz Köse and Yanning Shen. Fairness-aware node representation learning. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2106.05391, 2021.

Charlotte Laclau, Ievgen Redko, Manvi Choudhary, and Christine Largeron. All of the fairness for
  edge prediction with optimal transport. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and
  Statistics, pp. 1774–1782. PMLR, 2021.

Peizhao Li, Yifei Wang, Han Zhao, Pengyu Hong, and Hongfu Liu. On dyadic fairness: Exploring and
  mitigating bias in graph connections. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2021.

Xiaorui Liu, Wei Jin, Yao Ma, Yaxin Li, Hua Liu, Yiqi Wang, Ming Yan, and Jiliang Tang. Elastic
  graph neural networks. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 6837–6849. PMLR,
  2021.

Ignace Loris and Caroline Verhoeven. On a generalization of the iterative soft-thresholding algorithm
  for the case of non-separable penalty. Inverse Problems, 27(12):125007, 2011.

Christos Louizos, Kevin Swersky, Yujia Li, Max Welling, and Richard Zemel. The variational fair
  autoencoder. arXiv preprint arXiv:1511.00830, 2015.

Gilles Louppe, Michael Kagan, and Kyle Cranmer. Learning to pivot with adversarial networks. In
  Proceedings of the 31st International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, pp.
  982–991, 2017.

Jiaqi Ma, Junwei Deng, and Qiaozhu Mei. Subgroup generalization and fairness of graph neural
   networks. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34, 2021a.

Yao Ma, Xiaorui Liu, Tong Zhao, Yozen Liu, Jiliang Tang, and Neil Shah. A unified view on
  graph neural networks as graph signal denoising. In Proceedings of the 30th ACM International
  Conference on Information & Knowledge Management, pp. 1202–1211, 2021b.

Ninareh Mehrabi, Fred Morstatter, Nripsuta Saxena, Kristina Lerman, and Aram Galstyan. A survey
  on bias and fairness in machine learning. ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR), 54(6):1–35, 2021.


                                                  11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Federico Monti, Davide Boscaini, Jonathan Masci, Emanuele Rodola, Jan Svoboda, and Michael M
  Bronstein. Geometric deep learning on graphs and manifolds using mixture model cnns. In
  Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 5115–5124,
  2017.
Tahleen Rahman, Bartlomiej Surma, Michael Backes, and Yang Zhang. Fairwalk: Towards fair graph
  embedding. 2019.
Ralph Tyrell Rockafellar. Convex analysis. Princeton university press, 2015.
Harini Suresh and John V Guttag. A framework for understanding unintended consequences of
  machine learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1901.10002, 2, 2019.
Lubos Takac and Michal Zabovsky. Data analysis in public social networks. In International scientific
  conference and international workshop present day trends of innovations, volume 1, 2012.
Petar Veličković, Guillem Cucurull, Arantxa Casanova, Adriana Romero, Pietro Liò, and Yoshua
  Bengio. Graph attention networks. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2018.
Felix Wu, Amauri Souza, Tianyi Zhang, Christopher Fifty, Tao Yu, and Kilian Weinberger. Sim-
  plifying graph convolutional networks. In International conference on machine learning, pp.
  6861–6871. PMLR, 2019.
Rex Ying, Ruining He, Kaifeng Chen, Pong Eksombatchai, William L Hamilton, and Jure Leskovec.
  Graph convolutional neural networks for web-scale recommender systems. In Proceedings of
  the 24th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery & Data Mining, pp.
  974–983, 2018.
Mikhail Yurochkin and Yuekai Sun. Sensei: Sensitive set invariance for enforcing individual fairness.
 In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2020.
Brian Hu Zhang, Blake Lemoine, and Margaret Mitchell. Mitigating unwanted biases with adversarial
  learning. In Proceedings of the 2018 AAAI/ACM Conference on AI, Ethics, and Society, pp. 335–
  340, 2018.
Lingxiao Zhao and Leman Akoglu. Pairnorm: Tackling oversmoothing in gnns. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1909.12223, 2019.
Meiqi Zhu, Xiao Wang, Chuan Shi, Houye Ji, and Peng Cui. Interpreting and unifying graph neural
 networks with an optimization framework. In Proceedings of the Web Conference 2021, pp.
 1215–1226, 2021a.
Yanqiao Zhu, Yichen Xu, Feng Yu, Qiang Liu, Shu Wu, and Liang Wang. Deep Graph Contrastive
  Representation Learning. In ICML Workshop on Graph Representation Learning and Beyond,
  2020.
Yanqiao Zhu, Yichen Xu, Feng Yu, Qiang Liu, Shu Wu, and Liang Wang. Graph contrastive learning
  with adaptive augmentation. In Proceedings of the Web Conference 2021, pp. 2069–2080, 2021b.


                                                 12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A    N OTATIONS

                                     Table 2: Table of Notations

      Notations                                     Description
         |E|                                   The number of edges
          n                                    The number of nodes
          d                           The number of node feature dimensions
        dout                                The number of node classes
    ∆s ∈ R1×n                          The sensitive attribute incident vector
        ϵlabel                              Label homophily coefficient
        ϵsens                             Sensitive homophily coefficient
   Xori ∈ Rn×d                            The input node attributes matrix
     A ∈ Rn×n                                  The adjacency matrix
     Â ∈ Rn×n                          The adjacency matrix with self-loop
     Ã ∈ Rn×n                    The normalized adjacency matrix with self-loop
     L ∈ Rn×n                                  The Laplacian matrix
 Xtrans ∈ Rn×dout                The output node features for feature transformation
  Fagg ∈ Rn×dout                  The aggregated node features after propagation
   F ∈ Rn×dout          The learned node features considering graph smoothness and fairness
    u ∈ R1×dout               The permutation direction in feature representation space
        h∗ (·)                           Fenchel conjugate function of h(·)
   ||X||F , ||X||1                 The Frobenius norm and l1 norm of matrix X
       λf , λs             Hyperparameter for fairness and graph smoothness objectives


B    P ROOF ON FAIRNESS O BJECTIVE
The fairness objective can be shown as the average prediction probability difference as follows:
                                    h 1 (s)               1>0 (−s) i
                                           >0
                ∆s SF (F)        =                   −                  SF (F) :,j
                              j       ||1>0 (s)||1      ||1>0 (−s)||1
                                     P                          P
                                        si =1 P̂ (yi = j|X)              P̂ (yi = j|X)
                                 =                            − si =−1
                                           ||1>0 (s)||1              ||1>0 (−s)||1
                                  = P̂ (yi = j|si = 1, X) − P̂ (yi = j|si = −1, X).

C    P ROOF OF T HEOREM 1
Before providing in-depth analysis on the gradient computation, we first introduce the softmax
function derivative property in the following lemma:
Lemma 1 For the softmax function with N -dimensional vector input y = SF (x) : R1×N −→
                     xj
R1×N , where yj = PNe exk for ∀j ∈ {1, 2, · · · , N }, the derivative N × N Jocobian matrix is
                        k=1

defined by [ ∂y       ∂yi                                           ∂y            ⊤
             ∂x ]ij = ∂xj . Additionally, Jocobian matrix satisfies ∂x = yIN − y y, where IN
represents N × N identity matrix and ⊤ denotes the transpose operation for vector or matrix.
                                   ∂yi
Proof: Considering the gradient ∂x   j
                                        for arbitrary ij, according to quotient and chain rule of
derivatives, we have
                  PN                                    PN
       ∂yi     exi k=1 exk − exi +xj          ex i        k=1 e
                                                                xk
                                                                   − exi
            =         N          2     =     N
                                                      ·      N
                                                                         = yi (1 − yj ),      (8)
       ∂xj           P                    P        xk
                                                          P        xk
                            xk
                      k=1 e                  k=1 e           k=1 e
Similarly, for arbitrary i ̸= j, the gradient is given by
                             ∂yi         exi         −exi
                                  = PN           · PN         = −yi yj .                           (9)
                             ∂xj        k=1 e
                                              xk
                                                     k=1 e
                                                           xk



                                                  13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Combining these two cases, it is easy to verify the Jocobian matrix satisfies ∂y          ⊤
                                                                              ∂x = yIN − y y. □

Arming with the derivative property of softmax function, we further investigate the gradient ∂⟨p,u⟩
                                                                                               ∂F ,
                           1×dout                      1×dout                             n×dout
where p = ∆s SF (F) ∈ R           and SF (·) and u ∈ R        is independent with F ∈ R          .
Considering softmax function SF (x) ∈ Rn×d is row-wise adopted in node representation matrix, the
                                                                                          Pdout
gradient satisfies ∂SF (F)i
                     ∂Fj    = 0dout ×dout for i ̸= j. Note that the inner product ⟨p, u⟩ = k=1  pk uk ,
                                    ∂⟨p,u⟩       Pdout ∂pk
it is easy the obtain the gradient [ ∂F ]ij = k=1 ∂Fij uk .
                                                  △
To simply the current notation, we denote F̃ = SF (F). According to chain rule of derivative, we
have
               dout               dout
      ∂pk      X    ∂pk ∂ F̃tk    X         ∂ F̃tk (a)    ∂ F̃ik (b)
            =                   =      ∆s,t        = ∆s,i        = ∆s,i F̃ik [δkj − F̃ij ], (10)
      ∂Fij     t=1
                    ∂ F̃tk ∂Fij   t=1
                                            ∂Fij          ∂Fij
where δkj is Dirac function (equals 1 only if k = j, otherwise 0;), equality (a) holds since softmax
function is row-wise operation, and equality (b) is based on Lemma 1. Furthermore, we can obtain
the gradient of fairness objective w.r.t. node presentation as follows:
                  d
                  out           outd                                                     outd
    ∂⟨p, u⟩       X   ∂pk       X                                                        X
[           ]ij =          uk =     ∆s,i F̃ik [δkj − F̃ij ]uk = ∆s,i F̃ij uj − ∆s,i F̃ij     F̃ik uk . (11)
      ∂F              ∂Fij
                  k=1              k=1                                                       k=1
Therefore, the matrix formulation is given by
                      ∂⟨p, u⟩
                              = Us ⊙ SF (F) − Sum1 (Us ⊙ SF (F))SF (F).                               (12)
                        ∂F
              △
where Us = ∆⊤  s u∈R
                       n×dout
                              and Sum1 (·) represents the summation over column dimension with
preserved matrix shape. Therefore, the computation complexity for gradient ∂⟨p,u⟩
                                                                             ∂F is O(ndout ).


D       P ROOF OF P ROPOSITION 1
We firstly show the conjugate function for general norm function f (x) = λ||x||, where x ∈ R1×dout .
The conjugate function of f (x) satisfies

                                 ∗          0,      ||x||∗ ≤ λ,
                               f (y) =                                                        (13)
                                            +∞, ||x||∗ > λ.
where ||x||∗ is dual norm of the original norm ||x||, defined as ||y||∗ = max y⊤ x. Considering the
                                                                             ||x||≤1
conjugate function definition f ∗ (y) = max y⊤ x − λ||x|| the analysis can be divided as the following
                                         x
two cases:
❶ If ||y||∗ ≤ λ, according to the definition of dual norm, we have y⊤ x ≤ ||x||||y||∗ ≤ λ||x||
for ∀||x||, where the equality holds if and only if ||x|| = 0. Hence, it is easy to obtain f ∗ (y) =
max y⊤ x − λ||x|| = 0.
    x

❷ If ||y||∗ > λ, note that the dual norm ||y||∗ = max y⊤ x > λ, there exists variables x̂ so that
                                                       ||x||≤1
||x̂|| ≤ 1 and x̂⊤ y < λ. Therefore, for any constant t, we have f ∗ (y) ≥ y⊤ (tx) − λ||tx|| =
                 t→∞
t(y⊤ x − λ||x||) −→ ∞.
Based on aforementioned two cases, it is easy to get the conjugate function for l1 norm (the dual
norm is l∞ ), i.e., the conjugate function for hf (x) = λ||x||1 is given by

                                              0,      ||x||∞ ≤ λ,
                                 h∗f (y) =                                                   (14)
                                              +∞, ||x||∞ > λ.
Given the conjugate function h∗f (·), we further investigate the proximal operators proxh∗ . Note that
                                                                                         f
                                                                                            dout
proxh∗ (u) = arg min ||y − u||2F + h∗f (u) = arg min ||y − u||2F = arg min
                                                                                        P
                        y                                                                   j=1 |yj −
        f                                              ||y||∞ ≤λf                       yj ≤λf
                                                                                       ∀j∈[dout ]


                                                      14
 Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


 uj |2 , the proximal operator problem can be decomposed as element-wise sub-problem, i.e.,
                  proxh∗ (u)j = arg min |yj − uj |2 = sign(uj ) min(|uj |, λf )
                          f             yj ≤λf

 which completes the proof.

 E      T RAINING A LGORITHMS
 We summarize the training algorithm for FMP and provide the pseudo codes in Algorithm 1.

  Algorithm 1: FMP Training Algorithm
  Input :Graph dataset =(X, A, Y); The total epochs T ; Hyperparameters λs and λf .
  Output :The well-trained FMP model.
1 for epoch from 1 to T do
2     Conduct feature transformation using MLP;
3     Conduct propagation and debiasing as steps ❶-❺;
4     Calculate the cross entropy loss for node classification task;
5     Conduct back propagation step to update model weight;
6 end


 F      DATASET S TATISTICS
 For fair comparison with previous work, we perform the node classification task on three real-world
 dataset, including Pokec-n, Pokec-z, and NBA. The data statistical information on three real-world
 dataset is provided in Table 3. It is seen that the sensitive homophily are even higher than label
 homophily coefficient among three real-world dataset, which validates that the real-world dataset are
 usually with large topology bias.

                                  Table 3: Statistical Information on Datasets

                Dataset # Nodes # Node Features # Edges # Training Labels # Training Sens
                Pokec-n       66569       265       1034094        4398          500
                Pokec-z       67796       276       1235916        5131          500
                 NBA           403         95        21242         156           246


 G       M ORE D ISCUSSION ON GNN S AS G RAPH S IGNAL D ENOISING
 In this section, we provide more examples to show many existing GNNs can be interpreted as graph
 signal denoising problem, including GAT and APPNP.

 GAT. Feature aggregation in GAT applies theP        normalized attention coefficient to compute a linear
 combination of neighbor’s features as Xagg,i = j∈N (i) αij Xtrans,j , where αij = sof tmaxj (eij ),
 eij = LeakyReLU(X⊤                        ⊤
                            trans,i wi + Xtrans,j wj ), and wi and wj are learnable column vectors.
 Prior study (Ma et al., 2021b) demonstrates that one-step gradient descent with adaptive step size
        1
          (ci +cj ) for the following objective problem:
 P
     j∈Ñ (i)



 PPNP / APPNP. Feature aggregation in PPNP and APPNP adopt the aggregation rules as Xagg =
                    −1
 α I − (1 − α)Ã       Xtrans and Xk+1                 k
                                    agg = (1 − α)ÃXagg + αXtrans . It is shown that they are
 equivalent to the exact solution and one gradient descent step with stepsize α2 to minimize the
 following objective problem:
                                               1
                      min ||F − Xtrans ||2F + ( − 1)tr F⊤ (I − Ã)F .
                       F                       α

                                                      15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                Pokec-n                          Pokec-z                               NBA


Figure 3: DP and Acc trade-off performance on three real-world datasets compared with (manifold)
Fair Mixup.

H     M ORE E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS

H.1    M ORE E XPERIMENTAL S ETTING D ETAILS

In FMP implementation, we first use 2 layers MLP with 64 hidden units and the output dimension
for MLP is 2. We also stack 2 layers for propagation and debiasing steps, where there is not
any trainable model parameters. As for the model training, we adopt cross entropy loss function
with 300 epochs. We also adopt Adam optimizer with 0.001 learning rate and 1 × 105 weight
decay for all models. The hyperprameters for FMP is λf = {0, 5, 10, 15, 20, 30, 100} and λs =
{0, 0.01, 0.1, 0.5, 1.0, 2.0, 3, 5, 10, 15, 20} .

H.2    C OMPARISON WITH FAIR M IXUP

We also implement Fair mixup (Chuang & Mroueh, 2021) as the additional baseline for different GNN
backbones in Figure 3. Note that input fair mixup requires calculating model prediction for mixed
input batch, it is non-trivial to adopt input fair mixup in our experiments (node classification task) since
forward propagation in GNN aggregates information from neighborhoods while the neighborhood
information for the mixed input batch is missing. Therefore, we adopt manifold fair mixup for the
logit layer (the previous layers contain aggregation step) in our experiments. Experimental results
show that our method can still achieve better accuracy-fairness tradeoff performance on three datasets.

H.3    S ENSITIVE ATTRIBUTE I NFLUENCE P ROBE

As for lending fairness perceptron, it represents the influence of sensitive attributes could be identified.
For example, our proposed FMP includes three steps, i.e., transformation, aggregation and debiasing,
where the sensitive attribute explicitly adopted in debiasing step. If we aims to identify the influence
of sensitive attributes for FMP, it is sufficient to check the difference between the input and output for
debiasing step. It is worth mentioning that the required information for identifying the influence of
sensitive attributes are naturally from the forward propagation. Additionally, if we aim to identify
the influence of sensitive attributes for existing methods (e.g, adding regularization and adversarial
debiasing), the well-trained fair model is insufficient and we need additional vanilla (unfair) model
without using any sensitive attribute information. In other words, these methods require model
retraining with sensitive attribute removement and thus much more resources for sensitive attributes
influence auditing. The key drawback of these methods is due to encoding the sensitive attributes
information into well-trained model weights. From auditors’ perspective, it is quite hard to identify
the influence of sensitive attributes only given well-trained fair model. Instead, our designed FMP
explicitly adopts the sensitive attribute information in the forward propagation process, which
naturally avoid the dilemma that sensitive attributes are encoded into well-trained model weight.
Figure 4 shows the visualization results for training with/without (left/right) sensitive attribute
for FMP and several baselines (with GCN backbones) across three real-world datasets. From the
visualization results, we observe that all methods with sensitive attribute information achieve better
fairness since the logit layer representation for different sensitive attributes are mixed with each other.
Therefore, it is hard to identify the sensitive attribute based on the representation and thus leads
to higher fairness results. The key different is that the results for training with/without (left/right)


                                                    16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                     Pokec_n                       Pokec_z                            NBA
           s                                                              s
   FMP


   Reg


   Adv


  Fair
  Mixup


Figure 4: The visualization of node representation for training with/without (left/right) sensitive
attribute for FMP and several baselines across three real-world dataset. The data point with different
colors represents different sensitive attributes.

               Vanilla                       Regularization                   Adversarial Debiasing


                               Figure 5: The running time comparison.


sensitive attribute in FMP can both obtained through the forward propagation, while the other baseline
methods requiring model retraining to probe the influence of sensitive attributes.


H.4      RUNNING T IME C OMPARISON

We provide running time comparison in Figure 5 for our proposed FMP and other baselines, including
vanilla, regularization and adversarial debiasing on many backbones (MLP, GCN, GAT, SGC, and
APPNP). To achieve fair comparison, we adopt the same Adam optimizer with 200 epochs with 5
running times. We list several observations as follows:
• The running time of proposed FMP is very efficient for large-scale dataset. Specifically, for vanilla
  method, the running time of FMP is higher than most lighten backbone MLP with 46.97% and
  15.03% time overhead on Pokec-n and Poken-z dataset, respectively. Compared with the most time-
  consumption APPNP, the running time of FMP is lower with 64.07% and 41.45% time overhead on
  Pokec-n and Poken-z dataset, respectively.
• The regularization method achieves almost the same running time compared with vanilla method on
  all backbones. For example, GCN with regularization encompasses higher running time with 6.41%
  time overhead compared with vanilla method. Adversarial debiasing is extremely time-consuming.
  For example, GCN with adversarial debiasing encompasses higher running time with 88.58% time
  overhead compared with vanilla method.


                                                  17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


              Pokec_n                         Pokec_z                            NBA


Figure 6: Hyperparameter study on fairness and smoothness hyperparameter for demographic parity
and Accuracy.


H.5    H YPERPARAMETER S TUDY

We provide hyperparameter study for further investigation on fairness and smoothness hy-
perparmeter on prediction and fairness performance on three datasets. Specifically, we
tune hyperparameters as λf = {0.0, 5.0, 10.0, 15.0, 20.0, 30.0, 100.0, 1000.0} and λs =
{0.0, 0.1, 0.5, 1.0, 3.0, 5.0, 10.0, 15.0, 20.0}. From the results in Figure 6, we can make the fol-
lowing observations:

       • The accuracy and demographic parity are extremely sensitive to smoothness hyperparameter.
         It is seen that, for Pokec-n and Pokec-z datasets (NBA), larger smoothness hyperparameter
         usually leads to higher (lower) accuracy with higher prediction bias. The rationale is that,
         only for graph data with high label homophily coefficient, GCN-like aggregation with skip
         connection is beneficial. Otherwise, the neighbor’s node representation with different label
         will mislead representation update.
       • The appropriate fairness hyperparameter leads to better fairness and prediction performance
         tradeoff. The reason is that fairness hyperparameter determinates the perturbation vector up-
         date step size in probability space. Only appropriate step size can lead to better perturbation
         vector update.


I     B ROADER S OCIAL I MPACT AND L IMITATIONS
Transparency is an advanced property in fairness domain and poses huge challenging for research and
industrial. Many existing works mainly rely on specific fairness metric to evaluate the prediction bias.
The transparency may stimulates maintainers and auditors of machine learning system to rethink the
fairness evaluation/auditing. Only achieving fair model with lower bias for specific fairness metric is
insufficient. The maintainers should also consider how to leverage the influence of sensitive attribute
for auditors. The transparency may lead maintainers pay more effects in improving the transparency
of fair model and could be helpful to convince the auditors. The limitations of this work are that it
requests sensitive information in the inference stage.


                                                  18
