Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


V ISUAL T RANSFORMATION T ELLING
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT
         In this paper, we propose a new visual reasoning task, called Visual Transforma-
         tion Telling (VTT). Given a series of states (i.e. images), a machine is required to
         describe what happened (i.e. transformation) between every two adjacent states.
         Different from most existing visual reasoning tasks, which focus on state reason-
         ing, VTT concentrates on transformation reasoning. We collect 13,547 samples
         from two instructional video datasets, i.e. CrossTask and COIN, and extract de-
         sired states and transformation descriptions to form a suitable VTT benchmark
         dataset. After that, we introduce an end-to-end learning model for VTT, named
         TTNet. TTNet consists of three components to mimic human’s cognition process
         of reasoning transformation. First, an image encoder, e.g. CLIP, reads content
         from each image, then a context encoder links the image content together, and at
         last, a transformation decoder autoregressively generates transformation descrip-
         tions between every two adjacent images. This basic version of TTNet is difficult
         to meet the cognitive challenge of VTT, that is to identify abstract transformations
         from images with small visual differences, and the descriptive challenge, which
         asks to describe the transformation consistently. In response to these difficulties,
         we propose three strategies to improve TTNet. Specifically, TTNet leverages dif-
         ference features to emphasize small visual gaps, masked transformation model
         to stress context by forcing attention to neighbor transformations, and auxiliary
         category and topic classification tasks to make transformations consistent by shar-
         ing underlying semantics among representations. We adapt some typical methods
         from visual storytelling and dense video captioning tasks, considering their simi-
         larity with VTT. Our experimental results show that TTNet achieves better perfor-
         mance on transformation reasoning. In addition, our empirical analysis demon-
         strates the soundness of each module in TTNet, and provides some insight into
         transformation reasoning.


1   I NTRODUCTION
What will come to your mind when you are given a series of images, e.g. Figure 1? Probably we
first notice the content of each image, then we link these images in our mind, and finally conclude a
series of events from images, i.e. the whole intermediate process of cooking noodles. In fact, this is
a typical reasoning process from states (i.e. single images) to transformation (i.e. changes between
images), as described in Piaget’s theory of cognitive development (Bovet, 1976; Piaget, 1977). More
specifically, children at the preoperational stage (2-7 years old) usually pay their attention mainly
to states and ignore the transformations between states, whereas the reverse is true for children at
the concrete operational stage (7-12 years old). Interestingly, computer vision is developed through
a similar evolution pattern. In the last few decades, image understanding, including image classi-
fication, detection, captioning, and question answering, mainly focusing on visual states, has been
comprehensively studied and achieved satisfying results.
Now it is time to pay more attention to the visual transformation reasoning tasks. Recently, there
have been some preliminary studies (Park et al., 2019; Hong et al., 2021) on transformation. For
example, Hong et al. (2021) defines a transformation driven visual reasoning (TVR) task, where
both initial and final states are given, and the changes of object properties including color, shape,
and position are required to be obtained based on a synthetic dataset. However, the current studies
of transformation reasoning remain limited in two aspects. Firstly, the task is defined in an artificial
environment that is far from reality. Secondly, the definition of transformation is limited to pre-
defined properties, which cannot be well generalized to unseen or new environments. As a result,


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                          add seasoning to the boiling water   pour the noodles into the waterand stir       pour the cooked noodles

                      …                                        …                                         …                              …

                              00:40                 00:58             01:45                 02:01            02:56              03:07


                                           ?                                  ?                                      ?
                          add seasoning                                  pour the noodles                                  pour the
                     to the boiling water                          into the water and stir                           cooked noodles


Figure 1: Visual Transformation Telling (VTT): given states represented by images (constructed
from videos), the goal is to reason and describe transformations between every two adjacent states.


the existing transformation reasoning task cannot meet the requirement of real-world applications.
Furthermore, the lack of strong transformation reasoning ability will hinder some more advanced
event-level reasoning tasks, such as visual storytelling(Ting-Hao et al., 2016) and procedure plan-
ning(Chang et al., 2020), since transformation plays an important role in these tasks.
To tackle these limitations, we propose a new visual transformation telling (VTT) task in this paper.
The main motivation is to provide descriptions for real-world transformations. For example, given
two images with dry and wet ground respectively, it should be described it rained, which precisely
describes a cause-and-effect transformation. Therefore, the formal definition of VTT is to output
language sentences to describe the transformation for a given series of states, i.e. images. VTT is
different from video description tasks, e.g. dense video captioning Krishna et al. (2017), since the
complete process of transformations is shown by videos, which reduces the challenge of reasoning.
To facilitate the study of VTT, we collect 13,547 samples from two instructional video datasets,
including CrossTask(Zhukov et al., 2019) and COIN (Tang et al., 2019; 2021). They are originally
used for evaluating step localization, action segmentation, and other video analysis tasks. But we
found them suitable to be modified to fit VTT, because the transformations are mainly about daily
activities, and more importantly, some main steps to accomplish a certain job have been annotated
in their data, including temporal boundaries and text descriptions. Therefore, we extract key im-
ages from a video as input, and directly use their text labels of the main steps as transformation
descriptions. More details can be found in Section 3.2.
When designing an effective VTT model, we face two kinds of challenges. The first one is related
to the cognitive challenge, which is to derive abstract transformation from images with small dif-
ferences, e.g. from the difference between wet and dry ground to rained. The second one is the
descriptive challenge, that is, the description of transformations should consider the consistency in
a series of images to output a reasonable event. If we only consider the description for a single
transformation, i.e. between two images, it is easy to output logical errors in the results.
In order to address these challenges, we propose a difference-sensitive and context-aware model,
named TTNet (Transformation Telling Net). TTNet consists of three major components, to mimic
the human cognition process of transformation reasoning. To be specific, CLIP (Radford et al.,
2021) is utilized as the image encoder to read semantic information from images into image vec-
tors. Then a transformer-based context encoder interacts image vectors together to capture context
information. At last, a transformer decoder autoregressively generates descriptions according to
context features. However, this basic model is not enough to meet the cognitive and descriptive
challenges, so we use three well-designed strategies to improve TTNet. Specifically, the first strat-
egy is to compute difference features on image vectors and fed them into the context encoder as
well, to emphasize small visual gaps. Then, masked transformation model is applied to capture the
context-aware information, by randomly masking out the inputs of the context encoder like masked
language model (Devlin et al., 2019). Finally, in addition to the general text generation loss, the
whole network is also supervised under the auxiliary task of category and topic classification, which
is to constrain the transformation representations to share underlying semantics, by mimicking hu-
man’s behavior that forms a global event in mind.
Since the task of VTT is new, there is no ready-made baseline model. Considering the similarity
of visual storytelling and dense video captioning to VTT, we modify typical methods including


                                                                                 2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


CST (Gonzalez-Rico & Fuentes-Pineda, 2018), GLACNet (Kim et al., 2019), and Densecap Johnson
et al. (2016) in these two applications as our baseline methods. Our experimental results show that
TTNet significantly outperforms these methods. Additionally, we conduct comprehensive studies
to show the importance of contextual information for VTT and the effectiveness of three strategies,
including difference features, masked transformation model, and auxiliary learning.
In conclusion, our major contributions include: 1) the proposal of a new task called visual trans-
formation telling to emphasize the reasoning of transformation in real world applications; 2) the
introduction of TTNet which is a difference-sensitive and context-aware model for transformation
reasoning. 3) extensive experiments on our collected data from instructional videos, demonstrating
the effectiveness of TTNet and providing many insights for understanding the VTT task.



2   R ELATED W ORKS

VTT belongs to the direction of visual reasoning, so we first list some typical visual reasoning
tasks and then discuss the relation between VTT and these tasks. CLEVR (Johnson et al., 2017)
and GQA (Hudson & Manning, 2019) concentrate on relation and logical reasoning on objects.
RAVEN (Zhang et al., 2019) and V-PROM (Teney et al., 2020) care about the induction and reason-
ing of graphic patterns. VCR (Zellers et al., 2019) and Sherlock (Hessel et al., 2022) test whether
machines are able to learn commonsense knowledge to answer daily questions. These tasks mainly
concentrate on state-level reasoning. Apart from these tasks, there is a series of works related to
dynamic reasoning. Physical reasoning (Bakhtin et al., 2019; Yi et al., 2020; Girdhar & Ramanan,
2020; Baradel et al., 2020; Riochet et al., 2022) evaluates the ability to learn physical rules from
data to answer questions or solve puzzles. VisualCOMET (Park et al., 2020) asks to reason beyond
the given state to answer what happened before and what will happen next. Visual storytelling (Park
et al., 2020) requires completing the missing information between states to describe a story logically.
Visual reasoning has a tendency to shift from static scenes to dynamic ones. While state and trans-
formation are both important for reasoning in dynamic scenes, we concentrate on transformation
reasoning, between state-only scenarios and more complex composite scenarios.
To the best of our knowledge, there are rare studies on designing specific tasks for visual transfor-
mation reasoning. The only work is TVR (Hong et al., 2021). Given the initial and final states, TVR
requires to predict a sequence of changes in properties, including size, shape, material, color, and
position. However, the synthetic scenario is far from reality and property change is not a common
fashion to describe transformations in life. A more natural way is the event-level description. For
example, it is more natural to tell it rained when describing what happened between dry and wet
ground outside. Visual storytelling (Ting-Hao et al., 2016; Ravi et al., 2021) requires event-level
description but transformations are mixed in the description, making it difficult to evaluate transfor-
mation only. Visual abductive reasoning (Liang et al., 2022) has a similar core idea to us, which
aims to find the most likely explanation for an incomplete set of observations. The difference is they
only require machines to reason one single missing transformation from multiple transformations,
while our task aims to reason multiple logically related transformations from states. The motiva-
tion of procedure planning Chang et al. (2020) is to complete a job given states, while VTT is to
explain transformations between states, which has wider scenarios, e.g. explaining the wet ground
with rain. Furthermore, the requirement for natural language generation makes VTT have different
evaluations and unique challenges such as generalization on language compositions. Walkthrough
planning Chang et al. (2020) has a different target which is to predict intermediate states.
Talking about transformation description, there is another topic related, i.e. visual description. Here
we review some typical visual description tasks and discuss their differences. Tasks that describe
a single image include image captioning (Farhadi et al., 2010; Kulkarni et al., 2011), dense image
captioning (Johnson et al., 2016), and image paragraphing (Krause et al., 2017). The difference
lies in the level of detail. Similarly, tasks for videos include video description (Venugopalan et al.,
2015), video paragraph description (Yu et al., 2016), grounded video description (Zhou et al., 2019),
and dense video captioning (Krishna et al., 2017). Different from image captioning tasks that focus
only on a single state, video description tasks start to describe events. For example, dense video
captioning asks to predict temporal boundaries and descriptions of key events in a video. However,
they provide the full process of transformation throughout videos, reducing the need for reasoning.

                                                  3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                            Drink and Snack                             wax
                                                                                                    show flush eggsow                                                                                                                                        cap knock                                 toin
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 fol rewslve tick ose
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    lay
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    d
                                                                                                                                                boxes            loosen                 catc


                                                                                                 ht                                                                                                                                          card
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              tag
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  on            k


                                                                                                                                                                              en
                                                                                                                                                                                            h


                                                                                                                                                                                                   l
                                                                                              se

                                                                                              lig wire
                                                                                      mou


                                                                                                                                                                                d


                                                                                                                                                                                         soi
                                                                                                                                                                                                    cle
                                                                                                                                                    ad
                                                                                                                                                 bre ly
                                                                                                                            ss
      Electrical Appliance                                                                                                                                                                                                        sc she use cl doo


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             #Samples
                                                                                                   sugar                               fry                                                 jack


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         fire
                                                                                                                                                    p


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        mi
                                        1656,

                                                                                                                  addre wat set


                                                                                                                                         p
                                                                                                                    pre
                                                                                                                                       ee
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              pla
                                                                                      hold
                                                                                                                                     pan
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 old hair


                                                                                                                                                                                                              an
                                                                                                                                     sw
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               r


                                                                                                                                                 ap
                                       12.22%                   Dish                          frame                                                                                     lines                                                         care
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        2000


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        lk ipe asc
                              1465,


                                                                                                                    pa
                                                                                                      ingredients                                                                                                                                                                                     ce
                                                                                                                                                                        ff


                                                                                                                    rts
                                                                                                                                                                  stu
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               shin
                                                                                                                                                         needs
                                                                                         fans                                                                                                                            d


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          eye
                             10.81%

                                                                                                                                                                                        ne movre glue
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      fin
                                                    1813,                                                                                                                                                                          zero


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          w te
                                                                                                                                                          rawtasopen                         e     pin
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             pre         bit


                                                                                                        c
                                                                                                                                                         t et


                                                                                             ir lt


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              lid
                                                   13.38%                                                    fit p artoys


                                                                                    slo sky a me
                                                                                                   tac


                                                                                                ak cu w
                                                                                                                                                                                                             fin

                                                                                                         ste
                                                                                                       o


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               tie
           Vehicle                                                                                                                        lse
                                                                                                                                                                   cd                                                                                                                                                                      0


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               wai
                                                                                                                         ass
                                                                                                                                     pu
                                                                                                                                                                te


                                                                                                                                                                                          w
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ed
                       1417,


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               tong
                                                                                                                                                                             ts
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ge


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        dip rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                        fix


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                t
                                                                                                                                                                        po
                                                                   Sport                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12


                                                                                                                                                                                                             tap
                                                                                                                                                      es


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        trim
                      10.47%                             456,
                                                                                                                                                cag


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ha
                                                                                          wa


                                                                                                                                                          pu


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           n
                                                                                               ad secrlotth


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ea
                                                        3.37%                                                                                                                            wid

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            transformations


                                                                                                                                                                                                                   l
                                                                                                                                                                                                ur
                                                                                                                                                                                               e
                                                                                                                                      t


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       mi w
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      t
                                                                                                                         top       fla


                                                                                       t


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              tes
                                                                                                                                                                                                il


                                                                                                                                     takscree
                                                         525,


                                                                                                                                                                 ski
                                                                                                    ll
                                                                                                       t


                                                                                                                                                                                                    tal
                                                                   Pets and Fruit            e
                                                                                                   gif                      tail


                                                                                                                                        coofa
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               tile


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          pit
                                                                                           h in


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   re
                                                        3.88%


                                                                                                                                                                         call
                                                                                                                                              n


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          mi
                                                                                                                      wls


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         x fl
                                                                                                                                                                                                    exitlittle
                                                                                                                                                                             po


                                                                                                                                                 sprin
                                                                                                                    bo


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          #Sentences
                                                                                                                                           ver


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               inke
                                                                                                                                  sti


                                                                                                                                                                         t
                                                                                             ma


                                                                                                                                                                         two


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        fue
                                                                                                             fus


                                                                                    dig


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    toy
                       1390,


                                                                                                                                                   kle


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        d
                                                         862,                                                   e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      outer


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           h


                                                                                                                                                        scal


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              try
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      thig


                                                                                                                                                                                          ins
                                                                                                                                        e n
                                                                                                                                      r


                                                                                     gu lift
                      10.27%                           6.37%
                                                                                                t


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        l bo or
                                                                                                                            fleiep
                                                                                                                            tr
                                                                                       n
                                                                                                 e


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            xtu
           Gadgets                                                Housework


                                                                                                                                                          es
                                                                                                   r                                       w                                                                                                                                                                                           10000
                                                                                          ke sh


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ch
                                                                                                                                                                                            size


                                                                                          ro e ials
                                                                                                        let
                                                                                                      gill

                                                                                                                                               ash


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   x
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     pe


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       o
                                                    871,                                    y                       cream


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              in
                                                                                           e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          n                                                           hill

                                                                                                                    lpaper back
                                                                                       sauc


                                                                                                                                                                                                                            t
                               1092,
                                                                                      link pe ll
                                                   6.44%


                                                                                                                                                                                                                     po
                                                                                                            fill pul
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               fall
                                                                                        rag
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      roll


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             re
                               8.06% 1025, 971,
                                                                                                                     filter bed rice hole


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  at
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      t


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               jar isk
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ajust


                                     7.57% 7.17%      Nursing and Care                  kinds area face
                                                                                                                                   tiles
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ge


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                er
                                                                                                                                                                                  ili


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               me
                                                                                                                     p


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               sold
                                                                                                                            ch


                                                                                                                   ga
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   replace                                                                                                 0


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              dryer
Leisure and Performance                                                                sand vein pattern pave crimping first brew fixe tighten                                                                                                 label


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ha
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               d

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ice
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          d


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  lf
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                bubble ss                                        freeze
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   shim supply
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0        5          10         15    20


                                                                                                                                                                                                                            typ
                                                                                                                                                                              correct      dried                   matter                                                                                      flesh

                                                Science and Craft                                                                                        dishwasher
                                                                                                                                                                                                    sponge


         Furniture and Decoration                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               words

                                      (a)                                                                                                                                                          (b)                                                                                                                                                       (c)

Figure 2: Different distributions of VTT samples. (a) Category. (b) Words. (c) Transformation
length (top), and sentence length (bottom).


3       V ISUAL T RANSFORMATION T ELLING
3.1       TASK D EFINITION

Visual transformation telling aims to test the ability of machines to reason and describe transfor-
mations from a sequence of visual states, i.e. images. Formally, N + 1 images S = {sn }N        +1
                                                                                              n=1 are
given, which are logically related and semantically different. Logically related means these images
are associated with a certain event, e.g. completing a job, while semantically difference is to expect
some substantial changes that are meaningful to people, i.e. transformation. The target is then to
reason N transformations T = {tn }N   n=1 between every two adjacent images and describe them with
natural languages, so that s1 → t1 → s2 → · · · → tn → sn+1 is logically sound.

3.2       VTT DATASET

To construct a meaningful dataset for VTT, we require the data to cover a large scope of real world
transformations. Therefore, we choose instructional videos as our basic library, because they con-
tain many daily life activities. Specifically, we choose two typical instructional video datasets,
i.e. CrossTask (Zhukov et al., 2019) and COIN (Tang et al., 2019; 2021), and construct our data.
Figure 1 illustrates an instruction video from COIN for cooking noodles and how we transform their
annotation into VTT dataset. We can see that the video is segmented into multiple main steps, and
each step is annotated with precise temporal boundaries and text labels. We directly use their text
labels as transformation descriptions and extract states based on temporal boundaries. Specifically,
for the first transformation, the first frame of the corresponding step segment becomes its start state
and the last frame becomes its end state. For the remaining transformations, the end state is ex-
tracted in the same way, while the start state shares the end state of the last transformation. We
check the quality of states and find transformations can be reasoned out in almost all samples. In
this way, we collected 13,547 samples as well as 55,482 transformation descriptions from CrossTask
and COIN, forming our new data for VTT. Figure 2 shows the distribution of the sample category,
keyword, transformation length, and sentence length. From the category distribution and the word
cloud, we can see that VTT data covers lots of daily activities, like dish, drink and snack, elec-
trical application, vehicle, gadgets, leisure and performance, etc. Furthermore, the distribution of
transformation length shows its diversity while most of samples contains about 2-5 transformations.
Sentence length is around 2-6 on average which means short descriptions make up the majority.

4       M ETHOD
Problem Formulation. Our main idea for solving visual transformation telling is to find a parame-
                                                                                        N +1
terized model fθ to estimate the conditional probability p(T |S; θ) = p({tj }Nj=1 |{si }i=1 ; θ), where
       C×W ×H                                                      L
si ∈ R          is a state represented as an image and tj = {xj,l }l=1 is a sentence of length L. The
conditional probability can also be written as auto-regressively generating N sentences:
                                                                                               N Y
                                                                                               Y L
                                                            p(T |S; θ) =                                                                                 p(xj,l |xj,<l , {si }N +1
                                                                                                                                                                              i=1 ; θ)                                                                                                                                                                                             (1)
                                                                                                           j                        l


                                                                                                                                                                        4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


              N+1 state
           representations
                                 masked transformation
                                        model
                                                     *
                                                                   difference features
                                                                       1       0
                                                                                         *   3. Transformation Decoder

      0       1     …        N
                                                                                                     pour     the   …
                                                     …                             …
                                             0 0 0
                                     0       0 0 0
                                             0 0 0
                                                             N                                              add seasoning   …
                                     +       +               +     +       +           +
             CLIP                                    …                             …                     Transformer


                                                                                                    …


                                                                                                                             …
                    …
                                                                                             parameter
                                                                                              sharing
                                                                                                            Transformer
                                                                                                             pour  … noodles
                                                         Transformer                                     + +
   1. Image Encoder                                                                                               add …+
                                                                                                         N +N +    … N water +
                             *


                                                                                                         …
                                                                                                              …


                                                                                                                             …
      auxiliary learning             0        1      …       N                                              1      1  … 1
                       FC           global
                                               N transformation
                       FC          context
                                               representations
                                                                  2. Context Encoder                                 share


Figure 3: The architecture of TTNet. Images are first encoded into state representations in the im-
age encoder, then transformed into transformation representations in the context encoder, and finally
decoded into text by the transformation decoder. To be more difference-sensitive and context-aware,
three strategies are considered to enhance TTNet (marked with *). Difference features computed
according to state representations are used as extra features, state representations and difference fea-
tures are randomly masked as zero during training, and auxiliary tasks are used for supervision.


Overview of TTNet. Our TTNet is designed to mimic human’s cognitive process of transformation.
The first step is independent recognition, which means that people may understand each image inde-
pendently. Therefore, we introduce an image encoder fimage to represent each image to a vector and
obtain a set of image vectors V = {vi }N     +1                N +1
                                           i=1 = {fimage (si )}i=1 . After that, humans will associate
these images together, and form an understanding of all images guided by a global event. To reflect
this process, we introduce a context encoder, e.g. a bi-directional RNN or a transformer encoder, de-
noted as fcontext , to obtain context-aware image representations C = {ci }N    +1                    N +1
                                                                              i=1 = {fcontext (i, V )}i=1
by considering contextual information. The final step is to describe these transformations based
on previous understanding. In TTNet, we feed the last N context-aware image representations to
a transformation decoder fcaption , implemented with an RNN or a transformer decoder, to gen-
erate each transformation description T = {ti }N                                N
                                                       i=1 = {fcaption (ci+1 )}i=1 separately and auto-
regressively. We empirically found adding the transformation representation to the word embedding
in each step is better than using it as the start token.
The model is then trained with ground truth transformations T ∗ = {t∗i }N       i=1 by minimizing the
following negative log-likelihood loss, where t∗i = {x∗i,l }L
                                                            l=1  is  the ground truth description of the
ith transformation.
                                          XN X   L
                                Ltext = −          log p(x∗i,l |x∗i,<l )                             (2)
                                                              i=1 l=1

In order to tackle the two unique challenges of VTT, i.e. cognitive challenge and descriptive chal-
lenge, we propose three specific strategies to enhance the above TTNet, including difference sen-
sitive encoding, masked transformation model, and auxiliary learning. To distinguish more clearly,
we called the model that does not use these three strategies TTNetbase .

4.1       D IFFERENCE S ENSITIVE E NCODING

In visual transformation telling, the differences between two adjacent states are usually very small.
Imagine the scene of cooking noodles, the whole picture does not change much before and after the
noodles are added to the pot. This characteristic requires the model not only to understand the con-
tent of each image, but also to focus on differences between images to facilitate the understanding of
transformations. For this purpose, we first utilize CLIP (Radford et al., 2021) as our image encoder,
due to its strong semantic representation ability trained on large scale unsupervised data. We also
introduce difference features, by subtracting the current state and the previous state representations
∆V = {vi −vi−1 }N     +1
                    i=1 , where v0 = vN +1 , to emphasize the subtle difference. The above two kinds


                                                                    5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


of representations are concatenated and fed to the context encoder. Furthermore, a type embedding
is added to distinguish these two kinds of features.
Since transformations are not independent, we may meet the logical consistency problem in the
transformation description process, named the descriptive challenge of VTT. For example, the logic
of descriptions does not make sense as shown in Figure 4. TTNetbase recognizes oranges as eggs,
which is logically unreasonable with the two transformations before and after. In TTNet, we intro-
duce masked transformation model in the context encoder and auxiliary learning in the loss function
to alleviate this problem.

4.2   M ASKED T RANSFORMATION M ODEL

Masked transformation model (MTM) is inspired
by masked language model (Devlin et al., 2019).
The intuition behind this is that one transforma-
tion can be reasoned from nearby transforma- 1. Cut both ends and remove fruit seeds.
tions. For example, if you are told the previous 2. Pour the egg into the bowl.
transformation is washing the watermelon and the 3. Pour the orange juice into the cup.
next is putting the watermelon into a planet, it Figure 4: TTNetbase failes to effectively use
is obvious that the intermediate transformation contextual information and mistakenly identi-
should be related to the watermelon. Following fies the orange as an egg.
this intuition, 15% of the input features, including
state representations and difference features, are randomly masked during training. Furthermore, we
empirically found that, for each sample, using this strategy with half the probability works better.

4.3   AUXILIARY L EARNING

Human usually tries to guess the category or topic before describing transformations, e.g. cook-
ing noodles. Therefore, this category or topic information may help guide description generation.
Inspired by this, we propose to leverage auxiliary tasks, i.e. category and topic classification, to su-
pervise the training process. Specifically, we introduce two additional cross entropy losses Lcategory
and Ltopic on the global context vector. We expect to make the learned transformation represen-
tations share the underlying category and topic information to enhance the learning of consistent
representations. So the final training loss becomes a combination of Ltext , Lcategory , and Ltopic :
                                   L = Ltext + αLcategory + βLtopic                                   (3)
where α and β are two adjustment factors.

5     E XPERIMENTS
In this section, we first introduce our empirical setups including baseline methods and evaluation
metrics. Then we demonstrate the main empirical results on the collected VTT dataset, including
both quantitative and qualitative results. After that, we show extensive ablation studies on different
strategies used in TTNet.

5.1   E MPIRICAL S ETUPS

Baseline Models. Visual storytelling and dense video captioning are the two most similar tasks
to VTT. Visual storytelling requests to generate N descriptions from N images. We select two
classic methods from the winners of visual storytelling challenge Mitchell et al. (2018), including
CST Gonzalez-Rico & Fuentes-Pineda (2018), and GLACNet Kim et al. (2019) for comparison.
CST contextualizes image features by LSTM and then generates descriptions with separate LSTMs
for each image. GLACNet mixtures global LSTM features and local image features into context
features and then generates descriptions with a shared LSTM decoder. When generating transfor-
mation descriptions, only the last N context features are used. Dense video captioning has a similar
target to describe a series of events. The difference is the input is a video and it additionally requires
to predict temporal boundaries for events. We choose DenseCap Johnson et al. (2016) for adapta-
tion which proposed in the paper that introduces dense video captioning. DenseCap integrates the


                                                    6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Table 1: Performance on the test set of VTT dataset. B@4/M/R/C/S/BS/Fl/Re/LS are short for
BLEU@4 / METEOR / ROUGE-L / CIDEr / SPICE / BERT-Score / Fluency / Relevance / Logical
Soundness. * indicates to use CLIP image encoder for a fair comparison. † indicates TTNet signifi-
cant (p < 0.05) outperforms the corresponding model on this human evaluation metric.

        Model         B@4       M       R         C        S      BS       Fl      Re      LS
        CST           10.09   11.39    25.98    43.22     9.28   16.30      -       -       -
        CST*          13.96   19.21    38.11    84.60    21.85   25.66    2.04†   3.16†   2.96†
        GLACNet       42.77   45.26    52.98   381.48    45.33   60.12      -       -       -
        GLACNet*      55.24   59.48    66.25   508.18    60.21   71.13    4.75    3.82†   3.78†
        DenseCap*     48.25   52.00    59.79   439.68    53.73   66.30    4.74    3.67†   3.59†
        TTNetBase     55.68   60.47    67.05   515.12    61.45   72.22    4.79    4.04    3.95†
        TTNet         61.22   66.31    71.84   570.63    66.20   76.25    4.78    4.10    4.11



past and future information into image features to capture the context information. There are many
advanced methods for dense video captioning but highly rely on fine-grained video features, which
are not suitable for our task. All three methods are implemented as closely as possible according to
the original paper and provide a fair comparison by using the same image encoder with TTNet. We
describe the implementation details of TTNet as well as baseline models in Section C.
Evaluation Metrics. Following previous works on visual descriptions (Ting-Hao et al., 2016; Kr-
ishna et al., 2017; Liang et al., 2022), automated metrics including BLEU@4 (Papineni et al., 2002),
CIDEr (Vedantam et al., 2015), METEOR (Banerjee & Lavie, 2005), ROUGE-L (Lin & Hovy,
2002), SPICE (Anderson et al., 2016), and BERT-Score (Zhang et al., 2020) are selected as auto-
matic metrics. Furthermore, we asked 25 human annotators to assess the quality of transformation
descriptions using a Likert scale ranging from 1 to 5, for following criteria: fluency, measuring how
well-written the transformation is; relevance, how relevant the transformations toward the image
states; logical soundness, how well the overall logic conforms to common sense.

5.2   R ESULTS ON VTT DATASET

Quantitative Results. Table 1 summarizes the results of 7 models on the VTT dataset, including
TTNet, TTNetbase , CST and its CLIP version, GLACNet and its CLIP version, and CLIP version
DenseCap. From the results, TTNet surpasses other models on most metrics with a large margin,
e.g. CIDEr is 11% higher than the second best model, i.e. TTNetbase . This large improvement comes
from the three strategies we proposed, which are the only differences between TTNet and TTNetbase .
Further comparing human metrics between them, the main strength of TTNet is the much stronger
overall logic of the generated descriptions, while the relevance is only slightly better and the flu-
ency is about the same. Secrefsec:ablation further shows the advantages of TTNet with detailed
ablation studies. It is not difficult to find that the performance gap between CST*, GLACNet*, and
Densecap* is also very large. While they all use CLIP, the difference lies in the way of context
decoding and text generation. GLACNet* outperforms DenseCap* mainly because LSTM captures
more information than past and future attention features according to the higher scores of relevance
and logical soundness. The gap between GLACNet* and CST* is caused by the way of text gen-
eration. GLACNet uses word embeddings and context features as inputs in each LSTM step, while
CST only uses the context as the initial state of LSTM. In our empirical studies, this little difference
improves the fluency a lot, and it is the reason that TTNet chooses to add context embedding to
word embedding as the inputs of the transformation decoder rather than using the context feature
as the start token. The underlying design philosophy between TTNetbase and GLACNet* is similar,
therefore, the performance is close. However, TTNetbase converges faster than GLACNet* during
training because the transformer captures the context information more efficiently than LSTM.
Qualitative Results. We show two examples from the VTT test data in Figure 5 about sowing and
pasting a car sticker. From these two examples, we can first realize that the gap between the states
is really small. For example, in the sticker case, only a small area of the sticker is changed, making
it difficult to reason a certain transformation without considering the overall pasting process. We
can see that when the states are confusing, e.g. DenseCap and GLACNet identify the wrong entity
in the sow case, TTNet is able to reason the correct transformations from the differences and the


                                                   7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                    DenseCap:                                GLACNet:                       TTNet:
                                                                    1. Put the candle wick into a vessel.    1. Dig some holes on the soil. 1. Sow on the soil.
                                                                    2. Clean up the interior of the pumpkin. 2. Dig some holes on the soil. 2. Apply a cover on the soil.
                                                                    Groundtruth: 1. Sow on the soil. 2. Apply a cover on the soil.


DenseCap:                                    GLACNet:                                     TTNet:                                       Groundtruth:
1. Tear off the front of the sticker.        1. Clean the window surface.                 1. Clean the window surface.                 1. Clean the window surface.
2. Tear off the front of the sticker.        2. Tear off the front of the sticker.        2. Put the sticker on the window.            2. Put the sticker on the window.
3. Tear off the front of the sticker.        3. Tear off the front of the sticker.        3. Tear off the front of the sticker.        3. Tear off the front of the sticker.
4. Tear off the front of the sticker.        4. Tear off the front of the sticker.        4. Press the sticker.                        4. Press the sticker.
5. Tear off the front of the sticker.        5. Tear off the front of the sticker.        5. Tear off the front of the sticker.        5. Tear off the front of the sticker.
6. Tear off the front of the sticker.        6. Press the sticker.                        6. Press the sticker.                        6. Press the sticker.
7. Tear off the other side of the sticker.   7. Tear off the other side of the sticker.   7. Tear off the other side of the sticker.   7. Tear off the other side of the sticker.

     Figure 5: Qualitative comparison on the VTT test data. Above: sow. Below: paste car sticker.

                              Table 3: Ablation studies on Table 4: Analysis of difference
Table 2: CIDEr of independent the effect of key components. features and auxiliary tasks.
transformation prediction.
                                                               Diff. MTM Aux.                          C       BS              State            Difference CIDEr
                                                                                                                               √
  Model                      Original Indep.                                                  515.28 72.22                                      -                  527.62
                                                               √                                                               √
  CST*                          84.90 49.80                              √                    556.85 75.00                                      early              559.78
                                                                                                                               √
  DenseCap*                    439.53 295.75                                        √         520.04 72.72                                      late               570.63
  GLACNet*                     508.19 268.49                                                  521.93 72.97
  TTNet w/o diff               527.62 422.04                   √         √                                                     Category Topic                       CIDEr
                                                               √                    √         562.25 75.62                     √
  TTNet                        570.63 349.96                                                                                                                       549.44
                                                                         √          √         562.83 75.72                              √
  TTNet (retrain)                        - 459.84                                             527.62 73.54                                                         562.96
                                                               √         √          √                                          √                √
                                                                                              570.63 76.25                                                         570.63



context. Furthermore, when the difference between states becomes rather small and the transforma-
tion length becomes large, TTNet is still able to judge subtle differences between transformations.
In contrast, GLACNet indeed understands the topic of pasting the car sticker but fails to distinguish
some transformations. In conclusion, TTNet is able to reason transformations from confusing states
and distinguish subtle differences between transformations, making it excel other methods.

5.3       A BLATION S TUDIES

In Section 4, we introduce three strategies to improve TTNet, including difference sensitive encod-
ing, masked transformation model, and auxiliary learning. In this section, we discuss the effective-
ness of these three strategies. But before that, we first need to answer the question that whether
the context information is crucial for VTT, since all three strategies act on the context encoder to
enhance the ability to capture context information. If the answer is yes, then it comes to answer
how these strategies work and whether there exist alternative choices, e.g. other types of difference
features. Experimental analyses are organized into five following topics according to this logic.
Importance Analysis of Context. To answer the question of whether the context is really important
for reasoning transformations. We design to let models predict each transformation independently,
i.e. only from two states before and after. If transformations can be reasoned without considering
the context, model performance should remain roughly the same. However, from Table 2, the CIDEr
score of all five models drops sharply from the original setting to the independent setting, showing
that the context is clearly very important. Without context, reasoning transformations become rather
difficult, and retraining the model with independent data does not help either.
Effectiveness of Three Strategies. Next, we move on to analyze the effectiveness of the three
strategies and their combinations. The first row in Table 3 shows the result of TTNetBase and the next


                                                                                          8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


three rows show the results of using each strategy independently on the base model. Among them,
the improvement of using difference feature is the most significant, indicating the difference is also
crucial for resolving transformation reasoning. The next four rows show the results of combining
these strategies and the conclusion is combining all three strategies leads to the best result. The next
three topics will go through all these strategies one by one in detail, to see how these strategies work.
Analysis of Difference Sensitive Encoding. We just show difference feature is the most significant
strategy for TTNet. However, it is not clear how difference features help the TTNet model and if
there are alternative choices for difference features, e.g. differences of raw images. To answer the
first question, we need to go back to Table 2, which contains an interesting result that TTNet without
using difference features overtakes the full model in the independent setting. This phenomenon
suggests that difference features help to capture contextual information. Contextual information
is more important for the original setting, and the model tries to capture it by attention more to
the difference features. However, this does not prevail in the independent setting since contextual
information is less effective and the model should attention more to the image features. This is why
retraining the full model with the independent data works, because the focus of attention is adjusted
during retraining. The second question is about the alternative type of difference features. We
compare early and late differences. The early difference is pixel-level difference computed on raw
images before input to the image encoder, while the late difference is used by TTNet and computed
on encoded image vectors to become the semantic difference. In TVR (Hong et al., 2021), early
difference is more effective while Table 4 shows the opposite result. This is because TVR requires
to predict property changes on synthetic data, which relies more on pixel differences. In contrast,
VTT requires event-level descriptions, with more emphasis on semantic distinctions.
Analysis of MTM. We expect MTM to guide the model to
reason transformation from nearby transformations. In order      500
to validate this ability, we design to let models predict trans- 400
formations with incomplete states, e.g mask one state of three.
                                                                          CIDEr
                                                                 300
Specifically, we test models under two special settings. In the           TTNet
                                                                 200      TTNet w/o MTM
first setting, we randomly mask one state for all test samples.           GLACNet*
In the second setting, we give even fewer states on average by   100      DenseCap*
                                                                          CST*
only providing start and end states for each sample. The re-         full       randomly mask one start & end only
sults are shown in Figure 6. We can see that when there is                           States
less and less information, the performance of all models de- Figure 6: Effect of missing states.
creases. However, TTNet has the slowest decline in perfor-
mance, showing its robustness to missing states. By further comparing the results between TTNet
and TTNet w/o MTM, we can conclude this robustness is contributed by the MTM strategy.
Analysis of Auxiliary Tasks. Finally, we analyze the effects of different auxiliary tasks and report
the results in Table 4. From the table, topic classification is more effective than category classi-
fication, since topics are more granular than categories. Supervision with two classification tasks
simultaneously improves the overall performance, e.g. 562.25 → 570.63 in terms of CIDEr.


6    C ONCLUSION

This paper introduces a new visual reasoning task to focus on transformation reasoning, i.e. changes
between every two states, named visual transformation telling. Given a series of images as states,
the description of each transformation is required to represent what happened between every two
adjacent images. In this way, the task could be used to test the machines’ ability of transforma-
tion reasoning, which is an important cognitive skill for humans, as described in Piaget’s theory.
To the best of our knowledge, this is the first real world application for transformation reasoning
by defining transformation descriptions as output. To facilitate the study on VTT, we build bench-
mark data based on 13,547 samples from two instructional video datasets, i.e. CrossTask and COIN.
After that, we design a model named TTNet, by applying three well-designed strategies into a ba-
sic human-inspired transformation telling model to make it difference-sensitive and context-aware.
From the experiments, we find that the proposed strategies help VTT generate consistent transfor-
mation descriptions, and thus obtain better results in terms of natural language generation metrics.
The empirical studies provide valuable insights for understanding VTT and the proposed model and
may help to design more complicated transformation reasoning tasks or models in the future.


                                                        9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


R EFERENCES
Peter Anderson, Basura Fernando, Mark Johnson, and Stephen Gould. SPICE: Semantic Propo-
  sitional Image Caption Evaluation. In Bastian Leibe, Jiri Matas, Nicu Sebe, and Max Welling
  (eds.), Computer Vision – ECCV 2016, Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pp. 382–398, 2016.
Anton Bakhtin, Laurens van der Maaten, Justin Johnson, Laura Gustafson, and Ross Girshick.
  PHYRE: A New Benchmark for Physical Reasoning. In Advances in Neural Information Pro-
  cessing Systems, volume 32, 2019.
Satanjeev Banerjee and Alon Lavie. METEOR: An Automatic Metric for MT Evaluation with
  Improved Correlation with Human Judgments. In Proceedings of the ACL Workshop on Intrinsic
  and Extrinsic Evaluation Measures for Machine Translation and/or Summarization, pp. 65–72,
  2005.
Hangbo Bao, Li Dong, Songhao Piao, and Furu Wei. BEiT: BERT Pre-Training of Image Trans-
  formers. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2022.
Fabien Baradel, Natalia Neverova, Julien Mille, Greg Mori, and Christian Wolf. CoPhy: Counterfac-
  tual Learning of Physical Dynamics. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2020.
Magali Bovet. Piaget’s Theory of Cognitive Development and Individual Differences. In Bärbel
 Inhelder, Harold H. Chipman, and Charles Zwingmann (eds.), Piaget and His School: A Reader
 in Developmental Psychology, Springer Study Edition, pp. 269–279. 1976.
Chien-Yi Chang, De-An Huang, Danfei Xu, Ehsan Adeli, Li Fei-Fei, and Juan Carlos Niebles.
  Procedure Planning in Instructional Videos. In Andrea Vedaldi, Horst Bischof, Thomas Brox,
  and Jan-Michael Frahm (eds.), Computer Vision – ECCV 2020, volume 12356, pp. 334–350.
  2020.
Boxing Chen and Colin Cherry. A Systematic Comparison of Smoothing Techniques for Sentence-
  Level BLEU. In Proceedings of the Ninth Workshop on Statistical Machine Translation, pp.
  362–367, 2014.
Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. BERT: Pre-training of Deep
  Bidirectional Transformers for Language Understanding. In Proceedings of the 2019 Confer-
  ence of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human
  Language Technologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers), pp. 4171–4186, 2019.
Alexey Dosovitskiy, Lucas Beyer, Alexander Kolesnikov, Dirk Weissenborn, Xiaohua Zhai, Thomas
  Unterthiner, Mostafa Dehghani, Matthias Minderer, Georg Heigold, Sylvain Gelly, Jakob Uszko-
  reit, and Neil Houlsby. An Image is Worth 16x16 Words: Transformers for Image Recognition at
  Scale. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2022.
Ali Farhadi, Mohsen Hejrati, Mohammad Amin Sadeghi, Peter Young, Cyrus Rashtchian, Julia
  Hockenmaier, and David Forsyth. Every Picture Tells a Story: Generating Sentences from Images.
  In Kostas Daniilidis, Petros Maragos, and Nikos Paragios (eds.), Computer Vision – ECCV 2010,
  Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pp. 15–29, 2010.
Rohit Girdhar and Deva Ramanan. CATER: A diagnostic dataset for Compositional Actions &
  TEmporal Reasoning. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2020.
Diana Gonzalez-Rico and Gibran Fuentes-Pineda. Contextualize, Show and Tell: A Neural Visual
  Storyteller, 2018.
Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep Residual Learning for Image
  Recognition. In 2016 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR),
  pp. 770–778, 2016.
Jack Hessel, Jena D. Hwang, Jae Sung Park, Rowan Zellers, Chandra Bhagavatula, Anna Rohrbach,
  Kate Saenko, and Yejin Choi. The Abduction of Sherlock Holmes: A Dataset for Visual Abduc-
  tive Reasoning, 2022.


                                               10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Xin Hong, Yanyan Lan, Liang Pang, Jiafeng Guo, and Xueqi Cheng. Transformation Driven Visual
  Reasoning. In 2021 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR),
  pp. 6899–6908, 2021.
Drew A. Hudson and Christopher D. Manning. GQA: A New Dataset for Real-World Visual Rea-
  soning and Compositional Question Answering. In 2019 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
  Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 6693–6702, 2019.
Justin Johnson, Andrej Karpathy, and Li Fei-Fei. DenseCap: Fully Convolutional Localization
  Networks for Dense Captioning. In 2016 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
  Recognition (CVPR), pp. 4565–4574, 2016.
Justin Johnson, Bharath Hariharan, Laurens van der Maaten, Li Feifei, C. Lawrence Zitnick, and
  Ross Girshick. CLEVR: A Diagnostic Dataset for Compositional Language and Elementary Vi-
  sual Reasoning. In 2017 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR),
  pp. 1988–1997, 2017.
Taehyeong Kim, Min-Oh Heo, Seonil Son, Kyoung-Wha Park, and Byoung-Tak Zhang. GLAC Net:
  GLocal Attention Cascading Networks for Multi-image Cued Story Generation, 2019.
Jonathan Krause, Justin Johnson, Ranjay Krishna, and Li Fei-Fei. A Hierarchical Approach for
  Generating Descriptive Image Paragraphs, 2017.
Ranjay Krishna, Kenji Hata, Frederic Ren, Li Fei-Fei, and Juan Carlos Niebles. Dense-Captioning
  Events in Videos. In 2017 IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), pp. 706–
  715, 2017.
Girish Kulkarni, Visruth Premraj, Sagnik Dhar, Siming Li, Yejin Choi, Alexander C Berg, and
  Tamara L Berg. Baby talk: Understanding and generating simple image descriptions. In CVPR
  2011, pp. 1601–1608, 2011.
Chris van der Lee, Albert Gatt, Emiel van Miltenburg, Sander Wubben, and Emiel Krahmer. Best
  practices for the human evaluation of automatically generated text. In Proceedings of the 12th
  International Conference on Natural Language Generation, pp. 355–368, 2019.
Chen Liang, Wenguan Wang, Tianfei Zhou, and Yi Yang. Visual Abductive Reasoning. 2022
  IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 15544–15554,
  2022.
Chin-Yew Lin and Eduard Hovy. Manual and automatic evaluation of summaries. In Proceedings
  of the ACL-02 Workshop on Automatic Summarization - Volume 4, AS ’02, pp. 45–51, 2002.
Ze Liu, Yutong Lin, Yue Cao, Han Hu, Yixuan Wei, Zheng Zhang, Stephen Lin, and Baining Guo.
  Swin Transformer: Hierarchical Vision Transformer using Shifted Windows. In 2021 IEEE/CVF
  International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), pp. 9992–10002, 2021.
Ilya Loshchilov and Frank Hutter. Decoupled Weight Decay Regularization. In International Con-
   ference on Learning Representations, 2022.
Antoine Miech, Dimitri Zhukov, Jean-Baptiste Alayrac, Makarand Tapaswi, Ivan Laptev, and Josef
  Sivic. HowTo100M: Learning a Text-Video Embedding by Watching Hundred Million Narrated
  Video Clips. In 2019 IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), pp. 2630–
  2640, 2019.
Margaret Mitchell, Ting-Hao ‘Kenneth’ Huang, Francis Ferraro, and Ishan Misra (eds.). Proceed-
 ings of the First Workshop on Storytelling. 2018.
Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, and Wei-Jing Zhu. BLEU: A Method for Automatic
  Evaluation of Machine Translation. In Proceedings of the 40th Annual Meeting of the Association
  for Computational Linguistics, pp. 311–318, 2002.
Dong Huk Park, Trevor Darrell, and Anna Rohrbach. Robust Change Captioning. In 2019
  IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), pp. 4623–4632, 2019.


                                               11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Jae Sung Park, Chandra Bhagavatula, Roozbeh Mottaghi, Ali Farhadi, and Yejin Choi. Visual-
  COMET: Reasoning about the Dynamic Context of a Still Image, 2020.
Adam Paszke, Sam Gross, Francisco Massa, Adam Lerer, James Bradbury, Gregory Chanan, Trevor
  Killeen, Zeming Lin, Natalia Gimelshein, Luca Antiga, Alban Desmaison, Andreas Kopf, Edward
  Yang, Zachary DeVito, Martin Raison, Alykhan Tejani, Sasank Chilamkurthy, Benoit Steiner,
  Lu Fang, Junjie Bai, and Soumith Chintala. PyTorch: An Imperative Style, High-Performance
  Deep Learning Library. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 32, 2019.
Jean Piaget. The Role of Action in the Development of Thinking. In Willis F. Overton and
  Jeanette McCarthy Gallagher (eds.), Knowledge and Development: Volume 1 Advances in Re-
  search and Theory, pp. 17–42. 1977.
Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agar-
  wal, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, Gretchen Krueger, and Ilya
  Sutskever. Learning Transferable Visual Models From Natural Language Supervision, 2021.
Colin Raffel, Noam Shazeer, Adam Roberts, Katherine Lee, Sharan Narang, Michael Matena, Yanqi
  Zhou, Wei Li, and Peter J. Liu. Exploring the Limits of Transfer Learning with a Unified Text-to-
  Text Transformer. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 21(140):1–67, 2020. ISSN 1533-7928.
Hareesh Ravi, Kushal Kafle, Scott Cohen, Jonathan Brandt, and Mubbasir Kapadia. AESOP: Ab-
  stract Encoding of Stories, Objects, and Pictures. In 2021 IEEE/CVF International Conference
  on Computer Vision (ICCV), pp. 2032–2043, 2021.
Ronan Riochet, Mario Ynocente Castro, Mathieu Bernard, Adam Lerer, Rob Fergus, Véronique
  Izard, and Emmanuel Dupoux. IntPhys 2019: A Benchmark for Visual Intuitive Physics Under-
  standing. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 44(9):5016–5025,
  2022. ISSN 1939-3539.
Tomas Soucek, Jean-Baptiste Alayrac, Antoine Miech, Ivan Laptev, and Josef Sivic. Look for the
  Change: Learning Object States and State-Modifying Actions from Untrimmed Web Videos. In
  2022 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 13936–
  13946, 2022.
Christian Szegedy, Vincent Vanhoucke, Sergey Ioffe, Jon Shlens, and Zbigniew Wojna. Rethinking
  the Inception Architecture for Computer Vision. In 2016 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision
  and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 2818–2826, 2016.
Yansong Tang, Dajun Ding, Yongming Rao, Yu Zheng, Danyang Zhang, Lili Zhao, Jiwen Lu,
  and Jie Zhou. COIN: A Large-scale Dataset for Comprehensive Instructional Video Analysis.
  arXiv:1903.02874 [cs], 2019.
Yansong Tang, Jiwen Lu, and Jie Zhou. Comprehensive Instructional Video Analysis: The COIN
  Dataset and Performance Evaluation. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intel-
  ligence, 43(9):3138–3153, 2021. ISSN 0162-8828, 2160-9292, 1939-3539.
Damien Teney, Peng Wang, Jiewei Cao, Lingqiao Liu, Chunhua Shen, and Anton van den Hengel.
  V-PROM: A Benchmark for Visual Reasoning Using Visual Progressive Matrices. Proceedings
  of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 34(07):12071–12078, 2020. ISSN 2374-3468.
Ting-Hao, Huang, Francis Ferraro, Nasrin Mostafazadeh, Ishan Misra, Aishwarya Agrawal, Jacob
  Devlin, Ross Girshick, Xiaodong He, Pushmeet Kohli, Dhruv Batra, C. Lawrence Zitnick, Devi
  Parikh, Lucy Vanderwende, Michel Galley, and Margaret Mitchell. Visual Storytelling, 2016.
Ramakrishna Vedantam, C. Lawrence Zitnick, and Devi Parikh. CIDEr: Consensus-based image
  description evaluation. In 2015 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
  (CVPR), pp. 4566–4575, 2015.
Subhashini Venugopalan, Huijuan Xu, Jeff Donahue, Marcus Rohrbach, Raymond Mooney, and
  Kate Saenko. Translating Videos to Natural Language Using Deep Recurrent Neural Networks.
  In Proceedings of the 2015 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for
  Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, pp. 1494–1504, 2015.


                                                12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Xiang Wang, Shiwei Zhang, Zhiwu Qing, Yuanjie Shao, Changxin Gao, and Nong Sang. Self-
  Supervised Learning for Semi-Supervised Temporal Action Proposal. In 2021 IEEE/CVF Con-
  ference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 1905–1914, 2021.
Kexin Yi, Chuang Gan*, Yunzhu Li, Pushmeet Kohli, Jiajun Wu, Antonio Torralba, and Joshua B.
  Tenenbaum. CLEVRER: Collision Events for Video Representation and Reasoning. In Interna-
  tional Conference on Learning Representations, 2020.
Haonan Yu, Jiang Wang, Zhiheng Huang, Yi Yang, and Wei Xu. Video Paragraph Captioning Using
  Hierarchical Recurrent Neural Networks. In 2016 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and
  Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 4584–4593, 2016.
Rowan Zellers, Yonatan Bisk, Ali Farhadi, and Yejin Choi. From Recognition to Cognition: Vi-
  sual Commonsense Reasoning. In 2019 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
  Recognition (CVPR), pp. 6713–6724, 2019.
Chen-Lin Zhang, Jianxin Wu, and Yin Li. ActionFormer: Localizing Moments of Actions with
  Transformers. In Shai Avidan, Gabriel Brostow, Moustapha Cissé, Giovanni Maria Farinella, and
  Tal Hassner (eds.), Computer Vision – ECCV 2022, volume 13664, pp. 492–510. 2022.
Chi Zhang, Feng Gao, Baoxiong Jia, Yixin Zhu, and Songchun Zhu. RAVEN: A Dataset for Re-
  lational and Analogical Visual REasoNing. In 2019 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision
  and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 5312–5322, 2019.
Tianyi Zhang, Varsha Kishore, Felix Wu, Kilian Q. Weinberger, and Yoav Artzi. BERTScore: Eval-
  uating Text Generation with BERT. In ICLR, 2020.
Luowei Zhou, Yannis Kalantidis, Xinlei Chen, Jason J. Corso, and Marcus Rohrbach. Grounded
  Video Description. In 2019 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
  (CVPR), pp. 6571–6580, 2019.
Dimitri Zhukov, Jean-Baptiste Alayrac, Ramazan Gokberk Cinbis, David Fouhey, Ivan Laptev,
  and Josef Sivic. Cross-Task Weakly Supervised Learning From Instructional Videos. In 2019
  IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 3532–3540,
  2019.


                                              13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A     VTT DATASET C ONSTRUCTION

In order to provide a deeper understanding of the VTT dataset, we describe how we construct VTT
in detail. The whole process consists of four major parts, i.e. combine and complete annotations,
extract state images, and split the dataset. Additionally, we mention some annotation information
from CrossTask and COIN, which is important for understanding our decisions when building VTT,
such as how to choose the start and end states.
Combine and complete annotations. Both CrossTask and COIN provide the annotations of step
labels and corresponding segments. Step labels are predefined before they started annotating videos.
The difference is that COIN employed experts to define steps while CrossTask derived them from
WikiHow, a website teaching how to do many things. With predefined steps, they find annotators to
label the step categories and the corresponding segments for each video. We collect and organize
these annotations in a uniform format to become the basis of the VTT dataset. Apart from that,
category and topic labels are used for auxiliary learning. Both CrossTask and COIN provide topic
information, which is the task to solve. However, only COIN provides categories as the domain
information and they are missing in the CrossTask. We manually classify all topics from CrossTask
into existing categories. The full list of 12 categories and 198 topics is shown in Table 5.

Table 5: The Categories and topics in VTT dataset. Topics marked with * are from CrossTask and
others belong to COIN.

 Category               Topics
 Nursing and Care       Wash Dog, Use Earplugs, Use Neti Pot, Put On Hair Extensions, Use Epinephrine Auto-injector, Perform CPR,
 (14)                   Wear Contact Lenses, Remove Blackheads With Glue, Give An Intramuscular Injection, Shave Beard, Wash Hair,
                        Bandage Dog Paw, Draw Blood, Bandage Head
 Pets and Fruit (7)     Plant Tree, Transplant, Graft, Cut Grape Fruit, Cut Mango, Cut Cantaloupe, Sow
 Furniture and Deco-    Install Shower Head, Install Ceramic Tile, Install Air Conditioner, Install Curtain, Lubricate A Lock, Replace
 ration (15)            Door Knob, Install Wood Flooring, Install Closestool, Assemble Cabinet, Assemble Sofa, Replace Faucet, Replace
                        Toilet Seat, Assemble Bed, Build Simple Floating Shelves*, Assemble Office Chair
 Leisure and Perfor-    Make Paper Wind Mill, Perform Vanishing Glass Trick, Raise Flag, Play Frisbee With A Dog, Make Chinese
 mance (17)             Lantern, Carve Pumpkin, Change Guitar Strings, Perform Paper To Money Trick, Pitch A Tent, Open Champagne
                        Bottle, Blow Sugar, Make Paper Easter Baskets, Cut And Restore Rope Trick, Do Lino Printing, Replace Drum-
                        head, Prepare Sumi Ink, Prepare Canvas
 Dish (23)              Make Kimchi Fried Rice*, Cook Omelet, Make Sandwich, Grill Steak*, Clean Fish, Use Toaster, Clean Shrimp,
                        Make Burger, Make French Toast*, Wrap Zongzi, Make French Strawberry Cake*, Make Pickles, Boil Noodles,
                        Make Bread and Butter Pickles*, Make Kerala Fish Curry*, Make Lamb Kebab, Make French Fries, Use Rice
                        Cooker To Cook Rice, Make Pizza, Make Youtiao, Make Salmon, Smash Garlic, Make Pancakes*
 Electrical Appliance   Replace Graphics Card, Replace Light Socket, Replace Electrical Outlet, Replace Memory Chip, Use Soy Milk
 (20)                   Maker, Change Toner Cartridge, Replace Laptop Screen, Replace Refrigerator Water Filter, Use Vending Machine,
                        Replace Filter For Air Purifier, Replace Hard Disk, Replace Blade Of A Saw, Refill Cartridge, Clean Laptop
                        Keyboard, Arc Weld, Install Ceiling Fan, Replace A Bulb, Paste Screen Protector On Pad, Assemble Desktop PC,
                        Use Sewing Machine
 Science and Craft      Prepare Standard Solution, Make Flower Press, Use Volumetric Pipette, Hang Wallpaper, Make Candle, Make
 (15)                   Soap, Use Triple Beam Balance, Make Flower Crown, Use Volumetric Flask, Paste Car Sticker, Make Slime With
                        Glue, Make Paper Dice, Wrap Gift Box, Set Up A Hamster Cage, Use Analytical Balance
 Drink and Snack (20)   Make Meringue*, Make Salad, Make Lemonade*, Make Taco Salad*, Make Tea, Make Chocolate, Make a Latte*,
                        Make Homemade Ice Cream, Make Jello Shots*, Make Coffee, Make Cocktail, Make Cookie, Make Irish Coffee*,
                        Roast Chestnut, Make Banana Ice Cream*, Make Orange Juice, Make Matcha Tea, Make Sugar Coated Haws,
                        Make Strawberry Smoothie, Make Hummus
 Vehicle (21)           Change Bike Chain, Replace Car Fuse, Replace Rearview Mirror Glass, Tie Boat To Dock, Pump Up Bicycle
                        Tire, Change Car Tire, Use Jack, Remove Scratches From Windshield, Jack Up a Car*, Change Bike Tires, Install
                        License Plate Frame, Fuel Car, Replace A Wiper Head, Install Bicycle Rack, Replace Tyre Valve Stem, Change a
                        Tire*, Patch Bike Inner Tube, Polish Car, Replace Car Window, Add Oil to Your Car*, Park Parallel
 Housework (15)         Put On Quilt Cover, Clean Bathtub, Wash Dish, Clean Leather Seat, Pack Sleeping Bag, Clean Wooden Floor,
                        Clean Toilet, Iron Clothes, Drill Hole, Remove Crayon From Walls, Clean Hamster Cage, Make Bed, Unclog Sink
                        With Baking Soda, Clean Rusty Pot, Clean Cement Floor
 Sport (10)             Practise Karate, Wear Shin Guards, Practise Triple Jump, Throw Hammer, Play Curling, Practise Skiing Aerials,
                        Practise Pole Vault, Attend N B A Skills Challenge, Glue Ping Pong Rubber, Practise Weight Lift
 Gadgets (21)           Open A Lock With Paperclips, Replace Mobile Screen Protector, Load Grease Gun, Change Mobile Phone Battery,
                        Replace Sewing Machine Needle, Change Battery Of Watch, Replace SIM Card, Resize Watch Band, Replace CD
                        Drive With SSD, Refill Mechanical Pencils, Make Wireless Earbuds, Refill Fountain Pen, Refill A Lighter, Rewrap
                        Battery, Replace Battery On Key To Car, Fix Laptop Screen Scratches, Operate Fire Extinguisher, Replace Battery
                        On TV Control, Use Tapping Gun, Refill A Stapler, Make RJ45 Cable



                                                                 14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            #Samples                                                   #Samples


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 40
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       60
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      50
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           100
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   150


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Make Bed                                                  Grill Steak


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Val
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Use Sewing Machine                                             Make Irish Coffee


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Test
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Refill A Stapler                                     Make French Toast


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Total
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Train
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Resize Watch Band                                    Make Banana Ice Cream


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                COIN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Replace Sewing Machine Needle                                                     Make a Latte
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Refill Fountain Pen                                         Make Taco Salad
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Make Lamb Kebab                                Build Simple Floating Shelves
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Pump Up Bicycle Tire                                                            Sow


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                CrossTask
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Clean Cement Floor                                     Put On Hair Extensions
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Make Wireless Earbuds                              Replace Mobile Screen Protector
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Use Toaster                                    Make Paper Wind Mill
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Assemble Bed                                      Assemble Office Chair
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Clean Toilet                                     Make Flower Crown
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Refill Cartridge                               Open Champagne Bottle
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Install License Plate Frame                                           Make Matcha Tea
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Make Orange Juice                                 Replace CD Drive With SSD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Change Mobile Phone Battery                                                 Practise Karate
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Make Meringue                                   Replace Blade Of A Saw
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Perform Paper To Money Trick                                Use Rice Cooker To Cook Rice
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Unclog Sink With Baking Soda                                                Replace A Bulb
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Use Epinephrine Auto-injector                                            Make Jello Shots


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Categories
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Make Kerala Fish Curry                                Replace Filter For Air Purifier
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Pack Sleeping Bag                                                Make Salmon
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Assemble Desktop PC                                            Install Bicycle Rack
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Replace Toilet Seat                              Open A Lock With Paperclips
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Prepare Standard Solution                                             Clean Rusty Pot
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Cut Cantaloupe                           Replace Refrigerator Water Filter
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Make Candle                            Remove Blackheads With Glue
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Use Soy Milk Maker                                         Replace Door Knob
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Clean Fish                                 Replace Laptop Screen
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Install Ceiling Fan                                   Use Vending Machine


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                198
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        198
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        198
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        198
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                180
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 18
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Topics
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Raise Flag                              Make Strawberry Smoothie
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Make Kimchi Fried Rice                                                  Boil Noodles
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Use Earplugs                                       Add Oil to Your Car
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Make Coffee                                         Paste Car Sticker
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Graft                                 Make Slime With Glue


                                                                                                             statistics of the VTT dataset in Table 6.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Use Volumetric Flask                                      Replace Memory Chip


                                                                                                                                                                                                                     transformations between states is small.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Tie Boat To Dock                                                Cook Omelet
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Replace Electrical Outlet                                         Make French Fries
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Make Tea                                Operate Fire Extinguisher
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Clean Leather Seat                                    Change Toner Cartridge
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Shave Beard                                                   Transplant


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                13547
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1436
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1352
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        10759
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                11722
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1825
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Samples
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Bandage Head                                          Replace Hard Disk
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Wrap Zongzi                                           Do Lino Printing
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Play Curling                          Give An Intramuscular Injection
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Refill Mechanical Pencils                                                  Make Salad
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Use Neti Pot                                  Replace A Wiper Head
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Make Cookie                                          Make RJ45 Cable
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Replace Battery On Key To Car                                               Make Lemonade
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Make Hummus                                      Make Chinese Lantern
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Assemble Cabinet                                                   Make Pizza


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                69029
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         7339
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         6974
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        54716
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                56169
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                12860
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            States
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Plant Tree                                     Install Shower Head
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Make Chocolate                                                 Make Burger
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Blow Sugar                           Replace Rearview Mirror Glass
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Park Parallel                                            Refill A Lighter
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Use Jack                                           Cut Grape Fruit
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Wash Dog                                    Use Analytical Balance
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Draw Blood                                    Change Guitar Strings
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Replace Drumhead                                    Change Battery Of Watch
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Replace Car Fuse                                             Make Pancakes
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Replace Graphics Card                                            Replace SIM Card
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Arc Weld                                             Make Pickles
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Drill Hole                        Make Bread and Butter Pickles
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Replace Battery On TV Control                                                 Jack Up a Car
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Clean Laptop Keyboard                                                 Make Cocktail
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Make Youtiao                                               Perform CPR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Perform Vanishing Glass Trick                                         Replace Light Socket
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Table 6: Statistics of the VTT dataset.



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Replace Car Window                                                     Make Soap
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Remove Scratches From Windshield                                     Replace Tyre Valve Stem
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Use Tapping Gun                                              Make Sandwich


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                55482
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         5903
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         5622
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        43957
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                44447
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                11035
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Transformations


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Put On Quilt Cover                                        Install Ceramic Tile
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Use Triple Beam Balance                                            Change Bike Tires
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Wear Shin Guards                                                     Wash Hair
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Make Sugar Coated Haws                                                      Pitch A Tent
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Bandage Dog Paw                                                      Cut Mango
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Lubricate A Lock                                     Patch Bike Inner Tube
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Make Flower Press                              Attend N B A Skills Challenge
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Set Up A Hamster Cage                                          Clean Hamster Cage
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Figure 7: The sample distribution of all the topics in VTT.


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Install Closestool                                                 Polish Car
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Install Air Conditioner                            Make Homemade Ice Cream
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Make Paper Dice                                              Roast Chestnut
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Glue Ping Pong Rubber                                         Install Wood Flooring
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Install Curtain                                                  Fuel Car
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Load Grease Gun                                             Change Car Tire
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Rewrap Battery                                              Clean Bathtub
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Wear Contact Lenses                                                 Change a Tire
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Smash Garlic                           Paste Screen Protector On Pad
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Prepare Canvas                                              Assemble Sofa
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Remove Crayon From Walls                                                  Replace Faucet
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Fix Laptop Screen Scratches                                                Carve Pumpkin
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Prepare Sumi Ink                                    Use Volumetric Pipette
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Wash Dish                                       Clean Wooden Floor
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Play Frisbee With A Dog                                                 Clean Shrimp
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Practise Pole Vault                                       Change Bike Chain
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Throw Hammer                                             Hang Wallpaper
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Practise Weight Lift                                                Iron Clothes
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                853
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        806
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        812
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        853
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                749
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                105
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Unique Transformations


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Practise Triple Jump                               Cut And Restore Rope Trick
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  val
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 val


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Practise Skiing Aerials                                              Wrap Gift Box
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  test
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 test


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  train
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 train


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Make French Strawberry Cake                                    Make Paper Easter Baskets


     the dataset. The biggest restriction is the high cost of labeling steps/transformations with descrip-
     such as HowTo100M (Miech et al., 2019), which limits the range of transformations covered by
     Discussions. Currently, the size of the VTT dataset is small compared with large video datasets
                                                                                                             figure, we can see that about half of the topics have over 100 samples. We also summarize the main
                                                                                                             / 1352 / 1436 in the level of topic. The detailed topic distribution is shown in Figure 7. From the
                                                                                                             Split Dataset. Finally, we split the data randomly into Train / Val / Test sets with samples of 10759
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     target of CrossTask and COIN is to segment all key steps in a video, the probability of multiple
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     is whether there exist multiple transformations between two adjacent states. Since the annotation
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     transformation should be reasoned in the overall context. Another problem someone may care about
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     after image states. Our motivation for the masked transformation model is from this observation that
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     samples, it is not enough to reason the transformations by only considering the nearby before and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     predictable from extracted states for humans but sometimes can be challenging. For those difficult
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     or text transitions. This is mainly caused by careless annotators. As a whole, transformations are
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     sample 200 examples to check the quality of states and only find a few flaws such as black screens
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     frames in the boundary of transformations are selected as states. After extracting, we randomly
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     to directly use the start or end frame of the segments as the start or end states. As shown in Figure 1,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     and COIN’s precise boundaries of segments annotated with three rounds of refinement, we choose
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     moment when the transformation ends. Based on CrossTask’s precise temporal segment annotations
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     of the moment just before the transformation starts, and the ending state should be an image of the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     to select images from video frames to construct states. Ideally, the starting state should be an image
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Extract State Images. When building the VTT dataset from videos, one important question is how
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                            Table 7: The VTT human evaluation guidelines.

         Metric     Score   Criteria
                     5      All sentences are fluent.
                     4      Most sentences are fluent with only a few flaws.
         Fluency     3      About half of the sentences are fluent.
                     2      Most of the sentences are difficult to read, only a few are okay.
                     1      All sentences are hard to read.
                     5      The descriptions are all related to the corresponding before and after images.
                     4      A few descriptions are slightly irrelevant, e.g. the description is related to the
                            underlying topic but cannot be clearly inferred from the images.
                     3      Many descriptions are slightly irrelevant or a few descriptions are irrelevant,
        Relevance           e.g. the action or target object mentioned in the transformation does not match
                            the images.
                     2      Many descriptions are irrelevant.
                     1      Most descriptions are irrelevant, or some descriptions are completely irrele-
                            vant, e.g. transformation is unrelated to the underlying topic of the images.
                     5      The underlying logic of the descriptions is consistent with common sense.
                     4      The overall logic is consistent with common sense, with minor flaws.
                     3      There are a few obvious logical problems between the descriptions, e.g. un-
         Logical            resonable repeating transformations.
        Soundness    2      There are some obvious logical problems, e.g. the order of transformations is
                            obviously not in line with common sense.
                     1      Logic cannot be judged because of the extremely poor fluency or poor rele-
                            vance leading to overall logic inconsistent with the underlying topic.


tions and temporal boundaries. One possible way to reduce this cost is first using pretrained step
localization models (Wang et al., 2021; Zhang et al., 2022) or action and object state-recognition
models (Soucek et al., 2022) to propose coarse steps/transformations and then refine the results with
human annotators. With more data to cover large transformations, machines can learn more pow-
erful transformation reasoning models, which have potential enhancement value for many tasks,
such as procedure planning, visual storytelling, explaining the phenomenon in life with events, etc.
Another issue is the precision of the boundary of existing step segments in CrossTask and COIN.
For future construction of larger datasets, we suggest a strategy for possible refinement by applying
object state-recognition models (Soucek et al., 2022).

B       E VALUATION D ETAILS
B.1      AUTOMATIC E VALUATION

We introduce some details that are not included in the main content of the paper when computing
automatic metrics. Firstly, we follow the smooth strategy introduced by Chen & Cherry (2014)
when computing BLEU@4 to provide more accurate results. This is because descriptions in VTT
are usually short, the original BLEU@4 gives a zero score for short texts. In addition, BERT-Score
is rescaled with the pre-computed baseline (Zhang et al., 2020) to have a more meaningful score
range. BLEU@4 is computed using NLTK package 1 . CIDEr, METEOR, ROUGE, and SPICE are
computed with the code from coco-caption 2 . BERT-Score is computed by using the official code 3
provided by the authors.

B.2      H UMAN E VALUATION

Automatic evaluation metrics have limitations on reflecting the quality of generated text mainly
because they are uninterpretable and do not correlate with human evaluations (van der Lee et al.,
2019). In the VTT task, we consider three levels of text quality, evaluated by people. The first
    1
      https://www.nltk.org/api/nltk.translate.bleu_score.html
    2
      https://github.com/tylin/coco-caption
    3
      https://github.com/Tiiiger/bert_score


                                                       16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                         Figure 8: The web interface of human evaluation on VTT.

                     Table 8: Implementations details of baseline models and TTNet.

             Model          Image Encoder Context Encoder Transformation Decoder Params
             CST          InceptionV3                LSTM                  LSTM       379M
             CST*      CLIP (ViT-L/14)               LSTM                  LSTM       661M
             GLACNet        ResNet152             bi-LSTM                  LSTM       128M
             GLACNet* CLIP (ViT-L/14)             bi-LSTM                  LSTM       373M
             DenseCap* CLIP (ViT-L/14)            Attention                LSTM       361M
             TTNetBase     CLIP (ViT-L/14)     Transformer            Transformer     368M
             TTNet         CLIP (ViT-L/14)     Transformer            Transformer     368M


level considers only the fluency of the text itself. The second level considers the relevance of each
individual transformation description to the topic and to the images before and after. The third level
considers the logical consistency between transformation descriptions. The assessment uses the
5-point Likert scale and follows the guidelines below in Table 7.
We asked 25 people to evaluate the major baseline models’ results shown in Table 1. A subset of
samples is selected for human evaluation by randomly sampling testing samples, 1 sample from
each topic and 2 extra samples, resulting in 200 samples in total. All annotators are asked to read
and follow the guidelines to give their scores. During human evaluation, the annotators can see
the images in addition to the category and the topic as a reference. The web interface for human
evaluation is shown in Figure 8. Each sample result from each model is evaluated by at least 2
people. Our code of the evaluation webpage will also be released along with the VTT source code.

C       I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS
During training, we apply commonly used image augmentation tricks, including randomly cropping
images into 224 × 224 patches, and random flipping. The overall architectures of all baseline mod-
els are shown in Table 8. We re-implemented CST and GLACNet following the original paper and
their released source code 4 5 . We didn’t find the code of DenseCap and followed their paper to
implement the final model. The image encoder of DenseCap is replaced with CLIP since the orig-
inal model targets video descriptions and uses video encoders. When implementing TTNet, in the
    4
        https://github.com/dianaglzrico/neural-visual-storyteller
    5
        https://github.com/tkim-snu/GLACNet


                                                   17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                   Table 9: Results of different image encoders.

                             Image Encoder                        Params    Acc    B@4         C      BS
                        InceptionV3 (Szegedy et al., 2016)          23M    77.44   44.88   404.85   61.75


          Pretrained7
          ImageNet
                        ResNet152 (He et al., 2016)                 59M    82.82   50.71   464.01   67.40
                        ViT-L (Dosovitskiy et al., 2022)           304M    85.84   58.26   540.46   73.59
                        Swin-L (Liu et al., 2021)                  196M    86.32   57.36   531.51   73.03
                        BEiT-L (Bao et al., 2022)                  306M    87.48   41.57   370.00   58.80
                        RN50                                        39M    73.30   53.35   491.80   69.79
          Pretrained8
          Image-text


                        RN101                                       57M    75.70   53.78   495.30   70.08
                        ViT-B/32                                    88M    76.10   55.21   510.08   71.27
                        ViT-B/16                                    86M    80.20   57.73   534.92   73.37
                        ViT-L/14                                   304M    83.90   61.22   570.63   76.25



image encoder part, the default CLIP image encoder is ViT-L/14. Image encoders in all models are
pretrained and fixed during training. Further details about the image encoder and the comparison
can be found in Section D.1. Transformer-based context encoder consists of two transformer en-
coder layers. The implementation of the transformer is based on x-transfomer 6 . Simplified relative
positional encoding (Raffel et al., 2020) is applied in all transformer layers. In the transformation
decoder part, we directly borrow CLIP’s tokenizer and their vocabulary list. Each transformation
description is generated separately with a shared two-layer transformer decoder. The idea of adding
transformation representations into word embeddings is inspired by GLACNet (Kim et al., 2019)
and we empirically found this way improves a lot on language influence compared with using the
representation as the start token. Like the context encoder, simplified relative positional encoding
is also used in the transformation decoder. We sample text with top-k top-p filtering with k = 100
and p = 0.9. The dimension of intermediate vectors is uniformed to be 512, including state rep-
resentations, transformation representations, and word embeddings. In the training loss part, the
adjustment factor α for Lcategory is set to be 0.025 and β for Ltopic is 0.1. The optimizer we used
is AdamW (Loshchilov & Hutter, 2022), with the learning rate first warming up to 1e-4 in the first
2000 steps and then gradually decreasing to 0. All models are implemented with PyTorch (Paszke
et al., 2019) and trained on one single Tesla A100 80G GPU card with 50 epochs. The code for
training and inference will be released publicly.


D       M ODEL O PTIMIZATION

In this section, we show more detailed information about the selection of the image encoders and
the hyperparameters of masked transformation model when optimizing our model.

D.1     S ELECTION OF I MAGE E NCODERS

Image encoding quality is the basis for subsequent reasoning and description of the model, and
thus greatly affects the overall performance of the model. From Table 1, we can see that the orig-
inal version of CST and GLACNet, with Inception V3 and ResNet as image encoders accordingly
perform worse than CST* and GLACNet*, indicating the choice of image encoder matters. We
conduct a more detailed analysis of the image encoder by testing 10 state-of-the-art image encoders,
5 were pretrained on ImageNet and 5 are CLIP models pretrained on large-scale image-text data.
In the table, we show their parameter size, ImageNet top-1 accuracy, and performance on the VTT
dataset. We can see that when the parameter sizes are similar, models pre-trained on image and
text data perform better than that pre-trained only on image data, e.g. ViT-L/14 vs. ViT-L. This
is consistent with the existing understanding that CLIP encodes more semantic information. In ad-
dition to training data, factors that affect model performance include model size, patch size used
    6
     https://github.com/lucidrains/x-transformers
    7
     Model weights and top-1 accuracy on ImageNet of ImageNet pretrained models are from: https://
github.com/rwightman/pytorch-image-models
   8
     Pretrained weights of CLIP models are from https://github.com/openai/CLIP and top-1 accu-
racy on ImageNet is from Table 10 of the original paper.


                                                             18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


in vision transformers, and training strategies. For example, CLIP models have more parameters
performs better. While the parameter size between ViT-B/16 and ViT-B/32 are similar, ViT-B/16
encodes finer image has smaller patch size resulting in a better image representation. BEiT-L has
the highest accuracy on ImageNet but performs the worst among all models. Our explanation is that
BEiT has learned enough image pattern information, but there is a defect in the capture of semantic
information.

D.2           H YPERPARAMETERS OF M ASKED T RANSFORMATION M ODEL

There are two hyperparameters in masked transformation model, i.e. the mask ratio and the sample
ratio. The mask ratio is similar with BERT’s mask ratio (Devlin et al., 2019), that is, the percentage
of state representations and difference features that are replaced with zero. We compare the mask
ratio from 0%-30% and find 15% works the best (Table 10), which is in line with BERT’s find-
ing. Another hyperparameter is the sample ratio. The motivation is to tackle the inconsistent issue
between training and inference, that is, no features are masked during inference. To fill this gap,
samples have opportunities to completely bypass the mask strategy during training. The sample ra-
tio is the probability that the sample will accept the mask strategy. From Table 11, 50% probability
is the best, better than the strategy of masking all samples used in BERT.

             Table 10: Ablation on the mask ratio.
                                                          Table 11: Ablation on sample ratio.
              Mask Ratio   B@4         C      BS
                                                          Sample Ratio   B@4          C      BS
                  0%       60.38   562.83   75.72
                  5%       60.93   567.92   76.11             0%         60.38   562.83    75.72
                 10%       61.02   568.71   76.13            25%         60.39   562.15    75.63
                 15%       61.22   570.63   76.25            50%         61.22   570.63    76.25
                 20%       61.07   568.99   76.21            75%         60.96   567.99    76.00
                 25%       61.16   570.18   76.35            100%        60.95   568.18    76.10
                 30%       60.72   565.43   75.94



E            G ENERALIZATION A NALYSIS
There are two levels of generalization that should be considered in visual transformation telling. At
the level of one single transformation, the question is whether machines are able to generalize to
different language compositions, i.e. new action-target combinations that do not exist in the training
set. At the higher level of multiple transformations, the question becomes to be whether machines
can generalize to different transformation combinations, such as different numbers and orders of
transformations on the same topic. In this section, we discuss these two kinds of generalization
problems and see how well our models perform.


        60
Count


        40
        20
         0
                          to
                        put
                         on
                       into
                 remove
                          of
                       add
                        out
                        cut

                       new
                      take
                    cover
                          in
                           a
                         up
                         or
                        old
                   install



                       with
                      pour


                    clean
                     head
                    water
                   paper
                   screw
                    some
                     back
                    apply
                         off
                      wipe
                    place
                    insert
                      from


                         fix
                     open
                      glue


                       hair
                    press
                       wall
                  battery
                     close
                hamster
                       gun
                       pull
                     wash
                       use
                   check
             ingredients
               detergent
                prepare


Figure 9: Top 50 words (exclude the and and) appear multiple times in all 853 unique descriptions.


E.1          L ANGUAGE C OMPOSITION

Language composition Johnson et al. (2017) has been widely discussed in the community of visual
reasoning that it is very useful if machines are able to generalize to unseen language combinations
with seen words. In the VTT dataset, it is common that different transformation descriptions share


                                                     19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


DenseCap:                     GLACNet:                         TTNet:                           Groundtruth:
1. Pour espresso.             1. Pour espresso.                1. Pour alcohol.                 1. Pour coffee into glass.
2. Pour espresso.             2. Pour espresso.                2. Pour espresso.                2. Pour chocolate in glass.
3. Add whipped cream.         3. Add whipped cream.            3. Add whipped cream.            3. Pour cream.


               Figure 10: Models failed to compose unseen transformations with seen words.

Table 12: Statistics of unique transformation combinations. Val Only and Test Only count combina-
tions that do not exist in the train split.

                 Topics                          Train       Val    Val Only           Test   Test Only          All
                 Dish                                 922    154            95          158        103        1118
                 Drink and Snack                      804    141            83          146         88         968
                 Electrical Appliance                 472     99            34          100         41         546
                 Furniture and Decoration             481     83            51           93         45         577
                 Gadgets                              414     82            33           84         40         487
                 Housework                            406     75            48           69         40         494
                 Leisure and Performance              408     85            39           85         39         485
                 Nursing and Care                     316     66            29           66         27         371
                 Pets and Fruit                       208     42            20           45         22         249
                 Science and Craft                    395     82            37           87         42         473
                 Sport                                167     35            18           38         22         207
                 Vehicle                              541    110            56          120         50         643
                 Total                           5534       1054          543          1091        559        6618



the same words, especially verbs, and nouns. We count the top 50 words, excluding the and and,
from all 853 unique transformation descriptions in the VTT dataset and results are shown in Figure 9.
With such a large proportion of shared vocabulary, the natural language generation of the transfor-
mation is more valuable than the classification of the transformation, since models would have more
chances to learn common patterns from transformations with shared words. To investigate whether
models learned on the VTT have the generalization ability of language composition, we test models
on one manually annotated by us, which comes from a related task in CrossTask, i.e. Make Bicerin.
The topic contains transformation descriptions that are not included in our training set but are com-
posed without new words. Figure 10 show the results of three models. Unfortunately, all models
failed to generate these new descriptions from the existing words but with descriptions that match
the states as closely as possible but exist in the list of transformations from the training set. We
believe there are two main reasons. Firstly, the small size of unique transformations limits models to
gain language composition ability from data. Secondly, current models lack effective design for this
generalization ability. Therefore, enlarging the dataset to cover more diverse transformations and
designing models with stronger generalization ability will be important future directions for visual
transformation telling.

E.2      T RANSFORMATION C OMBINATION

The states and transformations under the same topic can be very different, one important reason is
the different combinations of key transformations. For example, add seasoning can be the step after
the water is boiling, or the noodles are poured, or both, depending entirely on the preference of the
person cooking the noodles. This freedom leads to rich transformation combinations even with few
key single transformations under each topic. We count the unique combinations in the VTT dataset


                                                              20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Table 13: Performance on all test samples and subsets of test samples whose transformation combi-
nations are shared and non-shared with the training set.

                              All                               Share                      Non-share
    Model          C     Fl          Re     LS      C           Fl      Re    LS      C      Fl    Re     LS
    CST*        0.85   2.04         3.16   2.96   0.99        1.95   3.22    3.00   0.73   2.17   3.08   2.91
    GLACNet*    5.08   4.75         3.82   3.78   6.21        4.80   3.90    3.91   4.11   4.69   3.70   3.59
    DenseCap*   4.40   4.74         3.67   3.59   5.16        4.72   3.66    3.61   3.75   4.76   3.68   3.57
    TTNetBase   5.15   4.79         4.04   3.95   6.02        4.80   4.08    4.00   4.40   4.77   3.99   3.88
    TTNet       5.71   4.78         4.10   4.11   7.01        4.81   4.23    4.29   4.59   4.74   3.93   3.86


as shown in Table 12. From the table, we can see that more than half combinations in the test set
do not exist in the training set (559 test only v.s. 1091 total), which means models need a strong
generalization ability to predict these unseen transformation combinations well.
To investigate how models perform on these non-share combinations, we separately computed the
performance of each model on three subsets of test samples, including all test samples, test samples
that have shared combinations with the training set, and test samples that have combinations not
included in the training set. From Table 13, we can see that models perform much worse on non-
share combinations than shared combinations, e.g. the logical soundness of TTNet is decreased from
4.29 to 3.86. This significant performance degradation suggests that the combination generalization
is challenging for existing models. Furthermore, TTNet performs indeed much better on shared
combinations than TTNetBase (logical soundness is 4.29 v.s. 4.00), but the situation is not true for
non-shared combinations (logical soundness is 3.86 v.s. 3.88), which means the proposed three
strategies contribute on learning existing combinations on the training set but has little or even
negative effects on model’s combination generalization ability.

F     M ORE Q UALITATIVE R ESULTS .
We show more results in Figure 11 and Figure 12. Figure 12 shows several hard cases that TTNet
fails to reason and describe. We point out three potential directions to improve the TTNet. The first
one relates the image recognition ability. From the first case, TTNet recognizes the tent as platfond
which is wrong. This error might respond to the image encoder that fails to distinguish these objects.
Therefore, it may lead to a better result by using a more powerful image encoder. The major point
here is that the model needs to identify subtle differences between states and determine specific
transformations based on context. The last case is out-of-domain cases, that is, the test samples are
quite different from the training data.


                                                         21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


DenseCap:                            GLACNet:                               TTNet:                                  Groundtruth:
1. Draw black patterns.              1. Fold or bent the paper.             1. Draw pictures on the materials.      1. Draw pictures on the materials.
2. Cut the raw materials.            2. Fold or bent the paper.             2. Fold or bent the paper.              2. Fold or bent the paper.
3. Cut the packing paper.            3. Fold or bent the paper.             3. Cut the raw materials.               3. Cut the raw materials.
4. Cut the raw materials.            4. Nail down or stick together.        4. Nail down or stick together.         4. Nail down or stick together.
5. Nail down or stick together.      5. Nail down or stick together.        5. Nail down or stick together.         5. Nail down or stick together.


                                     GLACNet:
DenseCap:                            1. Screw off the valve cap and open the TTNet:                                  Groundtruth:
1. Remove the air nozzle.            valve.                                  1. Screw off the valve cap and open the 1. Screw off the valve cap and open the
2. Remove the air nozzle.            2. Pump up to the tire.                 valve.                                  valve.
3. Pump up to the tire.              3. Pump up to the tire.                 2. Install the air nozzle.              2. Install the air nozzle.
4. Pump up to the tire.              4. Tighten the valve and screw on the   3. Pump   up  to the  tire.             3. Pump up to the tire.
                                     valve cap.                              4. Remove    the  air nozzle.           4. Remove the air nozzle.


DenseCap:                            GLACNet:                               TTNet:                                  Groundtruth:
1. Do the first two jumps.           1. Begin to run up.                    1. Begin to run up.                     1. Begin to run up.
2. Do the first two jumps.           2. Do the third jump.                  2. Do the first two jumps.              2. Do the first two jumps.
3. Do the third jump.                3. Do the third jump.                  3. Do the third jump.                   3. Do the third jump.


DenseCap:                            GLACNet:                               TTNet:                                  Groundtruth:
1. Dig a pit with proper size.       1. Dig a pit with proper size.         1. Dig a pit with proper size.          1. Dig a pit with proper size.
2. Fill the tree into the pit.       2. Fill the tree into the pit.         2. Fill the tree into the pit.          2. Fill the tree into the pit.
3. Fill the tree into the pit.       3. Fill the tree into the pit.         3. Fill the pit with some soil.         3. Fill the pit with some soil.
4. Fill the tree into the pit.       4. Fill the pit with some soil.        4. Pour water to the tree.              4. Pour water to the tree.
5. Fill the tree into the pit.       5. Fill the pit with some soil.        5. Fill the pit with some soil.         5. Fill the tree into the pit.
6. Fill the pit with some soil.      6. Pour water to the tree.             6. Pour water to the tree.              6. Pour water to the tree.


                                  Figure 11: More qualitative results in the VTT test data.


                                                                           22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


DenseCap:                      GLACNet:                       TTNet:                              Groundtruth:
1. Set up the brackets.        1. Lay the cushion evenly.     1. Lay the cushion evenly.          1. Lay the cushion evenly.
2. Set up the platfond.        2. Set up the platfond.        2. Set up the platfond.             2. Set up the brackets.
3. Fix the ground nail.        3. Set up the platfond.        3. Fix the ground nail.             3. Fix the ground nail.


DenseCap:                      GLACNet:                       TTNet:                              Groundtruth:
1. Rise to the sky.            1. Rise to the sky.            1. Ski down from the hill.          1. Ski down from the hill.
2. Rise to the sky.            2. Rise to the sky.            2. Ski down from the hill.          2. Ski up from the hill.
3. Rise to the sky.            3. Rise to the sky.            3. Rise to the sky.                 3. Rise to the sky.
4. Rise to the sky.            4. Rise to the sky.            4. Ski down from the hill.          4. Ski down from the hill.
5. Rise to the sky.            5. Rise to the sky.            5. Ski down from the hill.          5. Ski up from the hill.
6. Rise to the sky.            6. Rise to the sky.            6. Rise to the sky.                 6. Rise to the sky.
7. Rise to the sky.            7. Rise to the sky.            7. Ski down from the hill.          7. Fall to the ground.
8. Rise to the sky.            8. Rise to the sky.            8. Ski down from the hill.          8. Ski up from the hill.
9. Rise to the sky.            9. Rise to the sky.            9. Rise to the sky.                 9. Rise to the sky.


DenseCap:                      GLACNet:                       TTNet:                              Groundtruth:
1. Wipe the glue to a layer.   1. Wipe up the face.           1. Disinfect the injecting place.   1. Add some water to the vessel.
2. Wipe the glue to a layer.   2. Wipe the glue to a layer.   2. Disinfect the injecting place.   2. Grind roundly and evenly.
3. Wipe nose.                  3. Wipe up the face.           3. Pull out the needle and press.   3. Grind roundly and evenly.


                                      Figure 12: Bad cases on the VTT dataset.


                                                              23
