Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


B ERT N ET: H ARVESTING K NOWLEDGE G RAPHS FROM
P RETRAINED L ANGUAGE M ODELS
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT
         Symbolic knowledge graphs (KGs) have been constructed either by expensive
         human crowdsourcing or with complex text mining pipelines. The emerging large
         pretrained language models (LMs), such as B ERT, have shown to implicitly encode
         massive knowledge which can be queried with properly designed prompts. How-
         ever, compared to the explicit KGs, the implict knowledge in the black-box LMs
         is often difficult to access or edit and lacks explainability. In this work, we aim at
         harvesting symbolic KGs from the LMs, and propose a new framework for auto-
         matic KG construction empowered by the neural LMs’ flexibility and scalability.
         Compared to prior works that often rely on large human annotated data or existing
         massive KGs, our approach requires only the minimal definition of relations as
         inputs, and hence is suitable for extracting knowledge of rich new relations that
         are instantly assigned and not available before. The framework automatically
         generates diverse prompts, and performs efficient knowledge search within a given
         LM for consistent outputs. The knowledge harvested with our approach shows
         competitive quality, diversity, and novelty. As a result, we derive from diverse LMs
         a family of new KGs (e.g., B ERT N ET and RO BERTA N ET) that contain a richer
         set of relations, including some complex ones (e.g., "A is capable of but
         not good at B") that cannot be extracted with previous methods. Besides,
         the resulting KGs also serve as a vehicle to interpret the respective source LMs,
         leading to new insights into the varying knowledge capability of different LMs.


1   I NTRODUCTION
Symbolic knowledge graphs (KGs) encode rich knowledge about entities and their relationships,
and have been one of the major means for organizing commonsense or domain-specific information
to empower various applications, including search engines (Xiong et al., 2017; Google, 2012),
recommendation systems (Wang et al., 2019a; 2018; 2019b), chatbots (Moon et al., 2019; Liu et al.,
2019b), healthcare (Li et al., 2019; Mohamed et al., 2020; Lin et al., 2020), etc. The common practice
for constructing a KG is crowdsourcing (such as ConceptNet (Speer et al., 2017), WordNet (Fellbaum,
2000), and ATOMIC (Sap et al., 2019)) , which is accurate but often has limited coverage due to the
extreme cost of manual annotation (e.g., ConceptNet covers only 34 types of commonsense relations).
Prior work has also built text mining pipelines to automatically extract knowledge from unstructured
text, including domain-specific knowledge (Wang et al., 2021b) and commonsense knowledge (Zhang
et al., 2020; Romero et al., 2019; Nguyen et al., 2021). Those systems, however, often involve a
complex set of components (e.g., entity recognition, coreference resolution, relation extraction, etc.),
and applicable only to a subset of all the knowledge, which is explicitly stated in the text.
On the other hand, the emerging large language models (LMs) pretrained on massive text corpora,
such as B ERT (Devlin et al., 2019), RO B ERTA (Liu et al., 2019a), and GPT-3 (Brown et al., 2020),
have been shown to encode a large amount of knowledge implicitly in their parameters. This has
inspired the interest in using the LMs as knowledge bases. For example, recent work has focused
on manually or automatically crafted prompts (e.g., "Obama was born in                ") to query the
LMs for answers (e.g., "Hawaii") (Petroni et al., 2019; Jiang et al., 2020; Shin et al., 2020; Zhong
et al., 2021) . Such probing also serves as a way to interpret the black-box LMs (Swamy et al., 2021),
and inspires further fine-tuning to improve knowledge quality (?Newman et al., 2021; Fichtel et al.,
2021). However, the black-box LMs, where knowledge is only implicitly encoded, fall short of the
many nice properties of explicit KGs (AlKhamissi et al., 2022), such as the easiness of browsing


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


             Method             Knowledge source               Outcome       Arbitrary relation
             Text mining        text corpus                    KG                    ✗
             Factual probing    LMs                            tail entity          ✓
             COMET              LMs + Existing Knowledge       tail entity          ✗
             Symbolic KD        GPT-3 (+ existing KGs)         KG                   ✓∗
             BertNet (Ours)     LMs                            KG                    ✓

Table 1: Categorization of works on automated knowledge graph construction. Compared with others, our
framework is more flexible as it relies on LMs as knowledge source, generates a full KG, applies to arbitrary
relations. The details are presented in Section 2.


the knowledge or even making updates (Zhu et al., 2020; Cao et al., 2021) and the explainability
for trustworthy use by domain experts. Can we automatically harvest KGs from the LMs, and hence
combine the best of both worlds, namely the flexibility and scalability from the neural LMs, and the
access, editability, and explainability in the symbolic form?
This paper makes a step towards this end—given a pretrained LM (e.g., B ERT, RO B ERTA), our
automatic framework extracts a KG from it in an efficient and scalable way—this results in a family
of new KGs (referred to as, e.g., B ERT N ET, RO B ERTA N ET) that permit a new extendable set of
knowledge beyond the existing hand-annotated KGs such as ConceptNet. As Table 1 suggests,
our framework is more flexible compared with previous works to construct knowledge graphs
automatically.
The new goal of extracting KGs purely from any LMs poses unique challenges. First, it is difficult
to extract knowledge reliably from LMs, as the LMs have shown to generate inconsistent outputs
given prompts of slightly different wording (e.g., "           originally aired in                 " vs
"       premiered on              ") (Elazar et al., 2021; Newman et al., 2021). Automatically learning
the optimal prompts (Lester et al., 2021; Zhong et al., 2021; Qin & Eisner, 2021) typically requires
many existing entity pairs as training data, which is often not available especially for new relations
that are instantly assigned. While West et al. (2021) extracted commonsense knowledge of high
quality from GPT-3, this method doesn’t apply to other LMs, since it relies on the extreme few-shot
learning ability and the large capacity of GPT-3 model. To this end, we apply an unsupervised method
that automatically paraphrases an initial prompt and create a diverse set of alternative prompts with
varying confidence weights. We then search for entity pairs that consistently satisfy the diverse
prompts. The second challenge lies in the search phase due to the large space of entity (one or
multiple tokens) tuples. We devise an efficient search-and-rescoring strategy that strikes the balance
between knowledge accuracy and coverage.
The minimal dependence on other sources besides the powerful LM itself allows maximal flexibility
of our framework to extract novel knowledge, such as those about complex relations like “A is
capable of, but not good at, B” that expresses sophisticated meaning and “A can
do B at C” that involves multiple entities. Besides, the resulting KGs can readily serve as a
symbolic interpretation of the respective black-box LMs, for users to browse and understand their
knowledge storage and capability.
We apply the framework to harvest KGs from a wide range of popular LMs, including RO B ERTA,
B ERT, and D ISTIL B ERT, of varying model sizes, respectively. The experiments show our approach
can harvest large-scale KGs of diverse concepts, and performs well on user-defined complex relations.
Compared with other KGs trained with existing knowledge bases or human annotations, the outcome
KGs of our framework, with solely a LM as the knowledge source, shows competitive quality,
diversity and novelty. The further analysis illustrates the better balance of knowledge accuracy and
coverage than baselines. Comparison between the resulting KGs from different LMs offers new
insights into their knowledge capacities due to different factors, such as model sizes, pretraining
strategies, and distillation.


                                                     2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


2    R ELATED W ORK
Knowledge graph construction Popular knowledge bases or KGs are usually constructed with
heavy human labor. For example, WordNet (Fellbaum, 2000) is a lexical database that links words
into semantic relations; ConceptNet (Speer et al., 2017) is a large commonsense knowledge graph
in the conventional KG format that consists of (head entity, relation, tail entity) triples; ATOMIC
(Sap et al., 2019) is a social commonsense KG by crowdsourcing consisting of if-then statements.
Automatic Knowledge Graph Construction has been focused by academics. We summarize different
categories of works in Table 1. Text mining based works aim to extract knowledge from text. A
typical information extraction system (Angeli et al., 2015) decomposes the task to a set of sub-tasks,
such as co-reference resolution, named entity recognition, and relationship extraction. There are also
works on commonsense knowledge extraction, like WebChild (Tandon et al., 2014), TransOMCS
(Zhang et al., 2020), DISCOS (Fang et al., 2021b), Quasimod o(Romero et al., 2019), ASCENT
(Nguyen et al., 2021). These extraction pipelines are based on linguistic pattern, and involve complex
engineering such as corpus selection, term aggregation, filtering and so on. Recently there are
attempts to make use of language models. Wang et al. (2021a) finetuned LMs to predict missed links
in KGs. COMET (Bosselut et al., 2019) is a finetuned generative LM trained to generate tail entities
given head entities and relations. Symbolic knowledge distillation (KD) (West et al., 2021) distil
the knowledge in GPT-3 to a generative LM. As a intermediate product, they got ATOMIC10x by
prompting GPT-3 (Brown et al., 2020) with examples. However, this method only applies to GPT-3
for the need of strong few-shot learning ability. Factual probing (Petroni et al., 2019; AlKhamissi
et al., 2022; Razniewski et al., 2021) measures the amount of knowledge in LMs by the accuracy
when filling a blank in a prompt, which is human-written, from text mining, or learned with a large
amount of existing knowledge. We summarize their difference to our work in the caption of Table 1
To the best of our knowledge , our framework is the first to construct a knowledge graph via extracting
knowledge purely from LMs (with minimal definition of relations as input).

LMs as knowledge bases It is easy to query knowledge in knowledge bases, while the implicit
knowledge in LMs are difficult to access. The retrieval of knowledge in LMs often requires finetuning
(Da et al., 2021; Wallat et al., 2020) or prompt tuning (Qin & Eisner, 2021; Jiang et al., 2020;
Adolphs et al., 2021; Davison et al., 2019; Petroni et al., 2019) with existing knowledge, limiting
their methods to query new relations without existing tuples. Together with the success of pretrained
LMs , recent work has developed various ways to understand their internal mechanisms, such as
analyzing the internal states of LMs, and extracting structured linguistic patterns (Tenney et al., 2019;
Hewitt & Manning, 2019). Factual probing aims to quantify the factual knowledge in pretrained
language models, which is usually implemented by prompting methods and leveraging the masked
language model pretraining task. Specifically, the amount of factual knowledge is estimated by a
set of human-written cloze-style prompts, e.g., "Dante was born in                     ". The accuracy
of the model prediction on the blank represents a lower bound of the amount of knowledge in the
model. LAMA (Petroni et al., 2019) collects a set of human-written prompts to detect the amount of
factual information that a masked language model encodes. LPAQA (Jiang et al., 2020) proposes
to use text mining and paraphrasing to find and select prompts to optimize the prediction of a
single or a few correct tail entities, instead of extensively predicting all the valid entity pairs like
in our framework. AutoPrompt (Shin et al., 2020) and OPTIPrompt (Zhong et al., 2021) search
prompts automatically. Though making prompts unreadable, they achieve higher accuracy on the
knowledge probing tasks. Instead of measuring knowledge inside an LM as an accuracy number, our
framework explicitly harvests a KG from the LM. Consistency is a significant challenge in knowledge
probing and extraction, which refers to a model that should not have predictions contradicting each
other. Basically, models should behave invariantly under inputs with different surface forms but
the same meaning, e.g., paraphrased sentences or prompts. Several benchmarks are proposed to
study consistency in LMs (Elazar et al., 2021; Hase et al., 2021). Elazar et al. (2021) analyzes the
consistency of pretrained language models with respect to the factual knowledge. They show that
the consistency of all LMs is poor in their experiment. In our framework, the extracted entity pairs
for each relation would consistently satisfy a diverse set of prompts. Unlike traditional KGs, it is
also non-trivial to edit knowledge in LMs, though there is some preliminary research on editing facts
in LMs (Zhu et al., 2020; Cao et al., 2021), via forcing the model to change predictions on some
data points while keeping the same for other data points. There is also another line of works that
utilize LMs to score entity pairs (Feldman et al., 2019; Bouraoui et al., 2020; Fang et al., 2021b;a)
. However, these works only use LMs to filter candidate knowledge tuples that are collected either


                                                   3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                                                                                     BertNet!
                                       Input                                                          potential_risk
    (eating candy, tooth decay)                                                             0.85       1. (smoking, cancer)
                                               The potential risk of A
    (playing game, fail the exam)                                                           0.43       2. (fishing, fish bite)
                                               is B.
    ...                                                                                     0.11       3. (speeding, crash)
                                                                                                               ...
         Seed entity pairs                         Initial prompt                                  Ranked Entity Pairs

                                                                                       Re-scoring w/ LM
                                                   Initialize
                                                                                                             Hair can potentially
    The potential risk of eating    Sample                                                                   cause infection.
    candy is tooth decay.
                                               P1: The potential risk of         (hair, infection)           The potential risk of
                                               A is B.                           (alcohol, suicide)          alcohol is suicide.
                 Paraphrase                                                      (food, obesity)
                                                                                                             Food may lead to
    Candy can potentially                      P2: A may lead to B.              ...                         obesity
    cause tooth decay.                                                         Candidate Entity Pairs
                                               P3: If you A, you may be                                      …
                                               at risk for B.
                  Extract
                                               …
                                    Add                                        Prompt                        Search w/ LM
        A can potentially                                                      weighting      P1 P2 P3 P4 …
        cause B.                                     Prompt Set                            Weighted Prompt Set

                            Prompt Creation                                                  Entity Pair Search

Figure 1: An overview of the knowledge harvesting framework. Given the minimal definition of the relation
as input (an initial prompt and a few shot of seed entity pairs), the approach first automatically creates a set of
prompts expressing the relation in a diverse ways (§3.1). The prompts are weighted with confidence scores. We
then use the LM to search a large collection of candidate entity pairs, followed by re-scoring/ranking that yields
the top entity pairs as the output knowledge (§3.2).

from the Internet or existing KGs, but they don’t direclty extract knowledge inside the LMs as our
framework.

3       H ARVESTING KG S FROM LM S

This section presents the proposed framework for extracting a relational KG from a given pretrained
LM, where the LM can be arbitrary fill-in-the-blank models such as B ERT (Devlin et al., 2019),
RO B ERTA (Liu et al., 2019a), BART (Lewis et al., 2020), or GPT-3 (with appropriate instructions)
(Brown et al., 2020). The KG consists of a set of knowledge tuples in the form <head entity
(h), relation (r), tail entity (t)>. Specifically, we automatically harvest from the
LM all appropriate entity pairs (h, t) for any given relation r. This presents a substantially more
challenging problem than the popular LM probing tasks (Petroni et al., 2019; Jiang et al., 2020; Shin
et al., 2020; Zhong et al., 2021) which predict a particular tail entity given both the head entity and
relation. In contrast, given only the relation, we need to search for hundreds or thousands of head/tail
entity pairs both accurately and extensively in an efficient manner.
To extract knowledge tuples of a particular relation (e.g., "potential_risk" as illustrated in
Figure 1), our approach requires only minimal input information that defines the relation of interest,
namely an initial prompt (e.g., The potential risk of A is B) together with a few shot
of seed entity pairs (e.g., <eating candy, tooth decay>). The prompt offers the overall
semantics of the relation, while the seed entity pairs serve to eliminate any possible ambiguities. For
new relations not included in existing KGs, it is impractical to require a large set (e.g., hundreds) of
seed entity pairs as in previous knowledge probing or prompt optimization methods (Petroni et al.,
2019; Jiang et al., 2020; Shi et al., 2019; Zhong et al., 2021). Instead, our approach needs only a very
small set, such as 5 example pairs in our experiments, which can easily be collected or written by
users.
A key challenge of directly feeding the initial prompt and asking the LM to generate head/tail
entities is that the outputs are often inconsistent: for example, slightly changing the wording of
the prompt (while keeping the same semantic) can easily lead to different irrelevant LM outputs
(Elazar et al., 2021; Hase et al., 2021). The inconsistency renders the extracted knowledge unreliable
and often inaccurate (as also shown in our experiments). Inspired by and generalizing the prior
knowledge probing work (Petroni et al., 2019; Jiang et al., 2020; Shin et al., 2020; Zhong et al.,
2021), we overcome the challenge by automatically creating diverse weighted prompts describing
the same relation of interest, and searching for those entity pairs that are consistently favored by the


                                                                           4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


multiple prompts under the LM. Interestingly, we found that those automatically created prompts,
though stemming from the initial prompt (often written by a human), are often better alternatives
than the initial prompt itself for drawing more accurate knowledge from the LMs, as studied in our
experiments.
In the following sections, we describe the core components of our approach, namely the automatic
creation of diverse prompts with confidence weights (§3.1) and the efficient search to discover
consistent entity pairs (§3.2) that compose the desired KGs. Figure 1 illustrate the overall framework.

3.1   AUTOMATIC C REATION OF D IVERSE W EIGHTED P ROMPTS

Given the input information of a relation, namely the initial prompt and a few shots of seed entity
pairs, we automatically paraphrase the initial prompt to a large set of prompts that are linguistically
diverse but semantically describe the same relation. Each of the prompts is further associated with a
confidence weight for an accurate measure of knowledge consistency in the next section.
Specifically, starting with the initial prompt, we randomly sample an entity pair from the seed set and
insert it into the prompt to form a complete sentence. We then use an off-the-shelf text paraphrase
model (see §4.1 for more details) to produce multiple paraphrased sentences of the same meaning.
By removing the entity names, each paraphrased sentence results in a new prompt that describes
the desired relation. To ensure diverse expressions of the relation, we keep those prompts that are
sufficiently different from each other in terms of edit distance. We repeat this process by continuing
the paraphrasing of the newly created prompts, until we collect at least 10 prompts for the relation.
The automatic creation of prompts is inevitably noisy. Some of the resulting prompts are less precise
in expressing the exact meaning of the desired relation. we define a reweighting score for each prompt
to calibrate its effect in the next knowledge search step. Specifically, we measure the compatibility
of the new prompts with the seed entity pairs, and derive the prompt weights with the compatibility
scores. Intuitively, given an entity pair ⟨h, t⟩, a compatible prompt p should induce a high likelihood
under the LM for each single entity plugged into the prompt. That is, the minimum likelihood of
h and t should be high. Besides, we also expect a high joint likelihood of h and t. Formally, the
compatibility score is written as:
       fLM (⟨h, t⟩, p) = α log PLM (h, t|p) + (1 − α) min {log PLM (h|p), log PLM (t|p, h)}           (1)
where the first term is the joint log-likelihood under the LM distribution PLM , the second term is
the minimum individual log-likelihood given the prompt (and the other entity), and α is a balancing
factor for which we set α = 2/3 in our experiments.
We compute the average compatibility score of each created prompt over all seed entity pairs. The
weight of the prompt is then defined as the softmax-normalized score across all prompts.

3.2   E FFICIENT S EARCH FOR C ONSISTENT K NOWLEDGE T UPLES

Given the above set of prompts with confidence weights, we next harvest entity pairs that consis-
tently satisfy all the prompts. Each entity consists of one or more tokens. We reuse the above
prompt/entity-pair compatibility function (Eq.1) and intuitively define the consistency of a new entity
pair ⟨hnew , tnew ⟩ as the weighted average of its compatibility with the different prompts:
                                                   X
                     consistency(⟨hnew , tnew ⟩) =     wp · fLM (⟨hnew , tnew ⟩, p)                 (2)
                                                       p

where wp is the prompt weight and the sum is over all automatically created prompts as above.
Therefore, an entity pair that is compatible with all prompts are considered to be consistent.
Based on the consistency criterion, we devise an efficient search strategy for consistent entity pairs. A
straightforward approach is to simply enumerate all possible pairs of entities, measure the respective
consistency scores as above, and pick the top-K entity pairs with highest scores as the resulting
knowledge for the KG. The approach can be prohibitively slow given the large vocabulary size V and
the high time complexity of the enumeration (e.g., O(V 2 ) assuming each entity consists of only one
token).
To this end, we an appropriate approximation that leads to a more efficient search and re-scoring
method. More concretely, we first use the minimum individual log-likelihoods (namely, the second


                                                   5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


term in the compatibility score Eq.1), weighted averaged across different prompts (similar as in Eq.2),
to propose a large set of candidate entity pairs. The use of the minimum individual log-likelihoods
allows us to apply a pruning strategy, as described more in the appendix. Once we collect a large
number of proposals, we re-rank them with the full consistency score in Eq.2 and pick the top-K
instances as the output knowledge.
We describe more nuanced handling in the search procedure (e.g., the processing of multi-token
entities) in the appendix.

Generalization to complex relations Most existing KGs or knowledge bases include relations that
are predicates connecting two entities, e.g., "A is capable of B". Yet, many relations in the
real life can be more complex. Our approach is flexible and easily extensible to extract knowledge
about those complex relations. We demonstrate in our experiments with two cases: (1) highly
customized relations that have specific and sophisticated meaning, such as "A is capable of,
but not good at, B". Such sophisticated knowledge is often hard for human to manually
write down massively. Our automatic approach naturally supports harvesting such knowledge given
only an initial prompt and few seed entities; (2) n-ary relations involving more than 2 entities,
such as "A can do B at C". Our approach can straightforwardly be extended to deal with
n-ary relations by generalizing the above compatibility score and search strategy accordingly to
accommodate more than two entities.

Symbolic interpretation of neural LMs The harvested knowledge tuples, as consistently recog-
nized by the LM cross varying prompts, can be seen as the underlying “beliefs” (Stich, 1979; Hase
et al., 2021) of the LM about the world. The interpretable symbolic tuples allow us to easily browse
those beliefs, analyze the knowledge capability of the black-box LM, and make intrinsic comparisons
between different LMs to understand the effect of diverse configurations, such as model sizes and
pretraining strategies, as we showcased in the experiments.


4     E XPERIMENTS

We validate the effectiveness of the proposed knowledge harvesting framework with extensive
experiments. We conduct human evaluation of our outcome KGs, and illustrate the effectiveness
of the automatically created prompts in our framework. Besides, using our framework as a tool to
interpret the LM knowledge storage, we make interesting observations about several knowledge-
related questions on the black-box LMs.
We will release the whole family of extracted KGs, as well as the code implementation of our
framework (included in the supplementary materials), upon acceptance.

4.1   S ETUP

Relations We extract knowledge about a large diverse set of relations. We collect relations from
two existing knowledge repositories, and also test on a set of new relations not included in existing
KGs. Specifically, our relations include (1) ConceptNet (Speer et al., 2017) is one of the most
popular commonsense KGs and is widely used for evaluating knowledge extraction. Following Li
et al. (2016), we filter the KG and subsample a set of 20 common relations (e.g. has_subevent,
motivated_by_goal). The initial prompts for the relations are from the ConceptNet repository,
and we randomly sample seed entity pairs from the ConceptNet KG for each relation. (2) LAMA
(Petroni et al., 2019) is a popular benchmark for factual probing, containing knowledge tuples from
multiple sources. Following the recent work (Jiang et al., 2020; Shin et al., 2020; Zhong et al., 2021),
we use the T-REx split 41 Wikipedia relations, such as capital_of, member_of). For each
relation, the human-written prompt provided in Petroni et al. (2019) is used as the initial prompt and
we randomly sample seed entity pairs for each relation. (3) New Relations: To test the flexibility of
our framework for harvesting novel knowledge, we write 14 new relations of interests that can hardly
be found in any existing KGs, and manually write initial prompts and seed entity pairs for them. The
resulting relations include complex relations as described in §3.2. More details, e.g., initial prompts,
and seed entities of relations, can be found in the appendix.


                                                   6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


      Head entity            Relation               Tail entity         Head entity                Relation                   Tail entity

        humidity             prevent          excessive temprature         viruses               potential risk            virus transmission
          care               prevent                  harm            prolonged sleep            potential risk             sleep disorders
      local council          can help                village           serious offence           potential risk               conviction
        therapist            can help                 client             electricity             ingredient for              electric lamp
          lake               place for            picnic tables             rice                 ingredient for                  soup
        studios              place for             live shows               milk                 ingredient for                 butter
       apple tree        can but not good             wood              locomotive           can but not good                speed trains
 Relation: A can do B at C       (people, communicate, web)           Relation: A needs B to C     (singers, vocal accompaniment, dance)
 Relation: A can do B at C     (adult couples, marry, marriage)       Relation: A needs B to C         (human lives, survival, flourish)
 Relation: A can do B at C      (skier, ski downhill, mountain)       Relation: A needs B to C      (actors, dialogue, portray characters)


          Figure 2: Examples of knowledge tuples harvested from D ISTILL B ERT (Randomly sampled).
Hyperparameters We use 5 seed entity pairs for each relation. To automatically collect prompts
(§3.1), we use GPT-3 with the instruction "paraphrase:{sentence}" as the off-the-shelf
paraphraser. In the entity pair searching (§3.2), we restrict every entity to appear no more than 10
times to improve the diversity of generated knowledge and search out at most 50,000 entity tuples for
each relation. We finally use various scoring thresholds to get the outcome KGs in different scales,
including (1) 50%: taking a half of all searched-out entities with higher consistency (Eq. 2). (2)
base-k: Naturally there are different numbers of valid tuples for different relations (e.g. tuples of
C APITAL O F should not exceed 200 as that is the number of all the countries in the world). We design
a relation-specific thresholding method, that is to set 10% of the k-nd consistency as the threshold
(i.e., 0.1 ∗ consistencyk ), and retain all tuples with consistency above the threshold. We name the
settings base-10 and base-100 when k is 10 and 100, respectively.

4.2     E VALUATION

4.2.1      E VALUATING OUTCOME KG S
We apply our framework
                                         Method                            Tuple             Diversity            Novelty%           Acc%
to extract knowledge graph
of ConceptNet (CN) re-                   WebChild                          4,649,471         -                       -               82.0∗
lations and New relations                ASCENT                            8,600,000         -                       -               79.2∗
from language models, and                TransOMCS                         18,481,607        100,659                98.3             56.0∗
then conduct human eval-                 COMETCN
                                              base-10                      6,741             4,342                  35.5                92.0
uation on the accuracy of                COMETCN                           230,028           55,350                 72.4                66.6
                                              50%
the extracted knowledge
with Amazon MTurk. The                   ROBERTA N ETCN
                                                     base-10               6,741             6,107                  64.4                88.0
correctness of each ex-                  ROBERTA N ETCN
                                                     base-100              24,375            12,762                 68.8                81.6
tracted knowledge tuple is               ROBERTA N ETCN
                                                     50%                   230,028           80,525                 87.0                55.0
labeled by 3 annotators with
True/False/Unjudgeable. A                ROBERTA N ETN ew
                                                     base-10               2,180             3,137                     -                81.8
                                                     N ew
tuple would be "accepted"                ROBERTA N ETbase-100              7,329             6,559                     -                68.6
(acc) if at least 2 annota-              ROBERTA N ETN ew
                                                     50%                   23,666            16,089                    -                58.6
tors think it is true knowl-
                             Table 2: Statistics of KGs constructed with different methods. Diversity refers
edge, and "rejected" (rej) if
                             to the number of unique entities in a KG, and Novelty refers to the proportion of
at least 2 annotators rate itentities that don’t appear in ConceptNet. The acceptance rate with ∗ are from
as false. We provide more    the original papers and subject to different evaluation protocol. Given COMET
details of human evaluation  can only predict the tail entity given a source entity and a relation, we generate
in the appendix.             KGs with COMET by feeding it the head entity and relation of our RobertaNet.
                             The first two blocks of this table corresponds to the first two blocks in Table 1,
The statistics of the gener- which includes three popular text mining methods: WebChild (Tandon et al.,
ated KGs from our frame- 2014), ASCENT (Nguyen et al., 2021), and TransOMCS (Zhang et al., 2020).
work (ROBERTA N ET) and
other knowledge extraction methods are mentioned in Table 2, and the samples of the extracted KG
from D ISTILL BERT can be found in Figure 2. The acceptance rate, indicating the precision of
KGs, in Table 2 are not comparable to each other, and only serves for a rough sense. From those
statistics, we can see that with solely the LM as the knowledge source, and without any training data,


                                                                  7
  Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                                                                       AutoPrompt
            0.9                         AutoPrompt                                          0.8                        LPAQA
                                        COMET                                                                          Human-written Prompt
                                        Human-written Prompt                                                           Top-1 Prompt (ours)
                                        Top-1 Prompt (ours)                                                            Multiple Prompts (ours)
            0.8                         Multiple Prompts (ours)                             0.7


                                                                                Precision
Precision



            0.7
                                                                                            0.6
            0.6
                                                                                            0.5
            0.5                                                                                   0.0    0.2   0.4     0.6      0.8       1.0
                  0.0     0.2   0.4     0.6      0.8       1.0                                                    Recall
                                   Recall
                                                                                  Figure 4: Precision-recall curve on LAMA rela-
  Figure 3: Precision-recall on ConceptNet relations.
                                                                                  tions.


                                  Methods          Acc            Rej                                   Source LMs     Acc         Rej
                            AUTOPROMPT            0.33            0.47                            D ISTIL B ERT        0.67       0.24
                         H UMAN P ROMPT           0.60            0.27                             B ERT- BASE         0.63       0.26
                   T OP -1 P ROMPT (Ours)         0.69            0.23                           B ERT- LARGE          0.70       0.22
                  M ULTI P ROMPTS (Ours)          0.73            0.20                        RO BERTA - BASE          0.70       0.22
                                                                                             RO BERTA - LARGE          0.73       0.20
  Table 3: The portions of accepted and rejected tu-                         Table 4: The portions of accepted and rejected tuples
  ples in human evaluation across settings, with the                         in human evaluation across different LMs, using the
  RO BERTA - LARGE as the LM.                                                M ULTI -P ROMPTS approach.

  our framework extracts KGs with competitive accuracy. Compared to COMET, our precision is a
  little lower, which is expected due to the big compromise we make in the setting, and our searching
  constraints ensure better diversity and novelty of RO BERTA N ET over COMET.

  4.2.2                 E VALUATING AUTOMATIC PROMPT CREATION
  To evaluate the effect of our automatic creation of prompts, we compare the generated KGs under
  these settings of prompts on the human-written new relations: (1) Multi-Prompts refers to the the
  full framework described in §3 which use the automatically created diverse prompts in knowledge
  search. (2) Top-1 Prompt: To ablate the effect of ensembling multiple prompts, we evaluate the
  variant that uses only the prompt with largest weight (§3.1) for knowledge extraction. (3) Human
  Prompt: To further understand the effectiveness of the automatically created prompts, we assess the
  variant that uses the initial prompt (typically written by human) of each relation. (4) AutoPrompt
  (Shin et al., 2020), which was proposed to learn prompts by optimizing the likelihood of tail entity
  prediction on the training set. To fit in our setting, we adapt it to optimize the compatibility score
  (Eq.1) on the seed entity pairs. We omit other prompt tuning work (e.g., Zhong et al., 2021; Qin &
  Eisner, 2021) because they either are difficult to fit in our problem or require more training data and
  fail with only the few shot of seed entity pairs in our setting.
  The human-annotated accuracy is shown in Table 3. Our T OP -1 P ROMPT significantly improves
  the accuracy up to 9% over the H UMAN P ROMPT, indicating our prompt searching algorithm can
  produce high quality prompts. M ULTI -P ROMPTS further improves the accuracy by around 4%, which
  means the combination of diverse prompts better capture the semantics of a relation. The method
  using the optimized prompt by AUTO P ROMPT gives a lower accuracy than the one with the human or
  searched prompt, because the small set of seed knowledge tuples are insufficient for learning effective
  prompts for the desired relations.
  Based on the results above, we move a step forward to see how the created prompts influence the
  subsequent module in the framework. Specifically, we evaluate if the automatically created prompts
  (§3.1) bring the consistency scoring (§3.2) better balance of knowledge accuracy (precision) and
  coverage (recall), by comparing various scoring methods on existing terms in ConceptNet and LAMA
  dataset. To be more detailed, we use the knowledge tuples from ConceptNet and LAMA as positive
  samples (§4.1), and synthesize the same amount of negative samples with the same strategy in Li
  et al. (2016) by random replacing entities or relations in the true knowledge. Each evaluated method
  estimates a score of each sample being positive (i.e., true knowledge), and ranks the samples based


                                                                         8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


on the scores. We can then compute both the precision and recall of positive samples at different
cut-off points along the ranking, and plot the precision-recall curves for each method.
The automatic evaluation setting on given knowledge terms also enables us to adapt existing prevalent
works, e.g., KG completion and factual probing (Table 1), for comparison with our approach: (1)
COMET (Bosselut et al., 2019) is a transformer-based KG completion model trained to predict the
tail entity t conditioning on the head entity and relation (h, r) on ATOMIC (Sap et al., 2019). The
model has encoded rich commonsense knowledge. We thus test it on the ConceptNet commonsense
data, and use its log-likelihood log P (t|h, r) as the score for each given knowledge tuple. (2) LPAQA
(Jiang et al., 2020) collects a set of prompts on LAMA with text mining and paraphrasing, and
ensembles them to optimize the factual probing task (and thus cannot extract new knowledge like
ours). We report the best performance of its three variants.
The resulting precision-recall curves on ConceptNet and LAMA knowledge are shown in Figure 3 and
Figure 4, respectively. The variant of our T OP -1 P ROMPT from our automatically-collected prompt
set is significantly better than the H UMAN P ROMPT. This is because the human-written prompts
often fail to effectively account for possible ambiguities in the expression, which are eliminated in
our approach by leveraging the seed entity pairs with compatibility measure. Increasing the number
of prompts (M ULTI -P ROMPTS) provides further improvements, showing the multiple automatically
created prompts can represent the desired relations more accurately and better guide the LMs for
consistency. Our approach also substantially outperforms other baselines, like C OMET on ConceptNet
and LPAQA on LAMA, indicating better knowledge correctness (precision) and coverage (recall) of
our framework in the context. On both datasets, AUTO P ROMPT, with only 5 seed entity pairs as its
training data, gives inferior performance than other approaches, indicating that the current prompt
optimization is not feasible for discovering knowledge of new relations without large training data.

4.3   A NALYSIS OF K NOWLEDGE IN D IFFERENT LM S

As discussed in §3, the outcome knowledge graphs can be treated as a fully symbolic interpretation
of pretrained language models. We use M ULTI -P ROMPTS to harvest KGs from 5 different LMs and
evaluate them with human annotation. The results are shown in Table 4, which sheds some new light
on several knowledge-related questions regarding the LMs’ knowledge capacity.
Does a larger LM encode better knowledge? For BERT (and RoBERTa), the large version and
the base version share the same pretraining corpus and tasks, respectively, while the large version
has a larger model architecture than the base version in terms of layers (24 v.s. 12), attention heads
(16 v.s. 12), and the number of parameters (340M v.s. 110M). We can see that BertNet-large and
RoBERTaNet-large are around 7% and 3% higher than their base version, separately, so the large
models indeed encoded better knowledge than the base models.
Does better pretraining bring better knowledge? RoBERTa uses the same architecture as BERT
but with better pretraining strategies, like dynamic masking, larger batch size, etc. In their extracted
knowledge graphs from our framework, RoBERTaNet-large performs better than BertNet-large (0.73
v.s. 0.70), and RoBERTaNet-base is also better than BertNet-base (0.70 v.s. 0.63), which indicates
the better pretraining indeed bring the better knowledge learning and storage.
Is knowledge really kept in the knowledge distillation process? DistilBERT is trained by distilling
BERT-base, and reduces 40% parameters from it. Interestingly, the knowledge distillation process
instead improves around 4% of accuracy in the result knowledge graph. This might be because the
knowledge distillation is able to remove some noisy information from the teacher model.
5     C ONCLUSION
We have developed an automatic framework that extracts a KG from a pretrained LM (e.g, B ERT,
RO B ERTA), in an efficient and scalable way, resulting in a family of new KGs, which we refer to
as B ERT N ET, RO B ERTA N ET, etc. Our framework is capable of extracting knowledge of arbitrary
new relation types and entities, without being restricted by pre-existing knowledge or corpora. The
resulting KGs also serve as interpretation to the source LMs, bringing new insights of the knowledge
capability in various LMs. Our current design and experimental studies are limited on LMs in
the generic domain, and are not yet been studied in specific domains such as extracting healthcare
knowledge from relevant neural models. We leave the exciting work of harvesting knowledge from
various kinds of neural networks across applications and domains in the future work.


                                                   9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Ethical considerations In this work, the harvested knowledge is automatically generated by LMs.
We would like to note that the language models could possibly generate unethical knowledge tuples,
same with the risks of other applications using language models for generation. We hope that the
knowledge extraction study could offer techniques to better interpret and understand the language
models, and in turn foster the future research of language model ethics. Since the knowledge graph
only consists simple phrases, we think filtering sensitive words would be effective. No foreseeable
negative societal impacts are caused by the method itself.

R EFERENCES
Leonard Adolphs, Shehzaad Dhuliawala, and Thomas Hofmann. How to query language models?
  ArXiv, abs/2108.01928, 2021.
Badr AlKhamissi, Millicent Li, Asli Celikyilmaz, Mona Diab, and Marjan Ghazvininejad. A review
  on language models as knowledge bases. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.06031, 2022.
Gabor Angeli, Melvin Johnson, and Christopher D. Manning. Leveraging linguistic structure for
  open domain information extraction. In ACL, 2015.
Antoine Bosselut, Hannah Rashkin, Maarten Sap, Chaitanya Malaviya, Asli Çelikyilmaz, and Yejin
  Choi. Comet: Commonsense transformers for knowledge graph construction. The Association for
 Computational Linguistics, 2019.
Zied Bouraoui, José Camacho-Collados, and Steven Schockaert. Inducing relational knowledge from
  bert. In AAAI, 2020.
Tom B. Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
  Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Sandhini Agarwal, Ariel
  Herbert-Voss, Gretchen Krueger, T. J. Henighan, Rewon Child, Aditya Ramesh, Daniel M. Ziegler,
  Jeff Wu, Clemens Winter, Christopher Hesse, Mark Chen, Eric Sigler, Mateusz Litwin, Scott Gray,
  Benjamin Chess, Jack Clark, Christopher Berner, Sam McCandlish, Alec Radford, Ilya Sutskever,
  and Dario Amodei. Language models are few-shot learners. ArXiv, abs/2005.14165, 2020.
Nicola De Cao, Wilker Aziz, and Ivan Titov. Editing factual knowledge in language models. 2021.
  URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2104.08164.
Jeff Da, Ronan Le Bras, Ximing Lu, Yejin Choi, and Antoine Bosselut. Analyzing commonsense
  emergence in few-shot knowledge models. In AKBC, 2021.
Joe Davison, Joshua Feldman, and Alexander Rush. Commonsense knowledge mining from pretrained
  models. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
  Processing and the 9th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (EMNLP-
  IJCNLP), pp. 1173–1178, Hong Kong, China, November 2019. Association for Computational
  Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/D19-1109. URL https://aclanthology.org/D19-1109.
Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. Bert: Pre-training of deep
  bidirectional transformers for language understanding. In NAACL-HLT (1), 2019.
Yanai Elazar, Nora Kassner, Shauli Ravfogel, Abhilasha Ravichander, Eduard Hovy, Hinrich Schütze,
  and Yoav Goldberg. Measuring and improving consistency in pretrained language models. Trans-
  actions of the Association for Computational Linguistics, 9:1012–1031, 2021.
Tianqing Fang, Weiqi Wang, Sehyun Choi, Shibo Hao, Hongming Zhang, Yangqiu Song, and Bin
  He. Benchmarking commonsense knowledge base population with an effective evaluation dataset.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2109.07679, 2021a.
Tianqing Fang, Hongming Zhang, Weiqi Wang, Yangqiu Song, and Bin He. Discos: Bridging the
  gap between discourse knowledge and commonsense knowledge. In Proceedings of the Web
  Conference 2021, pp. 2648–2659, 2021b.
Joshua Feldman, Joe Davison, and Alexander M. Rush. Commonsense knowledge mining from
  pretrained models. In EMNLP, 2019.


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Christiane D. Fellbaum. Wordnet : an electronic lexical database. Language, 76:706, 2000.
Leandra Fichtel, Jan-Christoph Kalo, and Wolf-Tilo Balke. Prompt tuning or fine-tuning - investigat-
  ing relational knowledge in pre-trained language models. In AKBC, 2021.
Google. Introducing the knowledge graph: things, not strings, 2012. URL https://blog.
  google/products/search/introducing-knowledge-graph-things-not/.
Peter Hase, Mona T. Diab, Asli Çelikyilmaz, Xian Li, Zornitsa Kozareva, Veselin Stoyanov, Mohit
  Bansal, and Srini Iyer. Do language models have beliefs? methods for detecting, updating, and
  visualizing model beliefs. ArXiv, abs/2111.13654, 2021.
John Hewitt and Christopher D. Manning. A structural probe for finding syntax in word representa-
  tions. In NAACL, 2019.
Zhengbao Jiang, Frank F. Xu, J. Araki, and Graham Neubig. How can we know what language
  models know? TACL, 2020.
Brian Lester, Rami Al-Rfou, and Noah Constant. The power of scale for parameter-efficient prompt
  tuning. ArXiv, abs/2104.08691, 2021.
Mike Lewis, Yinhan Liu, Naman Goyal, Marjan Ghazvininejad, Abdelrahman Mohamed, Omer Levy,
 Veselin Stoyanov, and Luke Zettlemoyer. Bart: Denoising sequence-to-sequence pre-training for
 natural language generation, translation, and comprehension. In ACL, 2020.
Christy Y. Li, Xiaodan Liang, Zhiting Hu, and Eric P. Xing. Knowledge-driven encode, retrieve,
  paraphrase for medical image report generation. In AAAI, 2019.
Xiang Li, Aynaz Taheri, Lifu Tu, and Kevin Gimpel. Commonsense knowledge base completion. In
  Proceedings of the 54th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume
  1: Long Papers), pp. 1445–1455, Berlin, Germany, August 2016. Association for Computational
  Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/P16-1137. URL https://aclanthology.org/P16-1137.
Xuan Lin, Zhe Quan, Zhi-Jie Wang, Tengfei Ma, and Xiangxiang Zeng. Kgnn: Knowledge graph
  neural network for drug-drug interaction prediction. In IJCAI, 2020.
Yinhan Liu, Myle Ott, Naman Goyal, Jingfei Du, Mandar Joshi, Danqi Chen, Omer Levy, Mike
  Lewis, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Veselin Stoyanov. Roberta: A robustly optimized bert pretraining
  approach. ArXiv, abs/1907.11692, 2019a.
Zhibin Liu, Zheng-Yu Niu, Hua Wu, and Haifeng Wang. Knowledge aware conversation generation
  with explainable reasoning over augmented graphs. In EMNLP, 2019b.
Sameh K Mohamed, Vít Nováček, and Aayah Nounu. Discovering protein drug targets using
  knowledge graph embeddings. Bioinformatics, 2020.
Seungwhan Moon, Pararth Shah, Anuj Kumar, and Rajen Subba. Opendialkg: Explainable conversa-
  tional reasoning with attention-based walks over knowledge graphs. In ACL, 2019.
Benjamin Newman, Prafulla Kumar Choubey, and Nazneen Rajani. P-adapters: Robustly extracting
  factual information from language models with diverse prompts. ArXiv, abs/2110.07280, 2021.
Tuan-Phong Nguyen, Simon Razniewski, Julien Romero, and Gerhard Weikum. Refined common-
  sense knowledge from large-scale web contents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.04596, 2021.
Fabio Petroni, Tim Rocktäschel, Patrick Lewis, Anton Bakhtin, Yuxiang Wu, Alexander H. Miller,
  and Sebastian Riedel. Language models as knowledge bases? EMNLP, 2019.
Guanghui Qin and Jas’ Eisner. Learning how to ask: Querying lms with mixtures of soft prompts. In
  NAACL, 2021.
Simon Razniewski, Andrew Yates, Nora Kassner, and Gerhard Weikum. Language models as or for
  knowledge bases. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.04888, 2021.


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Julien Romero, Simon Razniewski, Koninika Pal, Jeff Z. Pan, Archit Sakhadeo, and Gerhard Weikum.
  Commonsense properties from query logs and question answering forums. In Proceedings of the
  28th ACM International Conference on Information and Knowledge Management, pp. 1411–1420,
  2019.

Maarten Sap, Ronan Le Bras, Emily Allaway, Chandra Bhagavatula, Nicholas Lourie, Hannah
 Rashkin, Brendan Roof, Noah A. Smith, and Yejin Choi. Atomic: An atlas of machine common-
 sense for if-then reasoning. ArXiv, abs/1811.00146, 2019.

Shaoyun Shi, Hanxiong Chen, Min Zhang, and Yongfeng Zhang. Neural logic networks. ArXiv,
  abs/1910.08629, 2019.

Taylor Shin, Yasaman Razeghi, Robert L Logan IV, Eric Wallace, and Sameer Singh. Eliciting
  knowledge from language models using automatically generated prompts. EMNLP, 2020.

Robyn Speer, Joshua Chin, and Catherine Havasi. Conceptnet 5.5: An open multilingual graph of
  general knowledge. In AAAI, 2017.

Stephen P Stich. Do animals have beliefs? Australasian Journal of Philosophy, 57(1):15–28, 1979.

Vinitra Swamy, Angelika Romanou, and Martin Jaggi. Interpreting language models through
  knowledge graph extraction. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS),
  1st Workshop on eXplainable AI Approaches for Debugging and Diagnosis, 2021.

Niket Tandon, Gerard De Melo, Fabian Suchanek, and Gerhard Weikum. Webchild: Harvesting and
  organizing commonsense knowledge from the web. In Proceedings of the 7th ACM international
  conference on Web search and data mining, pp. 523–532, 2014.

Ian Tenney, Dipanjan Das, and Ellie Pavlick. Bert rediscovers the classical nlp pipeline. ArXiv,
  abs/1905.05950, 2019.

Jonas Wallat, Jaspreet Singh, and Avishek Anand. Bertnesia: Investigating the capture and forgetting
  of knowledge in bert. In BLACKBOXNLP, 2020.

Bo Wang, Tao Shen, Guodong Long, Tianyi Zhou, and Yi Chang. Structure-augmented text repre-
  sentation learning for efficient knowledge graph completion. Proceedings of the Web Conference
  2021, 2021a.

Hongwei Wang, Fuzheng Zhang, Xing Xie, and Minyi Guo. Dkn: Deep knowledge-aware network
  for news recommendation. Proceedings of the 2018 World Wide Web Conference, 2018.

Hongwei Wang, Fuzheng Zhang, Miao Zhao, Wenjie Li, Xing Xie, and Minyi Guo. Multi-task
  feature learning for knowledge graph enhanced recommendation. The World Wide Web Conference,
  2019a.

Qingyun Wang, Manling Li, Xuan Wang, Nikolaus Nova Parulian, Guangxing Han, Jiawei Ma,
  Jingxuan Tu, Ying Lin, H. Zhang, Weili Liu, Aabhas Chauhan, Yingjun Guan, Bangzheng Li,
  Ruisong Li, Xiangchen Song, Heng Ji, Jiawei Han, Shih-Fu Chang, James Pustejovsky, David Liem,
  Ahmed Elsayed, Martha Palmer, Jasmine Rah, Cynthia Schneider, and Boyan A. Onyshkevych.
  Covid-19 literature knowledge graph construction and drug repurposing report generation. In
  NAACL, 2021b.

Xiang Wang, Dingxian Wang, Canran Xu, Xiangnan He, Yixin Cao, and Tat-Seng Chua. Explainable
  reasoning over knowledge graphs for recommendation. In AAAI, 2019b.

Peter West, Chandra Bhagavatula, Jack Hessel, Jena D Hwang, Liwei Jiang, Ronan Le Bras, Ximing
  Lu, Sean Welleck, and Yejin Choi. Symbolic knowledge distillation: from general language models
  to commonsense models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.07178, 2021.

Chenyan Xiong, Russell Power, and Jamie Callan. Explicit semantic ranking for academic search via
  knowledge graph embedding. Proceedings of the 26th International Conference on World Wide
  Web, 2017.


                                                12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Hongming Zhang, Daniel Khashabi, Yangqiu Song, and Dan Roth. Transomcs: From linguistic
  graphs to commonsense knowledge. In IJCAI, 2020.
Zexuan Zhong, Dan Friedman, and Danqi Chen. Factual probing is [mask]: Learning vs. learning to
  recall. NAACL, 2021.
Chen Zhu, Ankit Singh Rawat, Manzil Zaheer, Srinadh Bhojanapalli, Daliang Li, Felix X. Yu, and
  Sanjiv Kumar. Modifying memories in transformer models. ArXiv, abs/2012.00363, 2020.


A        A PPENDIX

A.1       C OMPUTE RESOURCE

All of our experiments are running on a single Nvidia GTX1080Ti GPU. Harvesting a knowledge
graph of one relation with Roberta-large takes about one hour.

A.2       T HE LICENSE OF THE ASSETS

All the data we used in this paper, including datasets, relation definitions, and seed entity pairs, etc.,
are officially public resources.

A.3       P REPROCESSING OF C ONCEPT N ET

We filter out some linguistic relations (e.g. etymologically derived from) and some trivial
relations (e.g. related to). We only consider the tuples with confidence higher than 1, and filter
out relations comprising less than 1000 eligible tuples. We don’t directly take the test set from Li et al.
(2016) because they reserve a lot of tuples for training, resulting in a small and unbalanced test set.

A.4       R ELATION DEFINITIONS

The initial prompts of ConceptNet are from its repository 1 . For LAMA relations, we use the human
written "template" for every relation as the initial prompt, which are all included in the LAMA dataset.
All the New relations, together with the generated prompts, are shown in Table 5 and the list below.

A.5       P ROCESSING OF MULTI - TOKEN ENTITIES

Each entity may take more than one BPE tokens when conducting the mask-filling task. In our entity
searching step, before searching the tokens to fill the mask, we enumerate the number of masks for
every entity and in our setting, each entity has one or two BPE tokens. We showcase the likelihood
calculation of multiple tokens in Figure 7.
In the candidate entity pairs proposal step, we use the minimum individual log-likelihoods (shorted
as MLL) instead of the full Equation 2, which allows us to apply a pruning strategies. For example,
when we are searching for 100 entity tuples, we maintain a minimum heap to keep track of the MLL
of the existing entity pair set. The maximum size of this heap is 100, and the heap top can be used
as a threshold for future search because it’s the 100-th largest MLL: When we are searching for a
new entity tuple, once we find the log likelihood at any time step is lower than the threshold, we can
prune the continuous searching immediately, because this means the MLL of the this tuple will never
surpass any existing tuples in the heap. If a new entity tuple is searched out without being pruned, we
will pop the heap and push the MLL of the new tuple. Intuitively, the pruning process makes sure
that the generated part of the tuple in searching is reasonable for the given prompt.

A.6       H UMAN EVALUATION

The wage is $0.15 for each three questions. The average time for answering a question is about
15 seconds, so the estimated wage of an hour is $12 per hour. The total cost on human annotation
    1
        https://github.com/commonsense/conceptnet5/wiki/Relations (the "Description" column.)


                                                      13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                               Figure 5: The instruction to annotators


                               Figure 6: The questions to annotators


is $1580. We present the screenshot of the instruction in Figure 5 and question in Figure 6. The
inter-annotator agreement (Krippendorff’s Alpha) is 0.27, showing fair agreement.

         Relation                   Initial prompts                      Seed entity pairs


                                                14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                         (people, work out, gym)
                                                                                (bird, fly, sky)
 somebody do something at EN T0 can EN T1 in EN T2                    (student, study, classroom)
                                                                          (player, play, ground)
                                                                      (sodier, fight, battleground)
                                                                                 (mask, virus)
                                                                            (exercise, disease)
           prevent        EN T0 prevents EN T1                         (study hard, fail the exam)
                                                                              (reading, stupid)
                                                                         (insurance, bankruptcy)
                                                                               (doctor, patient)
                                                                              (teacher, student)
            help          EN T0 can help EN T1                          (housekeeper, housewife)
                                                                    (teaching assistant, professor)
                                                                               (police, victim)
                                                                               (gym, exercise)
                                                                            (classroom, study)
          place for       EN T0 is the place for EN T1                           (office, work)
                                                                    (hosipital, medical treatment)
                                                                              (mart, shopping)
                                                                                     (fat, thin)
                                                                                  (happy, sad)
          antonym         EN T0 is the opposite of EN T1                         (north, south)
                                                                                (woman, man)
                                                                                    (pass, fail)
                                                                                (China, Japan)
                                                                        (Australia, New Zealand)
   separated by the ocean EN T1 and EN T0 are separated by the (United Kingdom, the Continent)
                          ocean                                            (United State, Cuba)
                                                                             (Spain, Morocco)
                                                                                  (flour, cake)
                                                                             (beef, hamburger)
       ingredient for     EN T0 is an ingredient for EN T1                       (potato, chip)
                                                                               (fried rice, rice)
                                                                         (stargazer pie, pilchard)
                                                                         (wool, woollen sweater)
                                                                                (milk, yogurt)
          source of       EN T0 is the source of EN T1                          (sand, silicon)
                                                                              (iron mine, iron)
                                                                               (crude oil, fuel)
                                                                                  (Nissan, car)
                                                                               (Apple, laptop)
          business        EN T0 sells EN T1                                         (Shell, oil)
                                                                                (Nvidia, GPU)
                                                                       (McDonald’s, hamburger)
                                                                             (egg, cheap, food)
                                                                             (boa, long, snake)
       featured thing     EN T0 is a very EN T1 EN T2             (Messi, skillful, football player)
                                                                         (Russia, large, country)
                                                                       (Amazon, rich, company)
                                                                     (developer, computer, code)
                                                                   (people, social media, connect)
     need sth to do sth   EN T0 needs EN T1 to EN T2                          (pig, food, grow)
                                                                           (people, money, live)
                                                              (intern, good performance, return offer)
                                                                                 (chicken, fly)
                                                                                  (dog, swim)
      can but not good    EN T0 can EN T1 but not good at           (long-distance runner, sprint)
                                                                                   (skater, ski)
                                                                            (researcher, teach)


                                                  15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                                  (team, wim)
                                                                            (student, pass exam)
     worth celebrating   It’s worth celebrating for a EN T0 to          (researcher, publish paper)
                         EN T1                                             (people, earn money)
                                                                            (parents, get a baby)
                                                                       (playing game, fail the exam)
                                                                    (sleep insufficiency, heart disease)
       potential risk    A potential risk of EN T0 is EN T1                 (candy, tooth decay)
                                                                             (flight, plane crash)
                                                                         (investment, lose money)

                           Table 5: prompt and entity pairs of new relations


The generated prompts are listed below:

     1. somebody do something at:
        at the EN T2 , EN T0 can EN T1
        EN T0 s can EN T1 in the EN T2
        the EN T2 is a place where EN T0 can EN T1
        the EN T0 can choose to EN T1 in the EN T2 or online
        a EN T0 can learn effectively by EN T1 ing in a EN T2 setting
        looking up at the EN T2 , it’s easy to see that EN T0 s can EN T1
        at the EN T2 , EN T0 s can EN T1 together and learn from each other
        a EN T0 can EN T1 in a EN T2 by themselves or with a group of friends
        at the EN T2 , EN T0 can use the machines to EN T1 , or they can take classes
        at the EN T2 , EN T0 can EN T1 by using the various machines and equipment available
        there are many facilities available for EN T0 who want to stay in shape and EN T1 , one of
        which is the EN T2
     2. prevent:
        EN T0 prevents EN T1
        if you EN T0 , you will not EN T1
        EN T0 provides a safety net against EN T1
        if you EN T0 , you are less likely to EN T1
        a EN T0 will protect you from getting the EN T1
        if you want to avoid being EN T1 , start EN T0 more
        if you don’t want to be EN T1 , you should EN T0 often
        EN T0 s are effective at preventing the spread of EN T1 es
        this is a paraphrase of the saying EN T0 prevents EN T1 ity.
        EN T0 is an important part of staying healthy and preventing EN T1
        regular EN T0 has been shown to be one of the most effective ways to prevent EN T1
        EN T0 protects people from having to declare EN T1 in the event of an accident or emer-
        gency
        EN T0 s prevent the spread of EN T1 es by trapping droplets that are released when the user
        talks, coughs, or sneezes
        it could be said that EN T0 prevents EN T1 , as it provides a safety net for people in the
        event of an unexpected setback
        regular EN T0 has various health benefits and is often prescribed by doctors as a preventative
        measure against developing various EN T1 s
     3. help:
        a EN T0 can help a EN T1
        the EN T0 can help with the EN T1 ’s chores
        a EN T0 can assist a EN T1 with her duties
        if you are a EN T1 of a crime
        the EN T0 can help you
        the EN T0 can help the EN T1 with their medical needs
        a EN T0 can help a EN T1 by providing guidance and support
        a EN T0 can help take care of the household duties for a EN T1
        a EN T0 officer can help a EN T1 by providing them with protection and assistance


                                                  16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


        a EN T0 can help with the chores around the house, giving the EN T1 more free time
        a EN T0 can help out a EN T1 by doing things like cleaning, cooking, and running errands
        a EN T0 can help a EN T1 in many ways, from grading papers to leading discussion sections
        a EN T0 can help a EN T1 by providing guidance, answering questions, and offering feed-
        back
        a EN T0 can help a EN T1 with their workload by taking on some of the teaching responsi-
        bilities
        a EN T0 can help a EN T1 by grading papers, leading discussion sections, and providing
        office hours
        the EN T0 can help EN T1 s of crime by investigating the incident and taking statements
        from witnesses
     4. place for:
        the EN T0 is the place for EN T1
        there’s no place like EN T0 for EN T1
        EN T0 is a great place to do some EN T1
        the EN T0 is a place where people go to EN T1
        there’s no better place to EN T1 than in an EN T0
        the EN T0 is the best place to get some EN T1 done
        the EN T0 provides an environment for people to EN T1
        if you want to do some EN T1 ing, you can go to the EN T0
        if you’re looking to do some EN T1 , EN T0 is the place for you
        if you’re looking to do some EN T1 , then you should head on over to EN T0
        if you’re looking to get fit and EN T1 , the EN T0 is the perfect place to do so
        there’s no place like the EN T0 for EN T1 because you have access to all the equipment you
        need to get a good workout
     5. antonym:
        a EN T0 is not a EN T1
        the antonym of EN T0 is EN T1
        EN T1 is the opposite of EN T0
        when you’re EN T1 , you’re not EN T0
        EN T1 is to EN T0 as night is to day
        EN T0 and EN T1 are opposite concepts
        if you EN T1 , it means you didn’t EN T0
        when a person is EN T0 , they are not EN T1
        the two words "EN T0 " and "EN T1 " are antonyms
        EN T0 is the direction that is opposite of EN T1
        to be EN T1 is to have a small amount of body EN T0
        when something EN T0 es, it is successful, and when something EN T1 s, it is not successful
        if you EN T0 something, you have succeeded, and if you EN T1 something, you have not
        succeeded
        this means that simply because someone does not EN T0 something does not mean they
        have EN T1 ed
     6. separated by the ocean:
        the ocean separates EN T1 from the EN T0
        there is an ocean separating EN T1 and EN T0
        the pacific ocean lies between EN T0 and EN T1
        EN T1 and EN T0 are separated by the tasman sea
        there is a distance of about 1,500 miles between EN T1 and the EN T0 s
        the distance between EN T1 and EN T0 is vast, with an ocean between them
        EN T1 and EN T0 are two different countries located on different continents
        EN T0 and EN T1 are two countries that are close to each other but are separated by the
        ocean
        there is a large body of water, known as the atlantic ocean, which separates the two land
        masses of EN T1 and the EN T0
        while EN T1 and EN T0 are both located in the oceania region of the world, the two
        countries are separated by the tasman sea
     7. ingredient for:
        EN T1 needs EN T0 as an ingredient


                                               17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


        one way to use EN T0 es is to make EN T1 s
        EN T0 is a key ingredient in making a EN T1
        one of the ingredients for making a EN T1 is EN T0
        if you want to make a EN T1 , you’ll need some EN T0
        a EN T0 is an ingredient that is used to make EN T1 s
        EN T0 is a dish that contains EN T1 as one of its ingredients
        EN T0 is a popular dish made with EN T1 as the main ingredient
        EN T0 is a type of fish pie that is typically made with EN T1 s
        EN T0 is a dish made from EN T1 that has been fried in a wok or a pan
     8. source of:
        EN T1 comes from EN T0
        EN T0 is used to make EN T1
        most EN T1 is made from EN T0
        EN T0 is a major source of EN T1
        the main source of EN T1 is EN T0
        the EN T0 is what turns into EN T1
        EN T1 is most commonly found in EN T0 s
        the EN T0 is the place where EN T1 is mined
        many EN T1 s contain EN T0 as a major ingredient
        EN T0 s are where EN T1 is pulled from the ground
        EN T1 is a dairy product that is made from EN T0
        EN T0 is the primary ingredient in the production of EN T1
        the main source of EN T1 is quartz, which is a type of EN T0
        EN T0 is the main source of EN T1 used in vehicles and other machinery
        EN T0 is used to produce gasoline, diesel, and other petroleum-based products, which are
        widely used as EN T1 for cars, trucks,
     9. business:
        EN T0 sells EN T1 s
        EN T0 is an EN T1 company
        EN T0 is known for selling EN T1 s
        EN T0 is a company that sells EN T1 s
        EN T0 is an international EN T1 and gas company
        EN T0 is a EN T1 company that manufactures and sells vehicles
        EN T0 sells EN T1 s through its online store and retail locations
        EN T0 is a company that sells graphics processing units (EN T1 s)
        EN T0 is a popular fast food chain that is known for selling EN T1 s
        EN T0 is ajapaneseEN T1 manufacturing company that is headquartered in yokohama,
        japan
        EN T0 is a fast food company that specializes in EN T1 s, fried chicken, and soft drinks
        EN T0 is a company that specializes in the production of EN T1 s, or graphics processing
        units
        EN T0 is a japanese EN T1 company that sells a wide variety of vehicles, from small to
        large, and from economy to luxury
        EN T0 describes themselves as "the worldu2019s largest information technology company
        by revenue," and they sell many products, including EN T1 s
    10. featured thing:
        the EN T0 EN T2 is very EN T1
        EN T0 s are a very EN T1 EN T2
        EN T0 is definitely a EN T1 EN T2
        EN T0 is a very EN T1 and successful EN T2
        you can hardly find a EN T1 er EN T2 than EN T0 s
        there is no doubt that EN T0 is a very EN T1 EN T2
        it covers a lot of ground, EN T0 is a very EN T1 EN T2
        a single EN T0 is a very EN T1 and affordable EN T2 item
        EN T0 s are a type of EN T2 that can grow to be very EN T1
        although EN T0 is not the world’s EN T1 est EN T2 , it is still very wealthy
    11. need sth to do sth:
        EN T0 need EN T1 to EN T2


                                              18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


          in order to EN T2 , EN T0 need EN T1
          there is a need for EN T1 to EN T2 EN T0
          a EN T0 requires EN T1 in order to EN T2
          EN T0 feel the need to EN T2 through EN T1
          a EN T0 requires EN T1 to EN T2 with each other
          EN T0 feel that they need EN T1 in order to EN T2
          a EN T0 will only EN T2 if it has enough EN T1 to eat
          without EN T1 , EN T0 would have a harder time EN T2 ing with others
          it is important for EN T0 to be able to EN T2 with each other through EN T1
      12. can but not good:
          EN T0 s are not good at EN T1 ing
          EN T0 s can EN T1 , but they aren’t very good at it
          the average EN T0 is not especially good at EN T1 ing
          the EN T0 is skilled at EN T1 ing, but not particularly good at it
          EN T0 s are not good at EN T1 ing because they are not built for it
          EN T1 ing requires explosive speed and power, which EN T0 s typically lack
          EN T0 s aren’t particularly good EN T1 mers, but they can do it if they need to
          while EN T0 s are capable of EN T1 ming, they are not particularly proficient at it
          EN T0 s are not good at EN T1 ing because they lack the proper equipment and training
          while EN T0 s are typically excellent at their jobs, EN T1 ing is not usually a strong suit
          although EN T0 s are theoretically able to EN T1 , they are not very good at it and usually
          stay on the ground
          while EN T0 s are able to EN T1 , they are not instinctively good at it and may need some
          help or encouragement to do so
      13. worth celebrating:
          it’s good when EN T0 EN T1
          it’s great for EN T0 to EN T1
          it’s great when a group of EN T0 EN T1
          it’s great when EN T0 s EN T1 s as a group
          it’s worth celebrating when a EN T0 EN T1
          it’s always good when EN T0 EN T1 is doing well
          when a group of EN T0 EN T1 , it is worth celebrating
          there is value in celebrating when group of EN T0 s EN T1
          it’s always good when EN T0 s EN T1 s, regardless of the topic
          it is seen as significant accomplishment for EN T0 when they EN T1
      14. potential risk:
          EN T0 may lead to EN T1
          EN T0 can potentially cause EN T1
          one potential risk of EN T0 is EN T1
          eating too much EN T0 can cause EN T1
          if a EN T1 es, it is a potential risk of EN T0
          if you have EN T1 , you may be at risk for EN T0
          EN T0 has been linked to an increased risk of EN T1
          an EN T0 always entails some risk2̆014you could EN T1 on it
          EN T0 can lead to EN T1 if it is not eaten in moderation
          an EN T0 always comes with the potential to make or EN T1
          if a EN T0 is not properly executed, it can cause a EN T1
          if a EN T0 is not well-planned or executed, it may lead to a EN T1
          a new study has found that EN T0 is linked to an increased risk of EN T1
          if you have a EN T1 , you are at a greater risk for cavities if you eat EN T0
          there is a strong correlation between EN T0 and an increased risk of airEN T1 es
          a recent study has found that there is a correlation between eating EN T0 and an increased
          risk of EN T1

A.7    D ETAILED RESULTS OF HUMAN EVALUATION

We show the detailed results of human evaluation in Table 6.



                                                 19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Table 6: Detailed result of human evaluation. The numbers indicate the portions of accepted and rejected tuples.
Ro-l, DB, B-b, B-l, Ro-b are short for Roberta-large, DistilBert, Bert-large, Bert-base, Roberta-base. Human,
Auto, Top-1 and Multi stand for methods that use Human Prompt, Autoprompt, Top-1 Prompt (Ours) and Multi
Prompts (Ours).


                         Model         Ro-l             Ro-l               Ro-l               Ro-l             DB                  B-b        B-l         Ro-b
                         Prompt     Human               Auto              Top-1              Multi           Multi                Multi      Multi       Multi
               BUSINESS           0.60/0.32           0.76/0.13        0.75/0.16          0.88/0.07        0.54/0.27          0.64/0.23     0.76/0.13   0.74/0.19
                   HELP           0.77/0.12           0.52/0.34        0.92/0.03          0.87/0.05        0.91/0.04          0.81/0.04     0.88/0.06   0.88/0.06
        INGREDIENT FOR            0.59/0.33           0.33/0.59        0.73/0.20          0.71/0.24        0.70/0.26          0.55/0.40     0.72/0.23   0.51/0.40
             PLACE FOR            0.76/0.10           0.41/0.36        0.63/0.32          0.89/0.07        0.84/0.14          0.78/0.18     0.87/0.11   0.88/0.09
               PREVENT            0.42/0.42           0.18/0.67        0.60/0.25          0.40/0.45        0.60/0.32          0.44/0.39     0.62/0.25   0.68/0.25
             SOURCE OF            0.76/0.17           0.21/0.67        0.52/0.44          0.60/0.33        0.63/0.36          0.65/0.32     0.75/0.24   0.55/0.37
SEPARATED BY THE OCEAN            0.48/0.38           0.16/0.48        0.56/0.35          0.55/0.40        0.51/0.24          0.57/0.26     0.44/0.46   0.44/0.49
              ANTONYM             0.50/0.41           0.10/0.83        0.50/0.48          0.55/0.44        0.38/0.56          0.41/0.56     0.52/0.42   0.75/0.22
        FEATURED THING            0.85/0.12           0.38/0.40        0.88/0.06          0.89/0.10        0.37/0.44          0.44/0.40     0.46/0.44   0.65/0.20
        NEED A TO DO B            0.71/0.18           0.62/0.21        0.66/0.22          0.79/0.10        0.83/0.12          0.62/0.25     0.65/0.18   0.72/0.17
   CAN BUT NOT GOOD AT            0.52/0.34           0.29/0.42        0.61/0.19          0.44/0.21        0.51/0.31          0.60/0.21     0.64/0.22   0.39/0.35
    WORTH CELEBRATING             0.47/0.29           0.23/0.51        0.81/0.05          0.85/0.08        0.79/0.12          0.74/0.14     0.84/0.10   0.83/0.10
         POTENTIAL RISK           0.40/0.23           0.31/0.45        0.70/0.21          0.76/0.19        0.87/0.05          0.66/0.22     0.72/0.16   0.79/0.08
              A DO B AT           0.56/0.33           0.14/0.55        0.79/0.14          0.97/0.03        0.93/0.07          0.93/0.05     0.94/0.06   0.94/0.06
               AVERAGE            0.60/0.27           0.33/0.47        0.69/0.22          0.73/0.20        0.67/0.24          0.63/0.26     0.70/0.22   0.70/0.22


         𝑃𝑃𝐿𝐿𝐿𝐿 (ℎ|𝑝𝑝)                                                                                      𝑃𝑃𝐿𝐿𝐿𝐿 (ℎ1 |𝑝𝑝)

                                                                  (Multiple tokens)
                         BERT                                                                                                        BERT
                                                       𝑃𝑃𝐿𝐿𝐿𝐿 (ℎ|𝑝𝑝)=𝑃𝑃𝐿𝐿𝐿𝐿 ℎ1 𝑝𝑝 ∗ 𝑃𝑃𝐿𝐿𝐿𝐿 (ℎ2 |𝑝𝑝, ℎ1 )

          [MASK] is the place for [MASK]                                                                     [MASK] [MASK] is the place for [MASK]


                                  𝑃𝑃𝐿𝐿𝐿𝐿 (𝑡𝑡|𝑝𝑝, ℎ)                                                                 𝑃𝑃𝐿𝐿𝐿𝐿 (ℎ2 |𝑝𝑝, ℎ1 )



                         BERT                                                                                                        BERT


          Library is the place for [MASK]                                                                     Study [MASK] is the place for [MASK]



Figure 7: We demonstrate the calculation with an example where p ="A IS THE PLACE FOR B". The left
two figures shows how we calculate PLM (h|p) and PLM (t|p, h). In this example, h ="library" when we set
both head and tail entities to have one single token. The right block shows how we calculate the conditional
probability of multiple-token entities by decomposing it into two steps. In this example, the first token of the
head entity h1 ="study".


                                                                                 20
