Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


E XAMPLE - BASED P LANNING VIA D UAL G RADIENT
F IELDS
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                             A BSTRACT
         Path planning is one of the key abilities of an intelligent agent. However, both
         the learning-based and sample-based planners remain to require explicitly defin-
         ing the task by manually designing the reward function or optimisation objec-
         tives, which limits the scope of implementation. Formulating the path planning
         problem from a new perspective, Example-based planning is to find the most ef-
         ficient path to increase the likelihood of the target distribution by giving a set
         of target examples. In this work, we introduce Dual Gradient Fields (DualGFs),
         an offline-learning example-based planning framework built upon score match-
         ing. There are two gradient fields in DualGFs: a target gradient field that guides
         task completion and a support gradient field that ensures moving with physi-
         cal constraints. In the learning process, instead of interacting with the environ-
         ment, the agents are trained with two offline examples, i.e., the target gradients
         and support gradients are trained by target examples and support examples, re-
         spectively. The support examples are randomly sampled from free space, i.e.,
         states without collisions. DualGF is a weighted mixture of the two fields, com-
         bining the merits of the two fields together. To update the mixing ratio adap-
         tively, we further propose a fields-balancing mechanism based on Lagrangian-
         Relaxation. Experimental results across four tasks (navigation, tracking, par-
         ticle rearrangement, and room rearrangement) demonstrate the scalability and
         effectiveness of our method. Our codes and demonstrations can be found at
         https://sites.google.com/view/dualgf.


1   I NTRODUCTION
Planning paths to reach a goal is a fundamental
function of an intelligent agent (Russell, 2010)
                                                             …
and has a wide range of real-world applica-
tions, such as navigation (Patle et al., 2019),
object tracking (Zhong et al., 2019), and ob-          Target Examples                            …
ject rearrangement (King et al., 2016). Ex-
isting planning algorithms, whether sampling-
                                                             …
based (LaValle et al., 1998a; Karaman & Fraz-
zoli, 2011) or learning-based (Kulathunga, 2021;                          Dual Gradient Fields
Yu et al., 2020; Tamar et al., 2016), need ex-         Support Examples                          Planning
hausted test-time sampling for searching a path
or reward functions for learning. This severely         Figure 1: Our task setting. Left: The agent
limits the implementation scope of planning since       learns task specification from target examples
many real-world tasks are hard to design the ob-        and physical constraints from support examples
jectives/ reward with human priors, e.g., tidying       during training. Right: The agent plans a path
up a house, or rearranging a desktop.                   in novel conditions during the test phase.
                                                                               .
In this paper, we consider a novel data-driven planning paradigm: Example-based planning, in which
the user can specify the task by providing a set of target examples, rather than programming a task-
specific objective. Benefiting from such a paradigm, example-based planning can scale to various
tasks, particularly tasks with implicit goals, i.e.specifying the task with a target distribution instead
of a specific goal state. Besides, the agent needs to infer the environmental constraints to safely move
in a physical world. Previous approaches either learn physical constraints from interacting with the


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


environment and collision penalty (Wu et al., 2022), offline demonstrations (Janner et al., 2022),
or exhaustively sampling points at test time (LaValle et al., 1998a). However, online interaction is
costly and unsafe, while offline demonstrations are expensive to collect and test-time sampling is
time inefficient.
To this end, we propose a fully example-based planning framework that learns two gradient fields
with different purposes from examples by score-matching (Vincent, 2011), namely DualGF. DualGF
consists of two fields: A target gradient field and a support gradient field. The target gradient field
estimates the gradient of the target distribution so as to provide the fastest direction to accomplish
the task. The support gradient field learns to reverse the perturbed state back to the free space
so as to help avoid collisions. To combine the merits of the two fields, we further introduce a
gradient mixer to adaptive balance the trade-off between the two gradients (keep safe vs. reach
goal) when constructing the dual gradient field in execution. In practice, we can also incorporate
the dual gradient field with a low-level controller to output primitive actions in control. The two
gradients are trained from two sets of examples, respectively. For the target gradient field, we
collect a set of target states sampled from the target distribution, such as a set of tidied rooms. For
the support gradient field, we provide the agent with another set of examples (support examples)
that are uniformly sampled from the free space, i.e., states without collision. The support examples
are abundant and easy to obtain in real scenarios, e.g., randomly initialised objects, which largely
alleviate the safety issue of learning from interactions. As illustrated in Fig. 1, the agent can
learn generalisable inference of task specification and physical constraints from target and support
examples and planning in unseen environment.
Our experiments validate the generalisation ability of the DualGF planning framework across a va-
riety of tasks, including classical planning tasks such as navigation, tracking, and planning tasks
without explicit goal specification such as object rearrangement (Wu et al., 2022). Specifically,
the proposed DualGF significantly outperforms the learning-based baselines in planning perfor-
mance and efficiency while achieving comparable performance with reference approaches that use
the ground truth model or test-time sampling. Ablation studies also demonstrate the effectiveness of
the proposed support gradient field and field-balancing mechanism.
In conclusion, our contributions are summarised as follows: a) We reformulate the path planning
problem in a data-driven paradigm, where we specify the tasks with examples rather than manu-
ally design objectives; b) We propose a novel score-based planning framework DualGF that can
adaptively integrate two gradient fields trained from different example sets so as to output instruc-
tions to complete a task; c) We conduct experiments in four tasks to demonstrate the scalability of
our method, and empirical results show that DualGF significantly outperforms the state-of-the-art
methods in efficiency and safety.

2   R ELATED W ORK
Learning from Demonstration. Example-based planning can be viewed as a special case of Learn-
ing from demonstration (LfD). LfD is a long-studied problem aiming at learning a policy from only
a set of expert trajectories. There are two mainstreams of LfD: Behavioural Cloning (BC) (Pomer-
leau, 1991; Ross & Bagnell, 2010; Ross et al., 2011), which learns a policy in a supervised manner;
and Inverse Reinforcement Learning (IRL) (Fu et al., 2017; Liu et al., 2020; Kostrikov et al., 2018;
Ziebart et al., 2008), which finds a cost function under which the expert is uniquely optimal. Differ-
ent from LfD, we train the agent from only two sets of examples instead of whole demonstrations.
There are some RL-based methods that consider an example-based setting: VICE (Fu et al., 2018)
is similar to AIRL (Fu et al., 2017), but is designed for learning from a set of success examples.
SQIL (Reddy et al., 2019) is a method modified from SAC (Haarnoja et al., 2018) that labels success
examples with a reward of +1. RCE (Eysenbach et al., 2021), a modification of the actor-critic-based
method (Fujimoto et al., 2018; Haarnoja et al., 2018), directly learns a value function from transi-
tions and successful examples. Recently, Offline-RCE (Hatch et al., 2022) extends RCE to an offline
setting. Different from these methods, our method requires neither interaction with the environment
nor offline demonstrations.
Path Planning. Sampling-based planning algorithms, such as the probabilistic roadmap method
(PRM, (Kavraki & Latombe, 1994)) and the rapidly exploring random tree (RRT, (LaValle et al.,
1998b)), are dominant in traditional path planning algorithms. PRT and its variants: (Dobson &
Bekris, 2014); (You et al., 2021); (Chai et al., 2022); (Hüppi et al., 2022), intend to generate a


                                                  2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


roadmap and find a collision-free path from a starting point to a goal region on the roadmap. RRT
and its variants: (Strub & Gammell, 2020); (Gammell et al., 2020) (Li et al., 2022); (Strub &
Gammell, 2022), iteratively build a tree by expanding towards the random sample point instead of
directly connecting to the sample point. Different from these methods, our approach enables path
planning in an end-to-end paradigm without test-time sampling, which is more time-efficient and
scalable to high-dimensional tasks. Our method is also similar to artificial potential field Lee &
Park (2003) which manually designs an attractive field guiding the agent to the goal location and a
repulsive field pushing the agent away from the obstacles. Differently, our method learns two fields
from two sets of examples that can generalise to unseen conditions. Besides, our method can plan
with visual observation (See Appendix. D.4) and scale up to high-dimensional domains.

3    P ROBLEM S TATEMENT
The example-based planning can be described by a tuple (S, Sf , ptar , ρ, ϵ) where S denotes the
state space (e.g., configurations of objects and obstacles) while Sf ⊆ S denotes the free space (the
valid states without object collision or transboundary). At each time step t, our planning agent
π : S → A first outputs a target state within an epsilon-ball of the input state, i.e., ||st+1
                                                                                            ˆ − st || ≤ ϵ.
Then a simple low-level controller (e.g., PID controller) outputs actions to achieve this state at =
                                                                             ∗
C(st , st+1
         ˆ ). During training, the agent is given a set of target examples Star   = {s∗ , s∗ ∼ ptar (s)}
                        +
where ptar : S → R denotes a target distribution. Similar to (Wu et al., 2022), the goal of the
planning agent is to find the most efficient path to increase the likelihood of the target distribution:
                                              "                     #
                                                X
                     ∗                                t
                   π = arg max Eρ(s0 ),τ ∼π         γ log ptar (st ) , s.t. ∀st ∈ Sf                   (1)
                                     π
                                                                st ∈τ

To this end, the agent needs to infer the task specification, i.e., knowing where to move can probably
succeed, as well as the free space, i.e., avoiding collisions between objects and obstacles.
In this work, we consider the offline setting of example-based planning, where the agent has to infer
physics constraints from support examples instead of interacting with the environment. The support
                                                        ∗
examples are uniformly sampled from the free space Ssup     = {s∗ , s∗ ∼ psup (s)} where

                                            1 ,
                                           
                                                     s ∈ Sf
                                                                                                   Z
                                 psup (s) = |Sf |           ,                         |Sf | =             ds                                   (2)
                                                                                                    Sf
                                               0, otherwise

The rationale for ‘replacing interactions with examples’ is that the support examples are enough for
inferring the free space Sf while the online interactions are unsafe and costly. Besides, the agent
should learn generalisable inference of free space instead of overfitting to a specific environment.
                          Score
                         Matching
                                                            Φ!"#
                  ...     Φ!"#
                                                                        Target Gradient
                                                                                           Mixer
       Target Examples
                                                                                                                                  Heuristic
                          Score                                                                                                   Controller
                         Matching           𝑠!              Φ$%&

                  ...     Φ$%&                                          Support Gradient                  Dual Gradient

                                                                                     Environment
      Support Examples
                (a) Training                                                         (b) Inference
                                                                    Target      Support         Dual
                   Target Gradient Net   Support Gradient Net                                             Mixer Field-Balancing
                                                                   Gradient     Gradient       Gradient           Mechanism


Figure 2: Method Overview. a): A target and a support score network are trained from examples via
score-matching objective. b): DualGF computes target and support gradient at each time step, where
the target gradient guides the task completion (i.e., move objects to tidy layout) and the support
gradient directs the objects to avoid collisions. DualGF adaptively mixes the two gradients via a
field-balancing mechanism to output the dual gradient. Incorporated with a low-level controller,
DualGF can interpret the dual gradient into an action.

                                                                    3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


4     M ETHODOLOGY

Overview: To tackle example-based planning, our key idea is to learn gradient fields from examples.
As illustrated in Fig. 2 (a), the target gradient field Φθtar and the support gradient field Φϕsup is
trained from the target examples and support examples via score-matching respectively. The target
gradient guides the task completion by providing the fastest direction to increase the task likelihood.
The support gradient helps avoid collision by pointing to the inner of the free space. Finally, we
construct a policy that plans the next state based on the mixture of the two gradients, i.e., the dual
gradient. In the control scenario, a heuristic-based controller can be used to interpret the dual
gradient into a low-level action.

4.1   P LANNING WITH THE D UAL G RADIENT F IELDS

We tackle example-based planning by greedily maximising the target likelihood. Firstly, the agent
aims at searching for the next state that maximises the target likelihood from the free space:
                                                                                           1
                      argmax log ptar (st+1 ),        s.t. log psup (st+1 ) ≥ log                     (3)
                        st+1                                                             |Sf |

However, this objective is problematic since both the log psup (st+1 ) and log ptar (st+1 ) are zero
in many regions, such as non-target region or inner of the free space. Besides, psup (st+1 ) is non-
differentiable on the boundary of the free space ∂Sf . As a result, we choose to ‘soften’ both distri-
butions by adding a small Gaussian noise:
                       Z                                       Z
            psup (ŝ) = N (ŝ; s, σ I)psup (s)ds, ptar (ŝ) = N (ŝ; s, σ 2 I)ptar (s)ds
             σ                     2                  σ
                                                                                                  (4)

In this way, we replace the objective in Eq. 3 with the following:

                          argmax log pσtar (st+1 ),           s.t. log pσsup (st+1 ) ≥ c              (5)
                            st+1

where c ∈ R is a threshold indicating the conservative degree of the policy. The problem Eq. 5 can
be further related to an unconstrained optimisation with a penalty term by the Lagrangian method:

                         max min log pσtar (st+1 ) + λ log pσsup (st+1 ) − c

                                                                                                (6)
                         st+1      λ≥0

where λ > 0 is known as a Lagrangian multiplier. The st+1 and λ can be updated iteratively for
multiple steps to obtain a solution. Here, we choose to update the st+1 and λ only one step for Eq. 6
            ˆ is close to st in our problem, i.e., ||st+1
since the st+1                                         ˆ − st ||2 ≤ ϵ. :

                         ˆ = st + µs ∇s log pσtar (st ) + λt ∇s log pσsup (st )

                       st+1
                                                                                                  (7)
                       λt+1 = ReLU λt − µλ log pσsup (st+1 ) − c


where µs and µλ are two step sizes. Empirically, the latter is set as a fixed scalar µλ = 0.01 while
the former is properly set to ensure ||st+1 − st ||2 ≤ ϵ. In this way, our planning policy is derived as:
                                            gdual
                           ˆ = st + ϵ
                         st+1                         ,       gdual = gtar + λt gsup
                                          ||gdual ||2                 |     {z     }
                                                                         dual gradient
                                                                                                      (8)
                          gtar = ∇s log pσtar (st ),          gsup = ∇s log pσsup (st )
                                 |     {z        }                   |     {z        }
                                    target gradient                   support gradient

Intuitively, the state is updated by the mixture of the target gradient ∇s log pσtar (st ) and the support
gradient ∇s log pσsup (st ) weighted by λt . As shown in Fig. 3, the target gradient is a vector field
that points to the goal region, so as to guide the task completion. The support gradient fields point to
the inner region of the free space. The closer a state is to the boundary of the free space, the larger
the magnitudes of its support gradient will ‘push’ it into the inner region. In Appendix. D.9, we also
derive the closed-form of the target and support gradients and discuss the above insights.


                                                          4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                  + 𝝀𝒕 ∗                            =


      Condition 𝑠!        Target Gradient Field            Support Gradient Field        Dual Gradient Field
                                Φ$%& (𝑠! )                       Φ!"# (𝑠! )             Φ!"# 𝑠! + 𝜆! Φ$%& (𝑠! )

Figure 3: Visualisation of the learned target, support and dual gradient fields on Navigation task. The
L2-norm of support gradients is small in the free space but grows significantly faster when close to
the boundary. As a result, the direction of dual gradients is consistent with the target gradient in the
free space and consistent with the support gradient near the boundary.

4.2    U PDATING M IXING R ATE VIA S UPPORT G RADIENT F IELD

From Eq. 7, we can infer that λt is updated to maintain the ‘safety level’ log pσsup (s) at a certain
threshold c, since a larger λt will lead to an increase of log pσsup (s) on the Further states, vice versa.
However, updating λt requires the exact computation of log pσsup (st+1 ) − c which involves inte-
gration over the state space as shown in Eq. 4. This is intractable when the state space is high-
dimensional. Thus, we seek to develop a practical field-balancing mechanism. We first approximate
log pσsup (st+1 ) from log pσsup (s0 ) via first-order Taylor expansion:

           log pσsup (st+1 ) − c = − c − log pσsup (s0 ) + log pσsup (st+1 ) − log pσsup (s0 )


                                                          t
                                                         X                                                  (9)
                                ≈ − c − log pσsup (s0 ) +   ∇s log pσsup (sk ), sk+1 − sk
                                                              k=0


We further assume that s0 is always initialised far away from the boundary of the free space so
that Vars0 ∼ρ(s) [log pσsup (s)] ≈ 0. Thus, the remaining term c − log pσsup (s0 ) can be regarded as a
constant c′ in the sense of expectation:

                                                                                          def
       Es0 ∼ρ(s) c − log pσsup (s0 ) = c − Eρ(s) [log pσsup (s)] = c − H(ρ(·), pσsup (·)) = c′

                                                                       |     {z         }                  (10)
                                                                              constant


4.3    I NCORPORATING D UAL GF WITH L OW- LEVEL C ONTROLLER

Under the assumption that the system is holonomic, DualGF can also tackle the control tasks in-
corporated with a low-level controller C : S × S → A. For instance, if the atomic action space is
velocity (with speed limit vmax and simulation duration ∆t), we can set ϵ = vmax · ∆t in Eq. 7 and
cast the state change (st+1ˆ , st ) into a target velocity via a heuristic-based controller:

                                                    ˆ − st
                                                  st+1         vmax
                          at = C(st+1
                                   ˆ , st ) =              =             · gdual                           (11)
                                                     ∆t      ||gdual ||2

For the non-linear dynamics where the action space is forces imposed on the objects, we can leverage
a PID controller to achieve the target velocity in multiple steps. In this work, we focus on the
effectiveness of the high-level module trained under the fully example-based setting, i.e., the dual
gradient fields, instead of the complexity of the dynamics. Hence, we conduct experiments on tasks
with velocity-based action space (e.g., linear or angular velocity).


                                                      5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


The whole planning framework is summarised below:
                               gdual
                ˆ = st + ϵ
              st+1                       ,   gdual = ∇s log pσtar (st ) + λt ∇s log pσsup (st )
                             ||gdual ||2
                                              t
                                                                                       !!
                                             X
                                                         σ                           ′
             λt+1 = ReLU λt − µλ                 ∇s log psup (sk ), sk+1 − sk − c                     (12)
                                             k=0
                                          vmax
                  at = C(st+1
                           ˆ , st ) =               · gdual
                                        ||gdual ||2

4.4   L EARNING G RADIENT F IELDS FROM E XAMPLES

Finally, we seek to estimate the target and support gradient fields mentioned above to realise our
planning framework. Thanks to score-based generative modelling, we can obtain a guaranteed esti-
mation of these gradient fields from examples.
Preliminary: The Denoising Score-Matching (DSM) proposed by (Vincent, 2011) aims at estimat-
ing the score function of a data distribution ∇s log pdata (s). Given a sample set {s∗ ∼ pdata (s)},
DSM pre-specifies a noise distribution qσ (es|s), e.g., N (0, σ 2 I), and trains a score network Φθ (·) to
denoise the perturbed data samples:

                                                                       s−e  s
                        L(θ) = Ees∼qσ (es|s),s∼pdata (s) ||Φθ (e s) − 2 ||22                         (13)
                                                                        σ
This objective guarantees the optimal score network satisfies Φ∗θ (s) = ∇s qσ (s) almost surely. When
σ is small enough, we have ∇s qσ (s) ≈ ∇s log pdata (s), so that Φ∗θ (s) ≈ ∇s log pdata (s).
Training: Adopting DSM, we train a target score network Φθtar : Rda +dc → Rda and a support
                                                              ∗                           ∗
score network Φϕsup : Rda +dc → Rda from target examples Star    and support examples Ssup    respec-
tively, where da denotes the dimension of agent-state space (e.g., agent’s position and orientation)
and dc denotes the dimension of conditional-state space (e.g., agent’s category, obstacles’ state).
With sa ∈ Rda and sc ∈ Rdc denoted as agent-state and conditional-state respectively (s = [sa , sc ]),
the training objectives of both score networks are as follows:

                                                        θ                   sa − esa 2
                      L(θ) = Eqσ (esa |sa ),ptar (s) ||Φtar ([e
                                                              sa , sc ]) −           ||2
                                                                               σ2
                                                                                                (14)
                                                        ϕ                    sa − esa 2
                     L(ϕ) = Eqσ (esa |sa ),psup (s) ||Φsup ([e sa , sc ]) −           ||2
                                                                               σ2
We adopt a variant of DSM (Song et al., 2020) that conducts DSM under different noise scales
simultaneously. We defer network architecture and key hyperparameters to Appendix. C.1.


                                                   Pattern1      Pattern2   Pattern3
 (a) Navigation        (b) Tracking                      (c) Ball Rearrangement      (d) Room Rearrangement

Figure 4: Examples of four tasks used in the experiments. Navigation and Tracking: to reach/track
a goal location while avoiding collision with obstacles. Ball Rearrangement: to rearrange balls into
certain patterns. Room rearrangement: to rearrange the furniture into a reasonable layout.


                                                        6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                 Circling                                                                               Clustering                                                                  Circling + Clustering
             1.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Oracle
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            TarGF(ORCA)
       PL 0.5                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               DualGF
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            TarGF(SAC)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            DualGF(wo Sup)
             0.0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            GAIL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            RCE
                   0                  20        40                    60                80         100     0                 20          40                     60              80         100    0                          100                              200           300
                                                                                                                                       Time Step
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Room Arrangement
             1.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0.8
                                                                                                     4.0                                                                                    4.0
             0.8                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0.6
       CS
             0.5                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0.4
                                                                                                     2.0                                                                                    2.0
             0.2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0.2

             0.0                                                                                     0.0                                                                                    0.0                                                                              0.0
                        TarGF(ORCA)

                                       DualGF

                                                 TarGF(SAC)

                                                                DualGF(wo Sup)

                                                                                 GAIL

                                                                                             RCE


                                                                                                               TarGF(ORCA)

                                                                                                                              DualGF

                                                                                                                                         TarGF(SAC)

                                                                                                                                                        DualGF(wo Sup)

                                                                                                                                                                         GAIL

                                                                                                                                                                                     RCE


                                                                                                                                                                                                      TarGF(ORCA)

                                                                                                                                                                                                                    DualGF

                                                                                                                                                                                                                               TarGF(SAC)

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             DualGF(wo Sup)

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               GAIL

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      RCE


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   DualGF


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             TarGF(SAC)


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          DualGF(wo Sup)


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           GAIL


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  RCE
            20.0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1.0
                                                                                                                                                                                           15.0
            15.0                                                                                   10.0                                                                                                                                                                      0.8
      ACN                                                                                                                                                                                  10.0
            10.0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0.5
                                                                                                     5.0
             5.0                                                                                                                                                                            5.0                                                                              0.2

             0.0                                                                                     0.0                                                                                    0.0                                                                              0.0
                       TarGF(ORCA)

                                       DualGF

                                                TarGF(SAC)

                                                              DualGF(wo Sup)

                                                                                 GAIL

                                                                                             RCE


                                                                                                               TarGF(ORCA)

                                                                                                                              DualGF

                                                                                                                                        TarGF(SAC)

                                                                                                                                                      DualGF(wo Sup)

                                                                                                                                                                         GAIL

                                                                                                                                                                                 RCE


                                                                                                                                                                                                      TarGF(ORCA)

                                                                                                                                                                                                                    DualGF

                                                                                                                                                                                                                               TarGF(SAC)

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            DualGF(wo Sup)

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               GAIL

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      RCE


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   DualGF


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             TarGF(SAC)


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          DualGF(wo Sup)


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           GAIL


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  RCE
Figure 5: Comparative Results on Ball Rearrangement and Room Rearrangement. The results on
Ball Rearrangement are plotted in the first three columns. The CS and ACN results on Room Rear-
rangement are plotted in the last column. The order of the X-axis is fixed across CS and ACN bars.

5     E XPERIMENT S ETUPS
5.1   TASKS
We evaluate our method on three types of tasks with increasing difficulties. Navigation and Tracking:
Classical path planning tasks with explicit task rewards. The agent needs to reach or tack a goal
location while avoiding collision with the obstacles. The size and location of the obstacles changes
in each episode. Ball Rearrangement: The agent needs to infer the pattern priors from different
target examples and efficiently rearrange 21 balls into different types of patterns while covering all
the modes of each pattern over the trajectories. Room Rearrangement: The agent learns arrangement
priors from the target examples and rearranges the furniture in unseen layouts to cover the ground
truth layout. The task demonstrations are illustrated in Fig. 4. We defer detailed state and action
spaces, target and support examples, pseudo-likelihood function and more visualisations of the tasks
to Appendix A.

5.2   E VALUATION
We collect trajectories over 5 random seeds for evaluation. For each task, we collect trajectories
starting from the same initial states. We calculate the following metrics on the trajectories (for more
details, we defer to Appendix. B): Task Return weighted     P by Success (TRS) calculates the aver-
aged cumulative reward of an episode : E[1(τ is success) st ∈τ rt ] where rt denotes the immediate
reward and 1(τ is success) = 1 only when τ has no collision. Success Rate (SR) calculates the per-
centage of non-collision trajectories. Pseudo-Likelihood (PL) measures the similarity between a
given state and a target distribution by assigning a pseudo-likelihood function Fproxy : S → R+ . At
each time step t, the PL-curve reports the averaged PL across all trajectories E[Fproxy (st )]. Cover-
age Score (CS): reports the Minimal-Matching-Distance(MMD) (Achlioptas        Pet al., 2018) between
terminal states of a method ST and a fixed set of examples Sgt from ptar :           min ||sgt − sT ||.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             sgt ∈Sgt sT ∈ST
Averaged Collision
           P t Number          (ACN) reports the averaged collision number E[ct ] at each time step
where ct =   ci,j , cti,j = 1 only if the i-th and j-th object collide and cti,j = 0 otherwise.


                                                                                                                                                                                 7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023



Table 1: Comparative results on Navigation and Tracking. The obstacles is always fixed in Naviga-
tion (Static) while changes for each episode in Navigation (Dynamic).

                                          Navigation (Static)                        Navigation (Dynamic)                                                                         Tracking
                                         TRS ↑         SR ↑                          TRS ↑         SR ↑                                                                   TRS ↑          SR ↑
                  RL (SAC)              9.1 ± 0.6    0.21 ± 0.04                 8.3 ± 0.4                                     0.19 ± 0.01                               0.0 ± 0.0     0.21 ± 0.02
                    GAIL                1.5 ± 0.4    0.35 ± 0.01                 1.6 ± 1.0                                     0.20 ± 0.02                               0.1 ± 0.1     0.18 ± 0.04
                    RCE                 2.2 ± 1.2    0.13 ± 0.01                 2.2 ± 0.4                                     0.22 ± 0.04                               0.1 ± 0.0     0.17 ± 0.03
    Learning
                TarGF (SAC)             7.0 ± 0.2    0.19 ± 0.02                 4.4 ± 0.3                                     0.19 ± 0.01                               0.2 ± 0.1     0.18 ± 0.04
     Based
               DualGF (wo Sup)          0.0 ± 0.0    0.07 ± 0.01                 0.9 ± 0.1                                     0.09 ± 0.03                               0.0 ± 0.0     0.11 ± 0.04
                   DualGF              30.0 ± 1.5    0.37 ± 0.02                26.2 ± 6.5                                     0.39 ± 0.05                               3.4 ± 0.1     0.56 ± 0.03
    Planning   PRM (Reference)         37.8 ± 3.6    0.45 ± 0.04                39.5 ± 3.3                                     0.47 ± 0.04                               4.1 ± 0.9     0.16 ± 0.04
     Based      Potential Field        34.8 ± 0.8    0.45 ± 0.00                23.2 ± 5.6                                     0.28 ± 0.07                               2.2 ± 0.6     0.09 ± 0.02

                                                                0.0
                   0.2                                                                                                                                                        Lambda(0.0)
                                                                                                                                                                              Lambda(0.5)
                                                                -2.0
                                                                                                                                                                              Lambda(1.0)
               PL 0.1                                     ACN -4.0                                                                                                            Lambda(1.5)
                                                                                                                                                                              Lambda(2.0)
                                                                -6.0                                                                                                          Lambda(2.5)
                   0.0                                                                                                                                                        Lambda(3.0)

                         0   20   40    60    80    100



                                                                       Lambda(0.0)

                                                                                     Lambda(0.5)

                                                                                                   Lambda(1.0)

                                                                                                                 Lambda(1.5)

                                                                                                                               Lambda(2.0)

                                                                                                                                             Lambda(2.5)

                                                                                                                                                           Lambda(3.0)
                                  Time Step


Figure 6: Ablation results on Clustering, where ∆Metric = Metric(DualGF) - Metric(Ablated).
With mixing rate λ0 decreasing, the advantage of DualGF over the ablation increases significantly.

The primary metrics for each task: TRS and SR for Navigation and Tracking; PL and ACN for Ball
Rearrangement; CS and ACN for Room Rearrangement.

5.3     BASELINES
We compare our framework (i.e., DualGF) with the following learning-based baselines and
planning-based baselines. The implementation details are deferred to Appendix. C.2. Leaning-
based Baselines: TarGF(SAC): is the learning-based framework of TarGF (Wu et al., 2022). GAIL:
A classical inverse RL method that trains a discriminator as the reward function. This method
trains two classifiers from target and support examples, respectively. RCE: The SOTA example-
based reinforcement learning method. RL(SAC): The agent is trained under the ground-truth task re-
ward and collision signals. Planning-based Baselines: TarGF(ORCA): A model-based framework
that requires the ground-truth model. Probabilistic Road Map (PRM): A classical sampling-based
method Kavraki & Latombe (1994). Potentential Field: Artificial potential field method Lee & Park
(2003). Oracle: The oracle performance is obtained by slightly perturbing the target examples with
a small Gaussian noise.

6     E XPERIMENT R ESULTS
6.1     BASELINE C OMPARISON
As seen from the quantitative result in Tab. 1 and Fig. 5, DualGF significantly outperforms baselines
and achieves comparable performance with reference methods such as TarGF(ORCA) and PRM:
In Navigation and Tracking: 1) DualGF outperforms learning-based baselines by a large margin.
The classical planning algorithm PRM achieves strong results in task reward (TR) since it can search
for a near-optimal path without any collision to reach the goal in most cases. However, even if
we have provided an exhaustive sampling budget (i.e., 2000) for PRM in each episode, PRM still
fails to search for a solution in some cases. As a result, DualGF outperforms PRM in ACN on
Navigation (Static) and Tracking due to the failure cases of PRM. 2) Notably, the PRM is of poor
time efficiency compared with DualGF. As shown in Tab. 2, PRM takes about 6 times of DualGF
in Navigation and 110 times in Tracking since PRM needs to search a path again when the agent
reaches the goal. 3) The Navigation and Tracking is non-trivial. The vanilla reinforcement learning
approach RL(SAC) ranks second in the simplest task Navigation (Static), yet it fails to keep the
advantage in more challenging tasks, i.e., Navigation (Dynamic) and Tracking.


                                                                 8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


In Ball Rearrangement: 1) As Fig. 5 illustrated, DualGF achieves the best perfor-
mance compared with learning-based baselines in PL and ACN. In the hardest task Cir-
cling + Clustering, DualGF even outperforms than TarGF(ORCA) that plans with the
ground truth model. These demonstrate the effectiveness of our method to scale to high-
dimensional tasks.       2) The CS of DualGF is comparable with other competitive base-
lines such as TarGF(SAC). Hence, our method is not trivially overfitting to a single mode.
3) The classifier-based methods (i.e., GAIL and RCE) fail
due to the training collapse of the classifier. In practice,                Milliseconds per Step
we observe that classifier-based baselines achieve appeal-                Navigation     Tracking
ing results during the training process yet fail to converge     DualGF    3.3 ± 0.2    3.4 ± 0.2
at a high-performance level due to the over-exploitation          PRM      19.7 ± 2.3 376 ± 35.9
of the classifier.
In Room Rearrangement: 1) DualGF achieves the best Table 2: The inference time per step av-
performance compared with baselines in both CS and eraged over 100 trajectories.
ACN. This indicates that our method can generalise well
to the diverse conditional attributes such as different sizes, numbers and composition of objects. 2)
The planning-based methods either suffer from scalability issues that PRM and Rapidly-exploring
Random Trees (RRT) (LaValle et al., 1998a) cannot search for a feasible solution in 10 minutes.
Besides, TarGF(ORCA) assumes the agent is circular in shape which is infeasible in Room Rear-
rangement. Hence, we do not compare them in Room Rearrangement.

6.2   A BLATION S TUDIES AND A NALYSIS
We further conduct ablation studies to analyse the effectiveness of the key components of our
method, i.e., the support gradient field and the field-balancing mechanism. Further ablations on
key hyperparameters (i.e., initial λ and c′ ), size of the target and support sets and the choice of the
noise level t are deferred to Appendix D.1, D.2 and D.3 respectively.
Effectiveness of the Support Gradient Field: Ours wo Sup is the ablated version that fixes the
mixing rate to zero λ ≡ 0. 1) The task performance of DualGF wo Sup is worse than DualGF in all
tasks across both Navigation and Tracking and Ball Rearrangement. Besides, the ACN of DualGF
is significantly lower than DualGF wo Sup These results indicate that the support gradient field can
help avoid collision effectively and further improve task performance. 2) In Room Rearrangement,
DualGF wo Sup achieves better CS than DualGF, yet performs worse than baselines in ACN. Mean-
while, DualGF outperforms the baselines in both CS and ACN. This indicates support gradient field
helps to find a better trade-off between task completion and collision avoidance.
Effectiveness of Field-balancing Mechanism: DualGF(Fixed) is the ablated version of DualGF
with mixing rate lambda is fixed at an initial level. We illustrate the advantage of DualGF over
DualGF(Fixed) on PL and ACN on Fig. 6. With the initial lambda decrease, the advantage of
DualGF increases significantly in both PL and ACN. This indicates our field balancing mechanism
can moderate the sensitivity to the choice of initial mixing rate λ0 .

7     C ONCLUSION
In this study, we first reformulate the path planning problem in a novel data-driven paradigm where
the agent learns to plan with two sets of examples. We further propose a novel score-based planning
framework (DualGF) to tackle this problem. There are two gradient fields in DualGFs: a target
gradient field that guides task completion and a support gradient field that ensures moving with
physical constraints. Moreover, an adaptive gradient balance mechanism is introduced to combine
the merits of the two fields. Experiments demonstrate the scalability of our method, and empirical
results show that it significantly outperforms state-of-the-art baselines in efficiency and safety.
Limitations and Future Work: The main limitations of this work are the local minimum issue as
discussed in Appendix D.6 and the holonomic assumption made in Sec 4.3. Another minor issue is
the inherent instability of the Lagrangian Relaxation which can be mitigated via a small learning rate
and gradient clipping, as discussed in Appendix D.7. In the future, we may incorporate our method
with MCMC-based approaches such as Langevin Dynamics to overcome the local minimum issues.
Besides, we may extend our method to non-holonomic scenarios by integrating model-predictive
control (MPC).


                                                   9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


R EFERENCES
Panos Achlioptas, Olga Diamanti, Ioannis Mitliagkas, and Leonidas Guibas. Learning representa-
  tions and generative models for 3d point clouds. In International conference on machine learning,
  pp. 40–49. PMLR, 2018.

Qisen Chai, Yujun Wang, Yong He, Caijing Xu, and Zhisong Hong. Improved prm path planning
  in narrow passages based on pso. In 2022 IEEE International Conference on Mechatronics and
  Automation (ICMA), pp. 41–46. IEEE, 2022.

Erwin Coumans and Yunfei Bai. Pybullet, a python module for physics simulation for games,
  robotics and machine learning. http://pybullet.org, 2016–2021.

Andrew Dobson and Kostas E Bekris. Sparse roadmap spanners for asymptotically near-optimal
  motion planning. The International Journal of Robotics Research, 33(1):18–47, 2014.

Benjamin Eysenbach, Sergey Levine, and Ruslan Salakhutdinov. Replacing rewards with examples:
  Example-based policy search via recursive classification. arXiv preprint arXiv:2103.12656, 2021.

Huan Fu, Bowen Cai, Lin Gao, Ling-Xiao Zhang, Jiaming Wang, Cao Li, Qixun Zeng, Chengyue
  Sun, Rongfei Jia, Binqiang Zhao, et al. 3d-front: 3d furnished rooms with layouts and seman-
  tics. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 10933–
  10942, 2021.

Justin Fu, Katie Luo, and Sergey Levine. Learning robust rewards with adversarial inverse rein-
  forcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1710.11248, 2017.

Justin Fu, Avi Singh, Dibya Ghosh, Larry Yang, and Sergey Levine. Variational inverse control with
  events: A general framework for data-driven reward definition. arXiv preprint arXiv:1805.11686,
  2018.

Scott Fujimoto, Herke Hoof, and David Meger. Addressing function approximation error in actor-
  critic methods. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 1587–1596. PMLR, 2018.

Jonathan D Gammell, Timothy D Barfoot, and Siddhartha S Srinivasa. Batch informed trees (bit*):
  Informed asymptotically optimal anytime search. The International Journal of Robotics Research,
  39(5):543–567, 2020.

Tuomas Haarnoja, Aurick Zhou, Kristian Hartikainen, George Tucker, Sehoon Ha, Jie Tan, Vikash
  Kumar, Henry Zhu, Abhishek Gupta, Pieter Abbeel, et al. Soft actor-critic algorithms and appli-
  cations. arXiv preprint arXiv:1812.05905, 2018.

Kyle Hatch, Tianhe Yu, Rafael Rafailov, and Chelsea Finn. Example-based offline reinforcement
  learning without rewards. Proceedings of Machine Learning Research vol, 144:1–17, 2022.

Matthias Hüppi, Luca Bartolomei, Ruben Mascaro, and Margarita Chli. T-prm: Temporal proba-
 bilistic roadmap for path planning in dynamic environments. In IEEE/RSJ International Confer-
 ence on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS 2022), 2022.

Michael Janner, Yilun Du, Joshua B Tenenbaum, and Sergey Levine. Planning with diffusion for
 flexible behavior synthesis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.09991, 2022.

Sertac Karaman and Emilio Frazzoli. Sampling-based algorithms for optimal motion planning. The
  international journal of robotics research, 30(7):846–894, 2011.

Lydia Kavraki and J-C Latombe. Randomized preprocessing of configuration for fast path planning.
  In Proceedings of the 1994 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation, pp.
  2138–2145. IEEE, 1994.

Jennifer E King, Marco Cognetti, and Siddhartha S Srinivasa. Rearrangement planning using object-
  centric and robot-centric action spaces. In 2016 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and
  Automation (ICRA), pp. 3940–3947. IEEE, 2016.


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Ilya Kostrikov, Kumar Krishna Agrawal, Debidatta Dwibedi, Sergey Levine, and Jonathan Tomp-
   son. Discriminator-actor-critic: Addressing sample inefficiency and reward bias in adversarial
   imitation learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1809.02925, 2018.
Geesara Kulathunga. A reinforcement learning based path planning approach in 3d environment.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2105.10342, 2021.
Steven M LaValle et al. Rapidly-exploring random trees: A new tool for path planning. 1998a.
Steven M LaValle et al. Rapidly-exploring random trees: A new tool for path planning. 1998b.
Min Cheol Lee and Min Gyu Park. Artificial potential field based path planning for mobile robots
 using a virtual obstacle concept. In Proceedings 2003 IEEE/ASME international conference on
 advanced intelligent mechatronics (AIM 2003), volume 2, pp. 735–740. IEEE, 2003.
Chenming Li, Han Ma, Peng Xu, Jiankun Wang, and Max Q-H Meng. Biait*: Symmetrical bidirec-
  tional optimal path planning with adaptive heuristic. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.06940, 2022.
Minghuan Liu, Tairan He, Minkai Xu, and Weinan Zhang. Energy-based imitation learning. arXiv
 preprint arXiv:2004.09395, 2020.
BK Patle, Anish Pandey, DRK Parhi, A Jagadeesh, et al. A review: On path planning strategies for
 navigation of mobile robot. Defence Technology, 15(4):582–606, 2019.
Dean A Pomerleau. Efficient training of artificial neural networks for autonomous navigation. Neu-
  ral computation, 3(1):88–97, 1991.
Siddharth Reddy, Anca D Dragan, and Sergey Levine. Sqil: Imitation learning via reinforcement
  learning with sparse rewards. arXiv preprint arXiv:1905.11108, 2019.
Stéphane Ross and Drew Bagnell. Efficient reductions for imitation learning. In Proceedings of the
   thirteenth international conference on artificial intelligence and statistics, pp. 661–668. JMLR
   Workshop and Conference Proceedings, 2010.
Stéphane Ross, Geoffrey Gordon, and Drew Bagnell. A reduction of imitation learning and struc-
   tured prediction to no-regret online learning. In Proceedings of the fourteenth international con-
   ference on artificial intelligence and statistics, pp. 627–635. JMLR Workshop and Conference
   Proceedings, 2011.
Stuart J Russell. Artificial intelligence a modern approach. Pearson Education, Inc., 2010.
Atsushi Sakai, Daniel Ingram, Joseph Dinius, Karan Chawla, Antonin Raffin, and Alexis Paques.
  Pythonrobotics: a python code collection of robotics algorithms, 2018.
Bokui Shen, Fei Xia, Chengshu Li, Roberto Martı́n-Martı́n, Linxi Fan, Guanzhi Wang, Claudia
  Pérez-D’Arpino, Shyamal Buch, Sanjana Srivastava, Lyne P. Tchapmi, Micael E. Tchapmi, Kent
  Vainio, Josiah Wong, Li Fei-Fei, and Silvio Savarese. igibson 1.0: a simulation environment
  for interactive tasks in large realistic scenes. In 2021 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on
  Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), pp. accepted. IEEE, 2021.
Yang Song, Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, Diederik P Kingma, Abhishek Kumar, Stefano Ermon, and Ben
  Poole. Score-based generative modeling through stochastic differential equations. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2011.13456, 2020.
Marlin P Strub and Jonathan D Gammell. Adaptively informed trees (ait*): Fast asymptotically
 optimal path planning through adaptive heuristics. In 2020 IEEE International Conference on
 Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pp. 3191–3198. IEEE, 2020.
Marlin P Strub and Jonathan D Gammell. Adaptively informed trees (ait*) and effort informed
 trees (eit*): Asymmetric bidirectional sampling-based path planning. The International Journal
 of Robotics Research, 41(4):390–417, 2022.
Aviv Tamar, Yi Wu, Garrett Thomas, Sergey Levine, and Pieter Abbeel. Value iteration networks.
  Advances in neural information processing systems, 29, 2016.


                                                 11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Pascal Vincent. A connection between score matching and denoising autoencoders. Neural compu-
  tation, 23(7):1661–1674, 2011.
Mingdong Wu, Fangwei Zhong, Yulong Xia, and Hao Dong. Targf: Learning target gradient field
 for object rearrangement. In Thirty-sixth Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems,
 2022.
Hong You, Gang Chen, Qingxuan Jia, and Zeyuan Huang. Path planning for robot in multi-
  dimensional environment based on dynamic prm blended potential field. In 2021 IEEE 5th
  Information Technology, Networking, Electronic and Automation Control Conference (ITNEC),
  volume 5, pp. 1157–1162. IEEE, 2021.
Jinglun Yu, Yuancheng Su, and Yifan Liao. The path planning of mobile robot by neural networks
   and hierarchical reinforcement learning. Frontiers in Neurorobotics, 14:63, 2020.
Fangwei Zhong, Peng Sun, Wenhan Luo, Tingyun Yan, and Yizhou Wang. Ad-vat+: An asymmetric
  dueling mechanism for learning and understanding visual active tracking. IEEE Transactions on
  Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 43(5):1467–1482, 2019.
Brian D Ziebart, Andrew L Maas, J Andrew Bagnell, Anind K Dey, et al. Maximum entropy inverse
  reinforcement learning. In Aaai, volume 8, pp. 1433–1438. Chicago, IL, USA, 2008.


                                              12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A     TASK D ETAILS

A.1    T RACKING AND NAVIGATION

Navigation and Tracking requires the agent to reach a static location or track a dynamic location
while avoiding collision with the obstacles. There are four rectangular obstacles and a particle agent.
The scale, position and orientation of the obstacles are randomised before each episode in both
tracking and navigation. The goal location is randomly reset at the start of the episode. Note that in
tracking, the goal location will be further reset when reached by the agent. In this task, the target
distribution is assigned as a Gaussian distribution centred on the goal location, i.e., N (g, 0.12 I).
The state space is the concatenation of the agent’s position, goal location and geometry observations
of obstacles. The action space is two-dimensional linear velocity.
State and Action Spaces: s = [sa , sc ] where the agent state is 2-D location sa = [x, y] ∈
[−1, 1]2 and condition-state is the 2D goal location and obstacles’ states sc = [g, o1 , o2 , o3 , o4 ]
where g ∈ [−1, 1]2 and oi denotes the state of the i-th obstacle. The obstacle state is the nor-
malised position, orientation and side-length oi = [pos, ori, side] where pos ∈ [−1, 1]2 , ori =
[sin(yaw), cos(yaw)] ∈ [−1, 1]2 , side ∈ [−1, 1].
Horizon: 100.
Initial Distribution: Before each episode, we first randomly initialise 4 box-shaped obstacles and
then randomly sample the agent’s state that does not collide with the obstacles.
Dynamics: The floor and wall are all absolutely smooth planes. The arena is a 0.25m x 0.25m area,
with the agent’s radius being 0.015m. We set the friction coefficients of all obstacles and agents to
10.0 to penalise the collision.
Target Examples: To sample a target example, we first randomly initialise the obstacles’ locations
and sizes and the goal location. Then, we sample an agent’s location via repeatedly sampling from a
Gaussian distribution centred on the fixed goal location until the location is collision-free. To ensure
the target score network can work well, we sample 100,000 examples for training.
Support Examples: To sample a support example, we first randomly initialise the obstacles’ loca-
tions and sizes and the goal location. Then, we sample an agent’s location via repeatedly sampling
from the uniform distribution over the configuration space until the location is collision-free. To
collect support examples, we reset the environment 200 times. For each reset, we collect 1000
examples from the same condition. Thus, the number of support examples is 200,000 in total.


A.2    BALL R EARRANGEMENT

Ball Rearrangement includes three sub-tasks: Circling, Clustering, and the hybrid of the first two,
Circling + Clustering. In both sub-tasks, there are three sets of 7 balls that belong to different
categories, i.e., red, green and blue. The state and action spaces are the joint positions and linear
velocities of all balls respectively. The agent is required to rearrange all balls to maximise the target
likelihood of the joint state while avoiding collisions. The interpretations of the target distribution
of each task are as follows: Clustering requires all balls to form into three clusters by colour; Both
Circling and Circling + Clustering require all balls to form into a circle that can be centred anywhere
in the arena, except that the latter further requires that the balls of the same type are adjacent to each
other.
State and Action Spaces: There are 21 balls in the environment. The state space is the con-
catenation of all sub-states of all balls: s = [s1 , s2 , ..., s2 1]. For each ball, the sub-state is
si = [sa , sc ], sa = [x, y], sc = [c] where x, y ∈ [−1, 1] denotes the two dimensional position
and c ∈ {0, 1, 2} is a class label. The action space is also the concatenation of all sub-actions of all
balls: a = [a1 , a2 , ..., a2 1] where ai ∈ [−1, 1]2 is a 2-dimensional linear velocity.
Horizon: 300 for Circling + Clustering and 100 for Circling and Clustering.
Initial Distribution: We first uniformly sample rough locations for each ball, and then we eliminate
overlaps between these positions by executing the physical simulation.


                                                   13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                  (a) Six Modes of Clustering


  (b) Examples of Circling                           (c) Examples of Circling + Clustering


Figure 7: Visualisation of three sub-tasks of Ball Rearrangement. (a): Clustering requires all balls
to form into three clusters by colour. (b): Circling requires all balls to form into a circle, neglecting
the colour order. (c): Circling + Clustering require all balls to form into a circle while the balls of
the same type are adjacent to each other.


Dynamics: The floor and wall are all absolutely smooth planes. All the balls are bounded in an 0.3m
x 0.3m area, with the radius being 0.025m. We set the friction coefficients of all balls to 100.0 since
we observe that setting a small(e.g.not larger than 1.0) friction coefficient does not significantly
affect the dynamics. Besides, to increase the complexity of the dynamics, we set the masses and
restitution coefficients of all green and blue balls to 0.1 and 0.99, respectively. The masses and
restitution coefficients of all red balls are set to 10 and 0.1, respectively. We observe that under these
dynamics, the collision may significantly harm the efficiency of the rearrangement process. Hence,
the agent has to adapt to the dynamics for more efficient object rearrangement.
Target Examples: For Circling, first random sample a feasible centre in the free space. Given the
centre, we further random sample a feasible radius for the target circle. Then we sample a circle
orientation of the target circle. Given the centre, radius and orientation, we can obtain feasible
locations for balls to form a circle. Finally, we randomly assign these positions to the balls. For
Clustering, we directly sample initial ball locations from a Gaussian Mixture Model in Eq. 15. Then
we step physical simulations to remove the collision between balls. The final state serves as a target
example. For Circling+Clustering, it is similar to Circling. We first sample feasible locations for
balls to form in a circle. Then we randomly sample a ‘colourisation starting point’. Starting from
this point, we colourise the balls in R − G − B or R − B − G order (50% for each order). For these
three tasks, we collect 100,000 target examples. However, we demonstrate in Appendix D.2 that the
target examples can be reduced to 100 in Clustering.
Support Examples: When sampling support examples, we increase the number of balls from 3 × 7
to 3 × 10 so as to increase the ball density in the arena. Since our score network is implemented as
a graph neural network (As mentioned in Appendix C.1), the network can be transferred to different
dimensions of input. To sample a support example, we uniformly sample locations for all the balls
independently. Then we step physical simulations to remove collisions between balls to obtain a
support example. To collect support examples, we repeat the above procedure to obtain 100, 000
examples. As shown in Appendix D.2, 50,000 support examples also work well.

A.3    ROOM R EARRANGEMENT

Room Rearrangement is built on a large-scale, synthetic indoor scene dataset 3D-FRONT (Fu
et al., 2021). Following (Wu et al., 2022), we use 756 of 839 rooms for training and 83 for testing.
The agent is required to learn scene priors from the target examples (i.e., training set) and rearrange


                                                   14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


objects into reasonable layouts during the test phase. The state space is the concatenation of obser-
vations of each object and the room boundary information. The action space is the concatenation of
the two-dimensional linear velocity and one-dimensional angular velocity of each object.
Dataset and Simulator: We clean the 3D-Front dataset Fu et al. (2021) to obtain bedrooms that
consist of four walls and three to eight objects. We augment each room by flipping two times and
rotating four times to get eight augmentations. We then import these rooms into iGibson Shen et al.
(2021) to run the physical simulation. The 756x8 rooms are used for target examples that are used
for training the target score network, the classifier-based baselines and the VAE in goal-conditioned
baselines. The other 83x8 rooms are used to initialise the room in the test phase, so the room
rearrangement task is performed on the test dataset. The rooms in the training dataset are only used
for learning prior knowledge to arrange the room.
State and Action Spaces: The state consists of a aspect ratio ra ∈ R+ and an object state so ∈
RK×6 where K denotes the number of objects. The aspect ratio ra = tanh( bbxy ) where bx and by
denotes the horizontal and vertical wall bounds. The object state is the concatenation of sub-states
of all the objects so = [s1 , s2 , ...si , ..., sK ] where the sub-state of the i-th object si ∈ R6 is consists
of 2-D position, 1-D orientation, 2-D bounding bound and a 1-D category label. The action is also
a concatenation of sub-actions of all the objects ao = [a1 , a2 , ...ai , ..., aK ]. For the i-th object,
the action ai ∈ R3 consists of a 2-D linear and a 1-D angular velocity. The whole action space
is normalised into a 3 × K dimensional unit-box [−1, 1]3×K by the velocity bounds. Note that
the agent-state sa in this task is the concatenation of agents’ positions and orientations while the
condition-state sc in this task is the aspect ratio and the concatenation of agents’ labels and 2-d
bounding boxes.
Horizon: Each training episode contains 100 steps, instead of 250 steps used in Wu et al. (2022).
Initial Distribution: To guarantee the initial state is accessible to the high-density region of the
target distribution, we sample an initial state in two stages: First, we sample a room from the 83x8
rooms in the test dataset. Then we perturb this room by 1000 Brownian steps.
Dynamics: For more efficient environment reset and physical simulation, we build a ‘proxy sim-
ulator’ based on PyBullet Coumans & Bai (2016–2021) to replace the iGibson simulator. We use
iGibson to load and save the metadata of each room. Then we reload these rooms in the proxy simu-
lator, where each object is replaced by a box with the same geometry. We set the friction coefficient
of all the objects in the room to zero, as the dynamics of the room are complex enough.
Target Examples: We use the 756x8 rooms from the training set as target examples.
Support Examples: Starting from each state in the target examples, we perturb the state via Brow-
nian steps. For every 800 steps, we collect a state and then step simulations to turn it into a feasible
support example. For each room, we collect 100 times. After cleaning the data, we obtain a support
set with 448, 754 examples.


B     M ETRIC D ETAILS

Here we introduce additional details of PL and CS.

B.1    P SEUDO -L IKELIHOOD (PL)

measures the similarity between a given state and a target distribution by assigning a pseudo-
likelihood function Fproxy : S → R+ . At each time step t, the PL-curve reports the averaged
PL across all trajectories E[Fproxy (st )]. Hence, the PL curve indicates the efficiency and final per-
formance of each method. We do not report the PL-curves on Room Rearrangement, since it is hard
to describe the human preferences and scene priors by hand-engineering.
The PL curve is only reported in Ball Rearrangement. The specific pseudo-likelihood functions are
listed as follows:
Circling: The pseudo-likelihood function is defined as Fproxy (s) = exp−(σθ +σr ) , where σθ and σr
denote the standard deviation of the angle between two adjacent balls and the distances from each


                                                      15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


ball to the centre of gravity of all balls, respectively. Intuitively, if a set of balls are arranged into a
circle, then the σr and σθ should be close to zero, achieving higher pseudo-likelihood.
Clustering: Different from (Wu et al., 2022), our target distribution is a six-mode Gaussian instead
of a two-mode Gaussian:
Defining the joint centres’ positions as a latent variable C = (Cr , Cg , Cb ) where Cr , Cg and Cb
denote centres of red, green and blue balls respectively and the above six modes as {ci }1≤i≤6 , the
C obeys a categorical distribution p(C = ci ) = 16 . The pseudo-likelihood function is a Gaussian
Mixture Model:
                  X
   pGM M (s) =          p(C = ck )p(s|C = ck )
                   1≤k≤6
                     Y                               Y                                Y
 p(s|C = ck ) =             N (Crk , 0.05I)(si )             N (Cgk , 0.05I)(si )             N (Cbk , 0.05I)(si )
                   1≤i≤ K
                        3
                                                   K    2K
                                                   3 ≤i≤ 3
                                                                                    2K
                                                                                     3 ≤i≤K
                                                                                                              (15)
Circling+Clusterng:        The pseudo-likelihood function is defined as Fproxy (s)            =
    −(σθ +σr )      −(σR +σG +σB )−σC
exp            · exp                   where σR denotes the standard deviation of the angle
between two adjacent red balls, and σG and σB and σC denotes the standard deviation of the
positions of red, green and blue centres. Intuitively, the first term exp−(σθ +σr ) measures the
pseudo-likelihood of balls forming a circle and the next term exp−(σR +σG +σB )+σC measures the
pseudo-likelihood of balls being clustered into three piles.

B.2    C OVERAGE S CORE (CS):

CS measures the diversity and fidelity of the terminal states ST =. CS reports the Minimal-
Matching-Distance(MMD)
            P             (Achlioptas et al., 2018) between ST and a fixed set of examples Sgt
from ptar :       min ||sgt − sT ||. This metric can detect mode-collapsing: If an agent only
              sgt ∈Sgt sT ∈ST
moves objects to a single mode, the terminal states may be far away from other modes which leads
to a high value of CS (i.e., bad performance).
For Ball Rearrangement: To calculate the coverage score, we sample fixed sets examples from the
target distribution serving as Sgt for Circling, Clustering, and Circling+Clustering, respectively. We
sample 20 examples for Circling and Circling+Clustering and 50 examples for Clustering. Since
the balls in the same category can actually be viewed as a two-dimensional point cloud, we measure
the distance between two states by summing the CDs between each pile of balls by category.
For Room Rearrangement: The coverage score is calculated by averaging the coverage score
in each room condition since the state dimension differs in different rooms. For each room in
83 test rooms, we calculate the coverage score between the eight ground truth states and eight
rearrangement results and then the averaged coverage score over the 83 rooms is taken as the final
coverage score for a method. We measure the distance between two states by calculating the average
L2 distance between the positions of the corresponding objects.


C     I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS

For all learning-based baselines, we implement all the methods including ours in the same network
architecture design and basically the same capacity (e.g., hidden dimensions).

C.1    D UAL GF

Training Objective: The complete training objective for both target and support networks is the
SDE-based score-matching objective proposed by Song et al. (2020):
      Et∼U (0,1) Es(0)∼pdata (s) Es(t)∼p0t (s(t)|s(0)) [Φθ (s(t), t) − ∇s(t) log p0t (s(t) | s(0))∥22 ].      (16)
                                            1      2t
where p0t (s(t) | s(0)) = N (s(t); s(0), 2 log σ (σ − 1)I) and σ = 25 is a hyper-parameter.


                                                       16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Using this objective, we can obtainR the estimated score w.r.t. different levels of the noise-perturbed
target distribution ptdata (s(t)) = p0t (s(t) | s(0))pdata (s(0))ds(0)simultaneously. In this way, we
can assign different noise-level t for different tasks conveniently. For all tasks, our method chooses
t = 0.01.
Network Architecture: In Navigation and Tracking, our score networks are simply implemented
as fully connected layers. We first encode the agent position sa and noise-level t into feature vectors
fa and ft . The state of each obstacle oi is encoded by a shared linear layer to foi . We then pool
the {foi }4i into a single vector. The support score network concatenates the fa , ft and fo and sends
them to a linear fusion layer to get the score output. The target score network further encodes goal
location into fg and concatenates the fa , ft , fg and fo and sends them to a linear fusion layer to get
the score output. In Ball Rearrangement and Room Rearrangement, the architecture of the target
score network is exactly the same as the score network of Wu et al. (2022) used in Clustering and
Cirlcing+Clustering. The support score network is exactly the same as the score network of Wu
et al. (2022) used in Circling which does not encode the class label into the initial feature.
Reproduction: To entirely reproduce the results and check the details, we recommend running
our code released on the Anonymous Github https://anonymous.4open.science/r/
ICLR23AnonymousCode-1426.

C.2   BASELINES

C.3   TAR GF

The training objective of TarGF is the same as Eq. 16. And we set t = 0.01 for all experiments for
a fair comparison.
For TarGF(SAC): The implementation is based on the codes released by authors, except that we
set t = 0.01 for both reward estimation and residual policy for a fair comparison.
For TarGF(ORCA): We set τ = 0.1 and the simulation duration of each timestep ∆t = 0.02. For
each agent(object), ORCA only considers the 2-nearest agents as neighbours, since in our experi-
ments ORCA often has no solution when the number of neighbours is larger than 2.

C.4   C LASSIFIER - BASED BASELINES

These baselines refer to the RCE and GAIL in experiments.
RCE and is implemented based on the codes Eysenbach et al. (2021) released by RCE’s authors. We
only modify γ = 0.95, the training steps decrease to 0.5 million (i.e., the same number of training
steps as other methods) and the model architecture. The architecture of actor and critic networks is
implemented the same as ours(i.e., the same feature extraction layers and edge-convolutional layers).
GAIL trains two classifiers by discriminating two example sets with agent’s rollouts respectively.
The discriminator takes only one state instead of two adjacent states as input since the ‘ground
truth’ reward(i.e., likelihood) is defined on the current state. At each training step, we update the
discriminator by distinguishing between the agents’ and the expert’s states(for one step) and then
update the RL policy under the reward given by the discriminator(for one step).

C.5   RL(SAC) IN NAVIGATION AND T RACKING

This is implemented as ablation of GAIL that replaces the classifiers with ground truth task rewards.

C.6   PRM

We implement PRM from an off-the-shelf open-sourced repository PythonRobotics Sakai et al.
(2018) with 16.3k stars. This implementation is also used for navigation tasks. We keep the de-
fault configuration and properly rescale our configurations to fit the API.



                                                  17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


C.7         P OTENTIAL F IELD

This baseline is also implemented from an off-the-shelf open-sourced repository Python-
Robotics Sakai et al. (2018) with 16.3k stars. We set ζ = 1.0 for the attractive field and ζ = 1.0 for
the repulsive field. The distance threshold of the repulsive field is set to be Q∗ = 0.1.

D       A DDITIONAL A NALYSIS

D.1         A BLATIONS ON M IXING R ATE λ AND T HRESHOLD c′

We seek to evaluate the sensitivity of our method to the two key hyperparameters, i.e., λ0 and c′ .
The experiments are conducted on Clustering for better quantitative evaluation.
We evaluate DualGF with different levels of the initial lambda λ0 . As shown in Fig. 8, the PL and
CS do not significantly change when the λ ≥ 1.0. This indicates our method is not sensitive to λ
when it is above a positive threshold.


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Lambda(0.0)
     1.00
                                                 1.0                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Lambda(0.5)
     0.75                                                                                                                                                          10.0                                                                                                         Lambda(1.0)
PL                                          CS                                                                                                               ACN                                                                                                                Lambda(1.5)
     0.50                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Lambda(2.0)
                                                 0.5                                                                                                                5.0
     0.25                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Lambda(2.5)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Lambda(3.0)
     0.00                                        0.0                                                                                                                0.0
            0   25      50       75   100
                                                       Lambda(2.0)
                                                                      Lambda(2.5)
                                                                                    Lambda(1.5)
                                                                                                   Lambda(1.0)
                                                                                                                 Lambda(3.0)
                                                                                                                                Lambda(0.5)
                                                                                                                                               Lambda(0.0)


                                                                                                                                                                          Lambda(3.0)
                                                                                                                                                                                         Lambda(2.5)
                                                                                                                                                                                                       Lambda(2.0)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Lambda(1.5)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Lambda(1.0)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Lambda(0.5)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Lambda(0.0)
                     Time Step


Figure 8: Ablation study results on the mixing rate λt . We fix the threshold c′ = 8 and evaluate
DualGF with different initial lambda.

Further, we evaluate DualGF with different levels of the initial threshold c′ . As shown in Fig. 9, the
PL and CS do not significantly change with all different levels of threshold but the ACN becomes
better with the increase of the threshold. This indicates our method is not sensitive to c′ .


     1.00                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Threshold(5)
                                                 1.0                                                                                                                0.0                                                                                                         Threshold(6)
     0.75                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Threshold(7)
PL                                          CS 0.8                                                                                                           ACN 0.0                                                                                                            Threshold(8)
     0.50
                                                 0.5
     0.25                                                                                                                                                           0.0
                                                 0.2
     0.00                                        0.0                                                                                                                0.0
            0   25      50       75   100
                                                       Threshold(6)


                                                                                    Threshold(5)


                                                                                                                 Threshold(8)


                                                                                                                                              Threshold(7)


                                                                                                                                                                          Threshold(8)


                                                                                                                                                                                                       Threshold(7)


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Threshold(6)


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Threshold(5)


                     Time Step


Figure 9: Ablation study results on the threshold c′ . We fix the threshold c′ = 8 and evaluate
DualGF with different initial lambda.


D.2         A BLATIONS ON THE S IZE OF THE E XAMPLE S ETS

This ablation study is conducted on Clustering. For simplicity, we just fix the λt at the initial value.
Target Set: We replace the target score network with ablated versions trained on different scales of
the target set. As shown in the figure. 10, the performance of DualGF does not significantly drop with
the number of target examples decreasing. Notably, with only 100 target examples, DualGF(Tar
1e2) achieves comparable performance to the DualGF(Tar 1e5) in PL, CS and ACN.
Support Set: Similarly, we replace the support score network with ablated versions trained on dif-
ferent scales of the support set. As shown in the figure. 11, the performance of DualGF significantly


                                                                                                                                18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


drops after the number of support examples is smaller than 50,000. This is reasonable since the
volume of the free space increases exponentially with the dimension of the state space. Thus, it is
infeasible to learn a good support score network with few examples. In our cases, using 50,000 to
100,000 support examples works well for 42-dimensional state space (i.e., 21 balls).


   1.00                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Oracle
                                               4.0                                                                                                                                                                     10.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          DualGF(Tar 1e5)
   0.75                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   DualGF(Tar 1e4)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        7.5
PL 0.50                                   CS 3.0                                                                                                                                                                ACN                                                                                                                                                                       DualGF(Tar 1e3)
                                               2.0                                                                                                                                                                      5.0                                                                                                                                                               DualGF(Tar 1e2)
   0.25                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   TarGF(SAC)
                                               1.0                                                                                                                                                                      2.5                                                                                                                                                               GAIL
   0.00
                                               0.0                                                                                                                                                                      0.0
          0   25      50       75   100



                                                            DualGF(Tar 1e5)

                                                                                            DualGF(Tar 1e4)

                                                                                                                                  DualGF(Tar 1e3)

                                                                                                                                                                DualGF(Tar 1e2)

                                                                                                                                                                                          TarGF(SAC)

                                                                                                                                                                                                         GAIL


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          DualGF(Tar 1e5)

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                DualGF(Tar 1e4)

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              DualGF(Tar 1e3)

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         DualGF(Tar 1e2)

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 TarGF(SAC)

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 GAIL
                   Time Step



                           Figure 10: Ablation results on the number of target examples.



   1.00                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Oracle
                                              4.0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         DualGF(Sup 1e5)
   0.75                                                                                                                                                                                                                10.0                                                                                                                                                               DualGF(Sup 5e4)
PL 0.50                                   CS 3.0                                                                                                                                                                ACN                                                                                                                                                                       DualGF(Sup 1e4)
                                              2.0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         DualGF(Sup 5e3)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        5.0
   0.25                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   TarGF(SAC)
                                              1.0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         GAIL
   0.00
                                              0.0                                                                                                                                                                       0.0
          0   25      50       75   100
                                                           DualGF(Sup 1e5)

                                                                                            DualGF(Sup 5e4)

                                                                                                                                  DualGF(Sup 1e4)

                                                                                                                                                                DualGF(Sup 5e3)

                                                                                                                                                                                         TarGF(SAC)

                                                                                                                                                                                                         GAIL


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          DualGF(Sup 1e5)

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                DualGF(Sup 5e4)

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              DualGF(Sup 1e4)

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        DualGF(Sup 5e3)

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 TarGF(SAC)

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 GAIL
                   Time Step



                           Figure 11: Ablation results on the number of support examples.


D.3       A BLATIONS ON THE C HOICE OF N OISE L EVEL OF THE S CORE N ETWORK

This ablation study is conducted on Clustering. For simplicity, we just fix the λt at the initial value.
Target Score Network: We fix the noise scale of the support score network at t = 0.01 (same
as DualGF in the main paper). We then compare the performance of the target score networks
conditioned on different levels of noise scale in Figure. 12. With the noise level decreasing, the
performance on PL and ACN slightly drops. This indicates the target score network can still provide
useful target gradients under smaller noise levels. However, we observe that the target score network
conditioned on a smaller noise scale seems to be more ‘unsafe’. Thus, we have to specify a larger
initial value of λt to regularise the target gradient. For t = 0.005, 0.001, 0.0005, 0.0001, we specify
λt = 4, 10, 15, 20 respectively.


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Oracle
   1.00                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 DualGF(Tar 0.01)
                                              4.0                                                                                                                                                                     10.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        DualGF(Tar 0.005)
   0.75                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 DualGF(Tar 0.001)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       7.5
PL 0.50                                   CS 3.0                                                                                                                                                                ACN                                                                                                                                                                     DualGF(Tar 0.0005)
                                              2.0                                                                                                                                                                      5.0                                                                                                                                                              DualGF(Tar 0.0001)
   0.25                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 TarGF(SAC)
                                              1.0                                                                                                                                                                      2.5                                                                                                                                                              GAIL
   0.00
                                              0.0                                                                                                                                                                      0.0
          0   25      50       75   100
                                                     DualGF(Tar 0.01)

                                                                              DualGF(Tar 0.005)

                                                                                                              DualGF(Tar 0.001)

                                                                                                                                           DualGF(Tar 0.0005)

                                                                                                                                                                   DualGF(Tar 0.0001)

                                                                                                                                                                                        TarGF(SAC)

                                                                                                                                                                                                       GAIL


                                                                                                                                                                                                                              DualGF(Tar 0.01)

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            DualGF(Tar 0.005)

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          DualGF(Tar 0.001)

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  DualGF(Tar 0.0005)

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       DualGF(Tar 0.0001)

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            TarGF(SAC)

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              GAIL


                   Time Step


                   Figure 12: Ablation results on the noise level of the target score network.


                                                                                                                                                                                                19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Support Score Network: Similarly, we fix the noise scale of the target score network at t =
0.01 (same as DualGF in the main paper) and λt = 3.0 for all experiments. We then compare
the performance of the support score networks conditioned on different levels of noise scale in Fig-
ure. 13. With the noise level decreasing, the performance on PL significantly drops while the ACN
remains comparable to the original DualGF. In practice, we observe that the target score network
conditioned on a smaller noise scale tends to be more ‘conservative’, i.e., the support gradients are
of large magnitude so that they overwhelm the target gradients.


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Oracle
   1.00                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               DualGF(Sup 0.01)
                                                 4.0                                                                                                                                  10.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      DualGF(Sup 0.005)
   0.75                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               DualGF(Sup 0.001)
                                                                                                                                                                                       7.5
PL 0.50                                      CS 3.0                                                                                                                             ACN                                                                                                                                   DualGF(Sup 0.0005)
                                                 2.0                                                                                                                                   5.0                                                                                                                            DualGF(Sup 0.0001)
   0.25                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               TarGF(SAC)
                                                 1.0                                                                                                                                   2.5                                                                                                                            GAIL
   0.00
                                                 0.0                                                                                                                                   0.0
          0      25      50       75   100
                                                       DualGF(Sup 0.01)

                                                                          DualGF(Sup 0.005)

                                                                                              DualGF(Sup 0.001)

                                                                                                                  DualGF(Sup 0.0005)

                                                                                                                                       DualGF(Sup 0.0001)

                                                                                                                                                            TarGF(SAC)

                                                                                                                                                                         GAIL


                                                                                                                                                                                             DualGF(Sup 0.01)

                                                                                                                                                                                                                DualGF(Sup 0.005)

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    DualGF(Sup 0.001)

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        DualGF(Sup 0.0005)

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             DualGF(Sup 0.0001)

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  TarGF(SAC)

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               GAIL
                      Time Step


                      Figure 13: Ablation results on the noise level of the support score network.


D.4       I MAGE - BASED D UAL GF

The conditional state sc can also be represented as an observation from the environment, e.g., an
RGB image. In Figure. 14, we demonstrate the image-based implementation of DualGF. Both the
target and support network take an image Ot ∈ R64∗64∗3 and a agent-state sta = [xa , ya ] ∈ R2 as
input and output a gradient Φθtar (sta , Ot ) ∈ R2 located on the agent-state. The image is simply en-
coded by three layers of CNN and then reshaped to a feature vector. This vector is then concatenated
with the agent’s feature vector to be fed into a final output linear layer.



                                                                                                                                                                                Φ"') (𝑠'" , 𝑂" )
                      𝑠'" = (𝑥' , 𝑦' ) ∈ ℝ(                                                                               Φ!"#

 Network
  Input                                          𝑂"

                                                                                                                                                                                Φ*+, (𝑠'" , 𝑂" )
                      𝑠!" = 𝑂" ∈ ℝ#$∗#$∗&                                                                               Φ$%&


              Figure 14: The image-based implementation of DualGF on Navigation and Tracking.



We compare this image-based version (i.e., DualGF(Image)) with learning-based baselines. No-
tably, these baselines still take the low-dimensional state as input. As shown in Figure. 3, Du-
alGF(Image) outperforms all the baselines across all the metrics. This indicates our method is still
effective when the state representation is complicated, such as pixel input.

D.5       S UCCESS R ATE ON BALL R EARRANGEMENT AND ROOM R EARRANGEMENT

We also report planning success rate (SR) on ball and room rearrangement. Since the number of ob-
jects in these environments is quite large, so we relax the success threshold to ‘less than N collisions
in an episode’ where N denotes the number of objects in each episode. As shown in Figure. 15, Du-


                                                                                                                                                                    20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023



Table 3: Comparative results on Navigation and Tracking. We compare the image-based implemen-
tation of DualGF with state-based baselines.

                                                                    Navigation (Static)                                                        Navigation (Dynamic)                                                           Tracking
                                                                   TRS ↑         SR ↑                                                          TRS ↑         SR ↑                                                        TRS ↑       SR ↑
    RL (SAC)                                                      9.1 ± 0.6                    0.21 ± 0.04                                     8.3 ± 0.4                 0.19 ± 0.01                                    0.0 ± 0.0                 0.21 ± 0.02
      GAIL                                                        1.5 ± 0.4                    0.35 ± 0.01                                     1.6 ± 1.0                 0.20 ± 0.02                                    0.1 ± 0.1                 0.18 ± 0.04
       RCE                                                        2.2 ± 1.2                    0.13 ± 0.01                                     2.2 ± 0.4                 0.22 ± 0.04                                    0.1 ± 0.0                 0.17 ± 0.03
   TarGF (SAC)                                                    7.0 ± 0.2                    0.19 ± 0.02                                     4.4 ± 0.3                 0.19 ± 0.01                                    0.2 ± 0.1                 0.18 ± 0.04
  DualGF (Image)                                                 16.4 ± 1.0                    0.24 ± 0.02                                    15.7 ± 2.7                 0.26 ± 0.02                                    0.4 ± 0.0                 0.27 ± 0.01


alGF achieves comparable performance with model-based approach TarGF(ORCA) and outperforms
all the other learning-based baselines except for Room Rearrangement.


      1.0

      0.8
SR
      0.5

      0.2

      0.0
            TarGF(ORCA)

                          DualGF

                                   TarGF(SAC)

                                                DualGF(wo Sup)

                                                                 GAIL

                                                                         RCE


                                                                                 TarGF(ORCA)

                                                                                                DualGF

                                                                                                         TarGF(SAC)

                                                                                                                      DualGF(wo Sup)

                                                                                                                                       GAIL

                                                                                                                                               RCE


                                                                                                                                                      TarGF(ORCA)

                                                                                                                                                                    DualGF

                                                                                                                                                                             TarGF(SAC)

                                                                                                                                                                                          DualGF(wo Sup)

                                                                                                                                                                                                           GAIL

                                                                                                                                                                                                                  RCE


                                                                                                                                                                                                                            DualGF


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     TarGF(SAC)


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   DualGF(wo Sup)


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    GAIL


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           RCE
Figure 15: Success rates of all methods. From left to right, we present results on Circling, Cluster-
ing, Circling+Clustering and Room respectively.


D.6     FAILURES : L OCAL M INIMUM P ROBLEM

Similar to Lee & Park (2003), the most typical failure of DualGF is the local minimum problem.
Figure. 16 demonstrate this problem in Navigation and Room Rearrangement.
On the left side, there are some regions in the dual gradient field where the target gradient and the
support gradient cancel each other. Besides, the dual gradients around these regions point back to
them. Once the agent steps into these regions, it will get stuck and cannot get out.
On the right side, we demonstrate another implicit type of this problem, where the agent is not stuck
by the obstacle but by itself. For instance, the target gradient leads a table and a shelf to move in the
opposite direction while the support gradient provides a ‘repulsive force’ on them. Thus, both the
shelf and the table get stuck in the left corner.
One potential solution is to leverage test-time sampling to increase the optimality of the planning
results.


  Local Minimum                                                         Dual Gradients                                Local Minimum                                    Local Minimum


Figure 16: The local minimum problem of DualGF. Left: Case study on Ball Rearrangement.
Right: Case study on Room Rearrangement.


                                                                                                                                              21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


D.7    M ITIGATING THE I NSTABILITY OF L AGRANGIAN U PDATES

The inherent instability of the Lagrangian updates may lead to bad results as shown in Figure. 17
(a) and (b): When the λt increases too fast, the support gradients overwhelm the target gradients so
the balls are too ‘conservative’ and do not move to the target distribution. When the λt drops too
fast, the target gradients overwhelm the support gradients so that the balls are too ‘aggressive’ and
collide with each other.
We can mitigate this problem by setting a small learning rate and clipping the gradient. When λt is
properly updated, we can obtain appealing results as shown in Figure. 17 (c).


         (a) 𝜆! increases too fast.           (b) 𝜆! drops too fast.              (c) 𝜆! is properly updated.

                       Figure 17: Success and failure cases of Lagrangian updates.
D.8    A NALYSE THE G RADIENT OF THE P ERTURBED D ISTRIBUTION

Our score networks trained via denoising score matching are essentially matching the score of the
perturbed distribution ∇s log pσ (s) where
                                               Z
                                      pσ (ŝ) = qσ (ŝ|s)p(s)ds
                                               Z                                             (17)
                                  ∇ŝ pσ (ŝ) = ∇ŝ qσ (ŝ|s)p(s)ds

When qσ is a Gaussian kernel, we can derive the closed form of ∇ŝ qσ (ŝ|s):
                                                                          ||s−ŝ||2
                                                                         e− 2σ2
                         ∇ŝ qσ (ŝ|s) = C(s, ŝ) · (s − ŝ), C(s, ŝ) = √                            (18)
                                                                            2πσ
where C(s, ŝ) > 0 is a scalar function depends on s and ŝ. Thus, ∇ŝ qσ (ŝ|s) essentially points to the
denoising direction, i.e., s − ŝ. Further, we have:
                                        Z
                          ∇ŝ pσ (ŝ) = C(s, ŝ)p(s) ·           (s − ŝ)     ds                      (19)
                                                                 | {z }
                                        |     {z       } denoising direction
                                           averaged

Intuitively, when ŝ lies in the zero-density region of p(s), i.e., p(ŝ) = 0, the gradient of the perturbed
distribution ∇ŝ pσ (ŝ) still points to the averaged denoising direction to the positive-density region.
To summarise, the score of the perturbed distribution ∇s log pσ (s) is in the same direction with
∇s pσ (s):
                                                   1
                                ∇s log pσ (s) =        · ∇s pσ (s)                              (20)
                                                pσ (s)
where pσ1(s) > 0 obviously. Thus, in the zero-density region of the original distribution, the score
networks are estimating the averaged denoising direction to the positive-density region.

D.9    T HE L IMITATION OF M ANUALLY D ESIGNING THE R EWARD FOR BALL
       R EARRANGEMENT

Here we take Circling for example to demonstrate the non-triviality of example-based planning. We
leverage the pseudo-likelihood function of Circling as a manually designed reward function to train
an RL agent, namely Heuristic(SAC).
As shown in Figure. 18, our method achieves significantly higher PL than Heuristic(SAC), which
indicates our method is better in both sample quality and efficiency. Our method is also better than
Heuristic(SAC) in CS, which indicates our method is better in diversity and mode coverage.


                                                      22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


     0.75                                                                                                 8.0
     0.50                                          0.4                                                    6.0
PL                                            CS                                                    ACN                                                    Oracle
     0.25                                                                                                 4.0                                              DualGF
                                                   0.2                                                                                                     Heuristic(SAC)
     0.00                                                                                                 2.0                                              GAIL
                                                   0.0                                                    0.0
            0     25      50       75   100


                                                         DualGF


                                                                     Heuristic(SAC)


                                                                                           GAIL


                                                                                                                DualGF


                                                                                                                         Heuristic(SAC)


                                                                                                                                             GAIL
                       Time Step



Figure 18: Comparison between DualGF and RL agent trained by manually designed reward. The
experiments are conducted on Circling.

D.10            E VALUATION ON ONLY S UCCESS T RAJECTORIES

In Navigation and Tracking, we report task return (TR) on non-collision trajectories. As shown in
Table. 4, our method still outperforms the learning-based baselines across all the tasks and metrics.
However, this evaluation will also be problematic since the success trajectories of different methods
are of different difficulties. For instance, the potential field baseline is of only 28% Success Rate yet
achieves the highest Task Return. However, we observe that this method only succeeds when the
initial state is quite near to the goal which is easier for the agent to obtain a higher task return.
Table 4: Comparative results on Navigation and Tracking. We report task return (TR) on non-
collision trajectories.

                                                   Navigation (Static)                             Navigation (Dynamic)                             Tracking
                                                   TR ↑         SR ↑                                TR ↑         SR ↑                       TR ↑            SR ↑
                          RL (SAC)            44.4 ± 5.7          0.21 ± 0.04                     42.4 ± 0.8     0.19 ± 0.01              0.2 ± 0.0     0.21 ± 0.02
                            GAIL               4.4 ± 1.1          0.35 ± 0.01                      7.5 ± 4.3     0.20 ± 0.02              0.6 ± 0.5     0.18 ± 0.04
  Learning                  RCE               15.7 ± 7.9          0.13 ± 0.01                      9.8 ± 0.1     0.22 ± 0.04              0.4 ± 0.1     0.17 ± 0.03
   Based                TarGF (SAC)           36.2 ± 3.9          0.19 ± 0.02                      0.7 ± 0.4     0.19 ± 0.01              0.1 ± 0.0     0.18 ± 0.04
                       DualGF (wo Sup)         0.0 ± 0.0          0.07 ± 0.01                     13.1 ± 4.9     0.09 ± 0.03              0.2 ± 0.06    0.11 ± 0.04
                           DualGF             81.3 ± 0.4          0.37 ± 0.02                     66.9 ± 7.3     0.39 ± 0.05              6.0 ± 0.5     0.56 ± 0.03
  Planning             PRM (Reference)        85.0 ± 0.4          0.45 ± 0.04                     84.0 ± 0.1     0.47 ± 0.04              25.7 ± 0.4    0.16 ± 0.04
   Based                Potential Field       77.4 ± 1.8          0.45 ± 0.00                     84.3 ± 0.3     0.28 ± 0.07              22.4 ± 2.4    0.09 ± 0.02


                                                                                      23
