Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


W ORDS ARE ALL YOU NEED ? L ANGUAGE AS AN
APPROXIMATION FOR HUMAN SIMILARITY JUDGMENTS

 Raja Marjieh1,* , Pol van Rijn2,* , Ilia Sucholutsky3,* , Theodore R. Sumers3 , Harin Lee2,4 ,

                                                  ∗
 Thomas L. Griffiths1,3,** , Nori Jacoby2,**      */**
                                                          Equal contribution.
                                                  1
                                                    Department of Psychology, Princeton University
                                                  2
                                                    Max Planck Institute for Empirical Aesthetics
                                                  3
                                                    Department of Computer Science, Princeton University
                                                  4
                                                    Max Planck Institute for Cognitive and Brain Sciences



                                             A BSTRACT

           Human similarity judgments are a powerful supervision signal for machine learn-
           ing applications based on techniques such as contrastive learning, information
           retrieval, and model alignment, but classical methods for collecting human similar-
           ity judgments are too expensive to be used at scale. Recent methods propose using
           pre-trained deep neural networks (DNNs) to approximate human similarity, but
           pre-trained DNNs may not be available for certain domains (e.g., medical images,
           low-resource languages) and their performance in approximating human similarity
           has not been extensively tested. We conducted an evaluation of 611 pre-trained
           models across three domains – images, audio, video – and found that there is a
           large gap in performance between human similarity judgments and pre-trained
           DNNs. To address this gap, we propose a new class of similarity approximation
           methods based on language. To collect the language data required by these new
           methods, we also developed and validated a novel adaptive tag collection pipeline.
           We find that our proposed language-based methods are significantly cheaper, in the
           number of human judgments, than classical methods, but still improve performance
           over the DNN-based methods. Finally, we also develop ‘stacked’ methods that
           combine language embeddings with DNN embeddings, and find that these consis-
           tently provide the best approximations for human similarity across all three of our
           modalities. Based on the results of this comprehensive study, we provide a concise
           guide for researchers interested in collecting or approximating human similarity
           data. To accompany this guide, we also release all of the similarity and language
           data, a total of 206,339 human judgments, that we collected in our experiments,
           along with a detailed breakdown of all modeling results.


1       I NTRODUCTION

Similarity judgments have long been used as a tool for studying human representations, both in
cognitive science (Shepard, 1980; 1987; Tversky, 1977; Tenenbaum & Griffiths, 2001), as well as in
neuroscience, as exemplified by the rich literature on representational similarity between humans
and machines (Schrimpf et al., 2020; Kell et al., 2018; Linsley et al., 2017; Langlois et al., 2021;
Yamins et al., 2014) whereby similarity patterns of brain activity are compared to those arising
from a model of interest. Recent research in machine learning suggests that incorporating human
similarity judgments in model training can play an important role in a variety of paradigms such as
human alignment (Esling et al., 2018), contrastive learning (Khosla et al., 2020), information retrieval
(Parekh et al., 2020), and natural language processing (Gao et al., 2021).
However, building a large dataset based on human similarity judgments is very expensive and often
infeasible since the number of judgments required is quadratic in the number of stimuli – for N
    ∗
        Correspondence: {raja.marjieh,is2961}@princeton.edu, pol.van-rijn@@ae.mpg.de


                                                      1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


 How similiar are the animals?
                                                                                  Human ground truth


                                  Pairwise similarity                           𝑂(𝑁 2) human
                                                                                       interactions

                                           Multimodal datasets

                                                                                 Prediction approaches


                          audio       images            video
                                                                                   𝑂(1) human
                                                                                        interactions
                                       DNN similarity


                                                 Stacked                         𝑂(𝑁) human
                                                                                      interactions


                 Captions               LLM similarity

                 +                                                               𝑂(𝑁) human
                                                                                      interactions
                  Tags                 WFA similarity



Figure 1: Comparing human similarity scores gathered through crowdsourcing with ML pipelines.
We used data from three modalities: images, audio, and video. For each modality, we extracted deep
model embeddings and gathered human captions and tags. Word- and language-embedding models,
as well as simple word-frequency analysis, were used to predict human similarity judgments.


stimuli, O(N 2 ) judgments are required1 . For example, to fully quantify the similarity of all possible
                                                                                              2
dyadic pairs of 50,000 images, one needs to collect on the order of 1.25 billion (∼ 50000  2    ) human
similarity judgments. Thus, human judgments are the main bottleneck for machine-learning methods
based on similarity. For this reason, the majority of available human similarity datasets are small by
machine learning standards (up to a few thousand objects).
Advancements in deep learning have brought an alternative approach that does not require extensive
collection of human judgments. Specifically, the idea is to use the similarity between hidden repre-
sentations in pre-trained deep neural networks (DNNs) to approximate human similarity (Peterson
et al., 2018; Jha et al., 2020; Marjieh et al., 2022; Hebart et al., 2020; Roads & Love, 2021). Some of
these methods also suggest fine-tuning representations on a small training set of human similarity
judgments (Peterson et al., 2018). This, in turn, results in a significant reduction in the number
of required human judgments down to O(1) (given the pre-trained model). While such methods
are promising, they still require access to strong pre-trained models which may not necessarily be
available in all domains (e.g., medical datasets, niche modalities, low-resource languages, etc.).
In addition, representations obtained from neural networks may not always overlap with human
similarity representations, given that the models can be trained for different objectives (i.e., their
embeddings may be poor approximations for human similarity).
A comprehensive comparison to assess which models perform well in predicting human similarity
across different modalities is currently lacking in the literature. To this end, one of our main
contributions in this paper is providing a first-of-its-kind large-scale evaluation of over 600 publicly-
available pre-trained models as approximations for human similarity judgments on three modalities
   1
     Depending on various assumptions, the full range of classical methods can require between O(N log N )
(Jamieson & Nowak, 2011) and O(N 3 ) (Hebart et al., 2020) human judgments. In this work, we used O(N 2 )
human judgments (collecting all unique dyadic pairs) as the baseline for comparison


                                                    2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


(images, audio, video). Our experiments reveal that there is a large gap in performance between the
O(1) DNN methods and the classical O(N 2 ) similarity method we used as the baseline.
To address this gap, we propose a new class of O(N ) methods to efficiently and accurately ap-
proximate human similarity based on language. This is motivated by a long line of research in
cognitive science suggesting that language is an extremely efficient way for humans to communicate
information about their sensory environment (Murphy, 2004; Zaslavsky et al., 2018; Piantadosi et al.,
2011; Jaeger & Levy, 2006). This in turn suggests that we can use textual descriptors to approximate
similarity judgments across different modalities. Moreover, such textual descriptors can be collected
at the cost of O(N ) human judgments (as people describe individual stimuli rather than pairs), which
renders this method scalable.
We consider two approaches for approximating similarity from text data. One approach is to use
pre-trained Large Language Models (LLM) to produce vector embeddings of the textual descriptions,
and then use a measure of distance between these embeddings to approximate human similarity. This
method is more domain-agnostic than the O(1) deep learning methods as it only requires access to a
pre-trained LLM regardless of the modality of the original dataset. However, there are some cases
where the domain may be out-of-distribution for all available LLMs (e.g., niche technical fields), or
where no LLMs are available at all (e.g., low-resource languages). In such cases, the other approach
is to use Word-Frequency Analysis (WFA) methods from classical text processing literature (Barrios
et al., 2016; Rouge, 2004; Beel et al., 2016),
As for the textual descriptions themselves, we consider two types, namely, free-text captions and
concise word tags. Collecting captions for machine learning datasets is a well-established practice
and can easily be done through crowdsourcing platforms. On the other hand, there is no consensus on
best practices for collecting tags without a pre-existing taxonomy (i.e., open-set labels). To address
this, we propose a novel adaptive tag mining pipeline called Sequential Transmission Evaluation
Pipeline (STEP-Tag) which we describe in Section 2.2.4. As we will show, STEP-Tag allows to
collect meaningful, diverse, and high-quality word tags for target stimuli in an online crowdsourcing
environment.
Finally, we propose one additional set of hybrid approximation methods that combine sensory
information with textual descriptions while still requiring O(N ) human judgments. For this approach,
we propose to stack the embeddings derived from both domain-specific models (e.g., output from
the last layer of an image classifier) with the LLM embedding of the respective textual description.
When multi-modal models are available, we can similarly leverage the joint embedding of both the
stimulus and its textual description.
We evaluate all of these novel and existing methods across multiple modalities. We test the relative
contributions of linguistic and sensory information in approximating human similarity and show
that our proposed language-based methods provide both accurate and efficient approximations
across modalities, even though they do not require a trained modality-specific deep learning model.
Crucially, with this large-scale evaluation, we are able for the first time to provide researchers with a
comprehensive guide of the tools to use for approximating human similarity at scale.
To summarize, our contributions are as follows:

       • We conduct a comprehensive comparison of human similarity approximation methods.

       • We propose a novel modality-agnostic method for approximating similarity based on text
         and show that it is both efficient and competitive in terms of performance.

       • We propose STEP-Tag, a novel adaptive tagging pipeline, and show that it is effective for
         crowdsourcing high-quality and diverse sets of word tags.

       • We synthesize our findings into a detailed guide for researchers interested in approximating
         human similarity judgments at scale.

       • We collect and release ground-truth and approximated versions of a large behavioral dataset
         (N = 1,492) across three different domains (images, audio, video), including two text-
         approximated similarity matrices for 1,000 audio clips and 1,000 video clips.


                                                   3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


2     DATASETS

2.1     S TIMULI

Throughout this work, we considered five stimulus datasets across three different modalities – images,
audio, and video – consisting of a total of 31,320 dyadic pairs labeled with similarity.

Images For images, we considered three datasets of common objects introduced in Peterson et al.
(2018) – namely, animals, furniture, and vegetables – each consisting of 7,140 dyadic pairs (all unique
pairs over 120 images).

Audio For audio, we used the RAVDESS corpus (Livingstone & Russo (2018), released under a
CC Attribution license), which consists of semantically neutral sentences spoken by 24 US American
actors to convey a specific target emotion. To construct a 1,000-recording subset, we selected 3
emotions per speaker per sentence. We randomly omitted 104 emotional stimuli and included all
96 neutral recordings (the dataset only contains 2 neutral recordings per speaker per sentence). To
construct the subset composed of 4,950 dyadic pairs (all unique pairs over 100 recordings), we
randomly selected ∼13 recordings per emotion from the 1,000.

Video Finally, for the video dataset, we considered the Mini-Kinetics-200 dataset (Xie et al., 2018)
(released under a CC BY 4.0 International License), which contains a large set of short video clips of
human activities from 200 activity classes. Specifically, we focused on the validation split, which
contains 5,000 videos in total. To construct our 1,000-video dataset, we sampled 5 random videos
from each of the 200 activity categories. The 100-video subset (4,950 dyadic pairs) used in the
similarity judgment collection experiment was then generated by sampling 100 random stimuli from
the 1,000 list.

2.2     H UMAN JUDGMENT COLLECTION

2.2.1    PARTICIPANTS

We collected data from N = 1,492 US participants for the new behavioral experiments reported in
this paper. Participants were recruited anonymously from Amazon Mechanical Turk and provided
informed consent under an approved protocol by either the Institutional Review Board (IRB) at
Princeton University (application 10859) or the Max Planck Ethics Council (application 2021_42)
before taking part. Participants earned 9-12 USD per hour, and each session lasted less than 30
minutes. To help recruit reliable participants, we required that participants are at least 18 years of age,
reside in the United States and have participated in more than 5,000 previous tasks with a 99% approval
rate (see Supplementary Section B for additional details about the behavioral experiments). All
experiments were implemented with the Dallinger and PsyNet frameworks designed for automation
of large-scale behavioral research (Harrison et al., 2020). In Supplementary Section A.1, we include
the data that was collected, instructions used, and code for replication of the behavioral experiments.
We also provide the code for computational experiments and analysis.

2.2.2    S IMILARITY JUDGMENTS

We collected two batches of pairwise similarity judgements, one for each of the audio and video
subsets, and were provided access to the similarity matrices for the three image datasets by the
authors of Peterson et al. (2018). For each pair we collected ∼ 5 similarity judgments to average out
inter-rater noise.

2.2.3    C APTIONS

We collected free-text captions for the video and audio datasets. Captions for the image datasets were
already collected by Marjieh et al. (2022) and used here with permission. For each stimulus, we
collected ∼ 10 captions.


                                                    4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                                        Iteration 3
                                                             Iteration 2
                                    Iteration 1

                               tomatillo
                                                                              brussel sprouts
                             Iteration 5                        Iteration 4

                           green
                   brussel sprouts
                                                       brussel sprouts


Figure 2: STEP-Tag, our novel tag-mining paradigm. We ran an adaptive process in which results of
one iteration are used as inputs for subsequent iterations. In every iteration, participants can add a
new tag, rate the relevance of existing tags or flag tags that are inappropriate.


2.2.4    TAGS
We propose a novel adaptive tag pipeline for simultaneous data collection and evaluation called
Sequential Transmission Evaluation Pipeline (STEP) and apply it in the context of semantic tag mining
(STEP-Tag). Our paradigm, STEP-Tag, allows researchers to efficiently collect high-quality word tags
for a given stimulus (Figure 2) and extends existing crowdsourcing text-mining techniques (Von Ahn
& Dabbish, 2008; 2004; Krishna et al., 2017; Law et al., 2007) by integrating ideas from transmission
chain experiments (Kirby et al., 2008; Griffiths & Kalish, 2005). In STEP-Tag, participants adaptively
create tags for a set of target stimuli and simultaneously evaluate the annotations made by previous
participants. In each trial, participants are first given a stimulus (e.g., an image or audio fragment)
and rate the relevance of tags that were created by other participants (on a 5-interval Likert scale)
or flag a tag if they find it inappropriate (with tags removed if more than two people flag the tag).
Next, participants are also given the opportunity to add new tags if they feel a relevant tag that
describes the stimulus is missing. The results of the annotation procedure of one participant then
propagate to the next participant (additional details about the paradigm, and screenshots are provided
in Supplementary Section B.6). Ultimately, as the process unfolds over many iterations, meaningful
tags are extracted and validated by multiple participants, enabling efficient open-label collection of a
desired dataset.
To validate STEP-Tag, we compared it against several baselines: (i) randomly selecting only a single
high-rated tag from the last iteration of STEP-Tag per stimulus, (ii) using tags only from the first
iteration of STEP-Tag (equivalent to non-adaptive tag collection), and (iii) using class labels instead
of tags. We found that tags produced after multiple iterations of STEP-Tag outperformed all three
baselines in terms of quality (i.e., downstream performance for similarity reconstruction) and diversity
(see Supplementary Section B.6.1).

3     M ODELS
3.1     DNN- BASED METHODS

We tested a wide range of pre-trained ML models that do not rely on text (overall we tested 611
models) and compared their internal representations to human similarity judgments and text-based
predictions (Figure 1A). We compiled our model pool by leveraging pre-trained model reposito-
ries (or zoos) available online. In particular, for images we use 569 pre-trained models from the
pytorch-image-models package timm (Wightman, 2019), for audio we use 36 pre-trained
models available in the torchaudio package (Yang et al., 2021) (see also Supplementary Figure
10 for an analysis of layer depth), and for video we use 6 pre-trained models available from the
PyTorchVideo package (Fan et al., 2021). Because of the recent success of multimodal training,
we additionally included 9 multimodal models based on CLIP from OpenAI’s public implementa-


                                                   5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


tion (https://github.com/openai/CLIP) for the image datasets, and compared them to
“stacked” representations (i.e., concatenating embeddings from separate image and text models).

3.2   LLM- BASED METHODS

Tags To embed tags we used ConceptNet Numberbatch (CNNB) which is a word-embedding model
trained on the ConceptNet knowledge graph that leverages other popular word embedding models
such as word2vec and GloVe (Speer et al., 2017). We experimented with several algorithms for
computing similarity between sets (or multi-sets) of tags and share the details in Supplementary
Section C.1.2. As a control, for images we also tried converting tags into a caption of the form “This
is an image of tag1, tag2, . . . ” and embedding them using a language model (see Supplementary
Section C.1.2).

Captions To embed captions, we used four pre-trained LLMs from HuggingFace (Wolf et al.,
2020): ‘bert-base-uncased’, ‘deberta-xlarge-mnli’, ‘sup-simcse-bert-base-uncased’, and ‘sup-simcse-
roberta-large’. SimCSE is a pre-training procedure that uses semantic entailment in a contrastive
learning objective (Gao et al., 2021). According to BERTScore (Zhang et al., 2020), the latter three
models are ranked in the top 40 models in terms of correlation with human evaluations on certain
tasks, with ‘deberta-xlarge-mnli’ ranked first. However, in our experiments, we found that embedding
similarity computed from ‘sup-simcse-roberta-large’ has the highest correlation with human similarity
judgments out of the four models. For SimCSE-based models, we used representations from the (final)
embedding layer (where the SimCSE contrastive objective is actually applied). For the other two
models, we computed embeddings from every layer, but restricted the main analysis to embeddings
from the penultimate layers. This was done in order to be consistent with our procedure for DNNs.

Other methods For the image datasets, we also considered several other methods that made use
of LLMs but do not fit into the categories described above. One approach was using prompts with
GPT3 (Brown et al., 2020) in a text-completion setup to directly predict similarity without extracting
embeddings (see Supplementary Section C.1.3 for details). We also tried using pre-trained image
captioning models to generate captions automatically (i.e. this would reduce O(N ) language-based
methods to O(1)) but this resulted in poor performance (see Supplementary Section C.1.3 for details).

3.3   S TACKING METHODS

We produce stacked representations for each modality by concatenating the single best-performing
(see Figure 3) LLM’s embeddings with the embeddings from the five best-performing DNNs into a
single set of long embeddings. Since the two sets of embeddings come from different spaces, we add
a single tunable hyperparameter for rescaling the LLM embeddings. This hyperparameter can be set
manually, but we use a small number of ground-truth similarity judgments (we use dyadic pairs for
just 20 stimuli) to optimize it automatically.

3.4   W ORD F REQUENCY A NALYSIS (WFA) METHODS

The aim of the WFA methods is to enable similarity approximation from language using traditional
embedding-free techniques. Such techniques are particularly useful for low-resource languages or
cross-cultural comparisons (Cowen & Keltner, 2017; Barrett, 2020), for which pre-trained models
are lacking, as they work solely on the basis of the text itself. The WFA methods we considered
included measuring co-occurrence, Rouge score, bm25s, and tf-idf. We provide details on each of
these procedures in Supplementary Section C.2.

3.5   P ERFORMANCE METRIC

We quantified performance by computing the Pearson correlation r between approximated similarity
scores and the ground-truth human similarity scores for all the unique dyadic pairs in a dataset. We
compared the performance of the different prediction methods to the inter-rater reliability (IRR) of
participants, which serves as an approximate upper-bound on performance. Following Peterson et al.
(2018), we computed IRR for each human similarity matrix using the split-half correlation method
with a Spearman-Brown correction (Brown, 1910).


                                                  6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     4

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Mean correlation                                                                  Mean correlation                                                           Mean correlation


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0.4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0.6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0.8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0.1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0.3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0.4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0.6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0.7
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0.8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              C 0.9
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0.1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0.3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0.4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0.6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0.7
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0.8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            B 0.9
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0.3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0.4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0.6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0.7
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             A 0.9
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    DenseNet
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        x3d                                                                           DeBERTa                                                                       ECAResNet
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    JXNesT


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             D Images
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        BERT                                                                          BERT                                                                          CLIP image
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Tags mean
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     R ESULTS


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Tags overlap                                                                  wav2vec 2.0                                                                   RepVGG
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Visformer
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Tags rouge
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Tags co-occurrence-rep                                                        Captions bm25S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    IG ResNeXt
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Tags co-occurrence-rep
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Tags co-occurrence                                                            Captions tf-idf-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      cosine                                                                        Tags overlap
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Tags co-occurrence


                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Approach
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Tags rouge                                                                    Tags tf-idf-                                                                  XCiT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      cosine
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    CLIP text

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Tags quantized                                                                Tags bm25S                                                                    gMixer
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    BERT (SimCSE)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    CoaT


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0.4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0.6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        slow                                                                          Tags co-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      occurrence-rep                                                                Tag to caption Roberta (SimCSE)


                                                                                                                                                                                                                      WFA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    TNT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Tags tf-idf-cosine                                                            Tags overlap                                                                  ConViT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    DeiT


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Audio
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Tags bm25S                                                                    HuBERT                                                                        PIT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    gMLP

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        DeBERTa                                                                       Tags quantized                                                                VGG11


7
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Tags mean (no split)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Tags bm25S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        BERT (SimCSE)                                                                 BERT (SimCSE)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    CaiT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    VGG13


                                                                                                                                                                                                                      DNN (baseline)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        slowfast                                                                      Tags rouge                                                                    Twins-PCPVT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Twins-SVT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Captions tf-idf-cosine                                                        Tags mean (no                                                                 ResMLP
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      split)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Tags quantized

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Captions bm25S                                                                Tags mean                                                                     ViT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    VGG19


                                                                                                                                                                                                                      LLM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    VGG16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        RoBERTa (SimCSE)                                                              WavLM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Tags tf-idf-cosine


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0.4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0.6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0.8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    NF-RegNet
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Tags mean (no split)                                                          Tags co-occurrence                                                            RoBERTa (SimCSE)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ResNetV2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Tags mean                                                                     RoBERTa (SimCSE)                                                              NFNet


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Video
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Captions bm25S


                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Stacked
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Tags mean+X3d S                                                               RoBERTa (SimCSE)+wav2vec                                                      GPT-3 prompting
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      2.0 large XLSR53
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    NF-ResNet

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      RoBERTa (SimCSE)+wav2vec                                                      ConvNeXT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Tags mean+X3d M                                                               2.0 large lv60k (100h)                                                        CLIP image+text
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Swin


                                                                                                            Average for each method type for each modality. The error bars are standard deviations.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Tags mean+Slow r50                                                            RoBERTa (SimCSE)+wav2vec
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      2.0 large lv60k (960h)                                                        Captions tf-idf-cosine
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    RoBERTa (SimCSE)+Swin base
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Tags mean+Slowfast r101                                                       RoBERTa (SimCSE)+wav2vec                                                      RoBERTa (SimCSE)+Swin large
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      2.0 large lv60k (10m)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    RoBERTa (SimCSE)+ConvNeXT base

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Tags mean+Slowfast r50                                                        RoBERTa (SimCSE)+wav2vec                                                      RoBERTa (SimCSE)+ViT base
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      2.0 large lv60k
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    RoBERTa (SimCSE)+ViT huge
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Inter-rater reliability
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Inter-rater reliability
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Inter-rater reliability


    gap between the methods and IRR), stacked ones get close and are consistently more aligned with
    While no approximation methods can perfectly match the ground-truth pairwise similarity, (see the
    the top 50 methods for this modality due to space constraints. Figure 3D shows the mean performance
    Figure 3 summarizes the performance of the various techniques across the three modalities. Note that
                                                                                                            B: Audio dataset. C: Video dataset. Each DNN baseline bar averages over multiple variants of the


    the image modality results in Figure 3A are averaged across the three image datasets and only show
                                                                                                            same architecture; the dots indicate average correlation of individual variants of the architecture. D:


    of the methods of each type for each modality. When viewing these results, a clear hierarchy emerges.
                                                                                                            Figure 3: Correlation to human similarity. A: Top 50 models averaged over the 3 image datasets.
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


human similarity than other methods across all three modalities. Text-based methods come next in
this hierarchy, followed by DNN-based ones. We also considered supervised methods that reweight
DNN-based embeddings based on a small set of human similarity judgments, but we found that the
performance was unstable (see Supplementary Section C.3 for details).
The pre-eminence of stacked results suggests that LLMs and DNNs capture at least some different
sources of variance in human similarity judgments. This is reinforced by our surprising finding that
stacked representations from CLIP, a state-of-the-art jointly pre-trained multi-modal model, do not
outperform stacked representations from independently trained models. We hypothesize that this
happens because information is lost from both modalities when optimizing for a joint embedding.
However, we note that the modest size of the performance gap between stacked and LLMs/DNNs,
suggests that there is also significant overlap between aspects of human similarity captured by
language and perception.
To investigate the effect of architecture and downstream task (e.g., classification) performance
on alignment of DNNs with human similarity, for the image modality we compared similarity
approximation performance against the number of model parameters on a log scale (Figure 4A) and
ImageNet classification performance (Deng et al., 2009) (Figure 4B). Overall, we found a positive
correlation between similarity approximation performance and the number of model parameters
(r = 0.39, p < 0.001) and a smaller but still significant positive correlation with performance
on ImageNet (r = 0.26, p < 0.001), There were some notable exceptions with particularly high
ImageNet performance but low similarity performance, such as the image transformer BEiT (Bao
et al., 2021).
Finally, we leverage both DNN-based methods and our proposed language-based methods to approxi-
mate similarity matrices that would otherwise require an unaffordable number of human similarity
judgments to collect all dyadic pairs. Specifically, we approximate the two similarity matrices
corresponding to all 1,000 audio clips and 1,000 video clips in our datasets using every method
listed for each of those modalities in Figure 3. We provide visualizations of the resulting matrices
at https://words-are-all-you-need.s3.amazonaws.com/index.html. We note
that to exhaustively collect all dyadic pairs with five judgments per pair would normally require
roughly 2.5 million human judgments for each of these matrices.


                  A
                                                                                                                                                   ConvNeXT        ConvNeXT
                                                         tf-idf-cosine                                                              ResNetV2
               Correlation with human similarity


                                                                                                                                                  ViT ResMLP ViT NFNet
                                                         bm25S                                                                     NFNet NFNet
                                                   0.6                                                              ViT
                                                                                                                                               NFNet NFNet         RoBERTa
                                                         bm25S                                                            CoaT CaiT CaiT CaiTCaiT          CLIP text      CLIP text
                                                         co-occurrence                                             CoaT     CaiT                      BERT
                                                                                                        XCiT                         RepVGG ResNet CLIP imageCLIP text
                                                                                                        XCiT               ResNet    DenseNet Mixer               ViT     CLIP image
                                                                                                                            DPN        DLA  DLA ViT SENet ResNet-RS
                                                                                                             EfficientNet
                                                                                                                    DenseNet      DLA     ResNet
                                                   0.4                                   LCNet DLA LCNet MnasNet                 DLA                  BERT
                                                                                               DLA        EfficientNet
                                                                                                                       HaloNeXt         DPN DPN        ResNet
                                                                                               TinyNet    EfficientNet ResNext       CSPDarknet53                BEiT
                                                                                                                                                                             DeBERTa
                                                                                                                    EfficientNet Inception-v3 EfficientNet
                                                                                                                            DPN ConvMixer         ViT            BEiT
                                                                                                                                   ResNeXt                            EfficientNet
                                                                                                                      EfficientNet Res2NeXt Mixer                BEiT
                                                   0.2                                                                                            BEiT
                                                                                                                                                  BEiT
                                                                                                                                                  BEiT
                                                                                                                                                  Mixer

                                                         1               3        10       1e+06                       1e+07                        1e+08                        1e+09

                                                                                                     Number of parameters

                  B                                                                                                                                            ViT Swin
                                                                                                                                                     ResNetV2        ConvNeXT
               Correlation with human similarity


                                                                                                                                                 ViT    ViT NFNet
                                                                                                                VGG16                          ViT NFNet           CaiT
                                                   0.6                                                   VGG11 ViT
                                                                                                                               ViT        NF-RegNet      NFNet
                                                                                                                                                 CoaT CaiT      CaiT
                                                                                                            VGG11 ConViT               CaiT     CaiT XCiT        IG ResNeXt
                                                                                                                                                                IG ResNeXt
                                                                                                           XCiT       XCiT ViT RepVGG ResNet
                                                                                                                   ResNet           DenseNet SEResNeXt IG ResNeXt
                                                                                                           ResNet               DPN DLA DLA         ECAResNet
                                                                                                                             DenseNet                    EfficientNet
                                                                                                              ResNet                        ECAResNet          ECAResNet
                                                   0.4                                 LCNet         DLA          RegNetX      MixNet DLA            ECAResNet
                                                                                            DLA         LCNet     HRNet     EfficientNet     CSPResNeXt            EfficientNet
                                                                                                  TinyNet                 EfficientNet ResNext ResNet RegNetZ BEiT
                                                                             TinyNet                                                             ConvMixer
                                                                                                                SEResNet            Inception-v3                      EfficientNet
                                                                                                                                   ResNet ConvMixer
                                                                                                                                         ResNet                             BEiT
                                                                                                                                                                             BEiT
                                                                                                                                               EfficientNet
                                                   0.2                                                                                                           BEiT

                                                                                                                                                                      BEiT

                                                                             60                           70                                 80                                 90
                                                                                                          ImageNet accuracy



Figure 4: Correlation to human similarity judgments as a function of A: number of model parameters;
and B: ImageNet accuracy.



                                                                                                                 8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                              How large is
    Start
                              my dataset?
                            N>1000                N<1000


                            Can I collect text             Collect human similarity         Pick a subset
                             descriptions?                   judgments - O(N 2)              of your data
                                                   no
                               yes
                                                                                               no
                          Do I have access to a             Do I have access to a
                          pre-trained LLM?                  pre-trained DNN?
                                                                                              yes
                                                   no
                               yes

                          Does my LLM embed                 Collect text and use             Use the similarity between
                           captions or tags?                frequency analysis - O(N )       DNN embeddings - O(1)
                    captions             tags
                                                                                      no     Use the similarity between
                                                                                             LLM embeddings - O(N )
                Collect                      Collect tags with
               captions                         STEP-Tag
                                                                                            Use the similarity between
                                                                                      yes   stacked embeddings - O(N )
                          Do I have access to a
                          pre-trained DNN?



            Figure 5: Guide to collecting and estimating human similarity judgments at scale.


5   D ISCUSSION AND C ONCLUSION
In this work, we compared novel and existing methods for approximating human similarity judgments.
The main contributions can be summarized as follows: 1) we provide a simple and accessible approach
for approximating O(N 2 ) human similarity judgments using O(N ) annotations, 2) we propose a new
adaptive pipeline STEP-tag for tag mining, 3) we evaluate our approach against 600+ domain-specific
state-of-the-art DNNs, and 4) we publicly release all data comprising 206,339 human judgments.
Based on these, we are now able to provide researchers with a best-practices guide to collecting
similarity datasets. Our guide is based on two bottlenecks that researchers may face: one is the limit
on the number of judgments that can be collected (e.g., due to cost) and the second is the availability
of pre-trained models (i.e., either DNNs or LLMs). Our results make it clear that deep learning can
provide good approximations for human similarity. In fact, when both pre-trained LLMs and DNNs
are available, stacking their representations is consistently the best approach. However, even when
neither type of pre-trained models are available, we suggest that classical word-frequency analysis
methods still provide researchers with an efficient and competitive method for approximating human
similarity. Our guide, comprehensively covering these and other cases, is laid out in Figure 5.
One limitation of this work is that while similarity proxies generated from our pipeline can support
ML datasets, they are also at risk of baking in high-level human biases that can lead to adverse
societal implications, such as amplifying race and gender gaps. Researchers should devote utmost
care to what they choose to incorporate in their training objective. Another limitation of our work is
the fact that we were restricted to English text data and US participants. However, we believe that our
approach and proposed methods (especially STEP-tag and the word-frequency methods) pave the way
for the study of cross-cultural variation of human semantic representations by providing efficient tools
for crowdsourcing high-quality semantic descriptors across languages. This is particularly relevant
for low-resource languages, where our tag-mining techniques can work even with the absence of
pre-trained ML models (Thompson et al., 2020; Barrett, 2020). We are currently expanding our work
to include more languages and diverse cultures. Taken together, our results showcase how we can
leverage language to make machine representations more human-like. Moreover, it highlights the
importance of combining machine learning and cognitive science approaches for mutually advancing
both fields. In particular, we believe that the methodologies adopted in this work have the potential to
greatly advance basic research on naturalistic representations in cognitive science.



                                                                 9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This work was supported by a grant from the John Templeton Foundation to TLG, an NDSEG
fellowship to TRS, and an NSERC fellowship (567554-2022) to IS.

R EFERENCES
Alexei Baevski, Yuhao Zhou, Abdelrahman Mohamed, and Michael Auli. wav2vec 2.0: A framework
  for self-supervised learning of speech representations. Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 33:12449–12460, 2020.

Alexei Baevski, Wei-Ning Hsu, Qiantong Xu, Arun Babu, Jiatao Gu, and Michael Auli. data2vec: A
  general framework for self-supervised learning in speech, vision and language, 2022.

Hangbo Bao, Li Dong, and Furu Wei. BEiT: BERT pre-training of image transformers. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2106.08254, 2021.

H Clark Barrett. Towards a cognitive science of the human: cross-cultural approaches and their
  urgency. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 24(8):620–638, 2020.

Federico Barrios, Federico López, Luis Argerich, and Rosa Wachenchauzer. Variations of the
  similarity function of textrank for automated summarization. arXiv preprint arXiv:1602.03606,
  2016.

Joeran Beel, Bela Gipp, Stefan Langer, and Corinna Breitinger. Paper recommender systems: a
  literature survey. International Journal on Digital Libraries, 17(4):305–338, 2016.

Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
  Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. Language models are
  few-shot learners. Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:1877–1901, 2020.

William Brown. Some experimental results in the correlation of mental abilities 1. British Journal of
 Psychology, 1904-1920, 3(3):296–322, 1910.

Sanyuan Chen, Chengyi Wang, Zhengyang Chen, Yu Wu, Shujie Liu, Zhuo Chen, Jinyu Li, Naoyuki
  Kanda, Takuya Yoshioka, Xiong Xiao, et al. WavLM: Large-scale self-supervised pre-training for
  full stack speech processing. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.13900, 2021.

Alan S Cowen and Dacher Keltner. Self-report captures 27 distinct categories of emotion bridged by
  continuous gradients. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 114(38):E7900–E7909,
  2017.

Jia Deng, Wei Dong, Richard Socher, Li-Jia Li, Kai Li, and Li Fei-Fei. ImageNet: A large-
   scale hierarchical image database. In 2009 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
   Recognition, pp. 248–255. Ieee, 2009.

Philippe Esling, Adrien Bitton, et al. Generative timbre spaces: regularizing variational auto-encoders
  with perceptual metrics. arXiv preprint arXiv:1805.08501, 2018.

Haoqi Fan, Tullie Murrell, Heng Wang, Kalyan Vasudev Alwala, Yanghao Li, Yilei Li, Bo Xiong,
  Nikhila Ravi, Meng Li, Haichuan Yang, Jitendra Malik, Ross Girshick, Matt Feiszli, Aaron Adcock,
 Wan-Yen Lo, and Christoph Feichtenhofer. PyTorchVideo: A deep learning library for video
  understanding. In Proceedings of the 29th ACM International Conference on Multimedia, 2021.
  https://pytorchvideo.org/.

Christoph Feichtenhofer. X3d: Expanding architectures for efficient video recognition. In Proceedings
  of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 203–213, 2020.

Christoph Feichtenhofer, Haoqi Fan, Jitendra Malik, and Kaiming He. SlowFast networks for video
  recognition. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, pp.
  6202–6211, 2019.


                                                  10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Tianyu Gao, Xingcheng Yao, and Danqi Chen. SimCSE: Simple contrastive learning of sentence
  embeddings. arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.08821, 2021.
Thomas L Griffiths and Michael L Kalish. A bayesian view of language evolution by iterated learning.
  In Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, volume 27, 2005.
Peter Harrison, Raja Marjieh, Federico Adolfi, Pol van Rijn, Manuel Anglada-Tort, Ofer Tcherni-
  chovski, Pauline Larrouy-Maestri, and Nori Jacoby. Gibbs sampling with people. Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:10659–10671, 2020.
Martin N Hebart, Charles Y Zheng, Francisco Pereira, and Chris I Baker. Revealing the multidimen-
 sional mental representations of natural objects underlying human similarity judgements. Nature
 Human Behaviour, 4(11):1173–1185, 2020.
Wei-Ning Hsu, Benjamin Bolte, Yao-Hung Hubert Tsai, Kushal Lakhotia, Ruslan Salakhutdinov, and
 Abdelrahman Mohamed. HuBERT: Self-supervised speech representation learning by masked
 prediction of hidden units. IEEE/ACM Transactions on Audio, Speech, and Language Processing,
 29:3451–3460, 2021.
T Jaeger and Roger Levy. Speakers optimize information density through syntactic reduction.
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 19, 2006.
Kevin G Jamieson and Robert D Nowak. Low-dimensional embedding using adaptively selected
  ordinal data. In 2011 49th Annual Allerton Conference on Communication, Control, and Computing
  (Allerton), pp. 1077–1084. IEEE, 2011.
Aditi Jha, Joshua Peterson, and Thomas L Griffiths. Extracting low-dimensional psychological
  representations from convolutional neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.14363, 2020.
Will Kay, Joao Carreira, Karen Simonyan, Brian Zhang, Chloe Hillier, Sudheendra Vijayanarasimhan,
 Fabio Viola, Tim Green, Trevor Back, Paul Natsev, et al. The Kinetics human action video dataset.
 arXiv preprint arXiv:1705.06950, 2017.
Alexander JE Kell, Daniel LK Yamins, Erica N Shook, Sam V Norman-Haignere, and Josh H
  McDermott. A task-optimized neural network replicates human auditory behavior, predicts brain
  responses, and reveals a cortical processing hierarchy. Neuron, 98(3):630–644, 2018.
Prannay Khosla, Piotr Teterwak, Chen Wang, Aaron Sarna, Yonglong Tian, Phillip Isola, Aaron
  Maschinot, Ce Liu, and Dilip Krishnan. Supervised contrastive learning. Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 33:18661–18673, 2020.
Simon Kirby, Hannah Cornish, and Kenny Smith. Cumulative cultural evolution in the laboratory: An
  experimental approach to the origins of structure in human language. Proceedings of the National
  Academy of Sciences, 105(31):10681–10686, 2008.
Ranjay Krishna, Yuke Zhu, Oliver Groth, Justin Johnson, Kenji Hata, Joshua Kravitz, Stephanie Chen,
  Yannis Kalantidis, Li-Jia Li, David A Shamma, et al. Visual genome: Connecting language and
  vision using crowdsourced dense image annotations. International Journal of Computer Vision,
  123(1):32–73, 2017.
Thomas Langlois, Haicheng Zhao, Erin Grant, Ishita Dasgupta, Tom Griffiths, and Nori Jacoby.
  Passive attention in artificial neural networks predicts human visual selectivity. Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 34, 2021.
Edith LM Law, Luis Von Ahn, Roger B Dannenberg, and Mike Crawford. TagATune: A game for
  music and sound annotation. In ISMIR, volume 3, pp. 2, 2007.
Kristin Lemhöfer and Mirjam Broersma. Introducing lextale: A quick and valid lexical test for
  advanced learners of english. Behavior research methods, 44(2):325–343, 2012.
Drew Linsley, Sven Eberhardt, Tarun Sharma, Pankaj Gupta, and Thomas Serre. What are the visual
  features underlying human versus machine vision? In Proceedings of the IEEE International
  Conference on Computer Vision Workshops, pp. 2706–2714, 2017.


                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Ze Liu, Yutong Lin, Yue Cao, Han Hu, Yixuan Wei, Zheng Zhang, Stephen Lin, and Baining Guo.
  Swin transformer: Hierarchical vision transformer using shifted windows. In Proceedings of the
  IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 10012–10022, 2021.
Zhuang Liu, Hanzi Mao, Chao-Yuan Wu, Christoph Feichtenhofer, Trevor Darrell, and Saining Xie.
  A ConvNet for the 2020s. arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.03545, 2022.
Steven R Livingstone and Frank A Russo. The Ryerson audio-visual database of emotional speech and
  song (RAVDESS): A dynamic, multimodal set of facial and vocal expressions in north american
  english. PloS one, 13(5):e0196391, 2018.
Raja Marjieh, Ilia Sucholutsky, Theodore R Sumers, Nori Jacoby, and Thomas L Griffiths. Predicting
  human similarity judgments using large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.04728, 2022.
Alice E Milne, Roberta Bianco, Katarina C Poole, Sijia Zhao, Andrew J Oxenham, Alexander J
  Billig, and Maria Chait. An online headphone screening test based on dichotic pitch. Behavior
  Research Methods, 53(4):1551–1562, 2021.
Gregory Murphy. The big book of concepts. MIT press, 2004.
Zarana Parekh, Jason Baldridge, Daniel Cer, Austin Waters, and Yinfei Yang. Crisscrossed captions:
  Extended intramodal and intermodal semantic similarity judgments for MS-COCO. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2004.15020, 2020.
F. Pedregosa, G. Varoquaux, A. Gramfort, V. Michel, B. Thirion, O. Grisel, M. Blondel, P. Pretten-
   hofer, R. Weiss, V. Dubourg, J. Vanderplas, A. Passos, D. Cournapeau, M. Brucher, M. Perrot, and
   E. Duchesnay. Scikit-learn: Machine learning in Python. Journal of Machine Learning Research,
   12:2825–2830, 2011.
Joshua C Peterson, Joshua T Abbott, and Thomas L Griffiths. Evaluating (and improving) the
  correspondence between deep neural networks and human representations. Cognitive Science, 42
  (8):2648–2669, 2018.
Steven T Piantadosi, Harry Tily, and Edward Gibson. Word lengths are optimized for efficient
  communication. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 108(9):3526–3529, 2011.
Mirco Ravanelli, Titouan Parcollet, Peter Plantinga, Aku Rouhe, Samuele Cornell, Loren Lugosch,
 Cem Subakan, Nauman Dawalatabad, Abdelwahab Heba, Jianyuan Zhong, Ju-Chieh Chou, Sung-
 Lin Yeh, Szu-Wei Fu, Chien-Feng Liao, Elena Rastorgueva, François Grondin, William Aris,
 Hwidong Na, Yan Gao, Renato De Mori, and Yoshua Bengio. SpeechBrain: A general-purpose
 speech toolkit, 2021. arXiv:2106.04624.
Brett D Roads and Bradley C Love. Enriching ImageNet with human similarity judgments and
  psychological embeddings. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
  Pattern Recognition, pp. 3547–3557, 2021.
Lin CY Rouge. A package for automatic evaluation of summaries. In Proceedings of Workshop on
  Text Summarization of ACL, Spain, 2004.
Martin Schrimpf, Jonas Kubilius, Ha Hong, Najib J Majaj, Rishi Rajalingham, Elias B Issa, Kohitij
 Kar, Pouya Bashivan, Jonathan Prescott-Roy, Franziska Geiger, et al. Brain-Score: Which artificial
 neural network for object recognition is most brain-like? BioRxiv, pp. 407007, 2020.
Roger N Shepard. Multidimensional scaling, tree-fitting, and clustering. Science, 210(4468):390–398,
  1980.
Roger N Shepard. Toward a universal law of generalization for psychological science. Science, 237
  (4820):1317–1323, 1987.
Robyn Speer, Joshua Chin, and Catherine Havasi. Conceptnet 5.5: An open multilingual graph of
  general knowledge. In Thirty-first AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 2017.
Mingxing Tan and Quoc Le. Efficientnet: Rethinking model scaling for convolutional neural networks.
 In International conference on machine learning, pp. 6105–6114. PMLR, 2019.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Joshua B Tenenbaum and Thomas L Griffiths. Generalization, similarity, and bayesian inference.
  Behavioral and brain sciences, 24(4):629–640, 2001.
Bill Thompson, Seán G Roberts, and Gary Lupyan. Cultural influences on word meanings revealed
  through large-scale semantic alignment. Nature Human Behaviour, 4(10):1029–1038, 2020.
Amos Tversky. Features of similarity. Psychological review, 84(4):327, 1977.
Luis Von Ahn and Laura Dabbish. Labeling images with a computer game. In Proceedings of the
  SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, pp. 319–326, 2004.
Luis Von Ahn and Laura Dabbish. Designing games with a purpose. Communications of the ACM,
  51(8):58–67, 2008.
Johannes Wagner, Andreas Triantafyllopoulos, Hagen Wierstorf, Maximilian Schmitt, Felix
  Burkhardt, Florian Eyben, and Björn W. Schuller. Dawn of the transformer era in speech emotion
  recognition: closing the valence gap, 2022.
Shu wen Yang, Po-Han Chi, Yung-Sung Chuang, Cheng-I Jeff Lai, Kushal Lakhotia, Yist Y. Lin,
  Andy T. Liu, Jiatong Shi, Xuankai Chang, Guan-Ting Lin, Tzu-Hsien Huang, Wei-Cheng Tseng,
  Ko tik Lee, Da-Rong Liu, Zili Huang, Shuyan Dong, Shang-Wen Li, Shinji Watanabe, Abdelrahman
  Mohamed, and Hung yi Lee. SUPERB: Speech Processing Universal PERformance Benchmark.
  In Proc. Interspeech 2021, pp. 1194–1198, 2021. doi: 10.21437/Interspeech.2021-1775.
Ross Wightman.  PyTorch image models.                    https://github.com/rwightman/
  pytorch-image-models, 2019.
Thomas Wolf, Lysandre Debut, Victor Sanh, Julien Chaumond, Clement Delangue, Anthony Moi,
  Pierric Cistac, Tim Rault, Rémi Louf, Morgan Funtowicz, Joe Davison, Sam Shleifer, Patrick von
  Platen, Clara Ma, Yacine Jernite, Julien Plu, Canwen Xu, Teven Le Scao, Sylvain Gugger, Mariama
  Drame, Quentin Lhoest, and Alexander M. Rush. Transformers: State-of-the-art natural language
  processing. In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
  Processing: System Demonstrations, pp. 38–45. Association for Computational Linguistics, 2020.
Kevin JP Woods, Max H Siegel, James Traer, and Josh H McDermott. Headphone screening
  to facilitate web-based auditory experiments. Attention, Perception, & Psychophysics, 79(7):
  2064–2072, 2017.
Saining Xie, Chen Sun, Jonathan Huang, Zhuowen Tu, and Kevin Murphy. Rethinking spatiotemporal
  feature learning: Speed-accuracy trade-offs in video classification. In Proceedings of the European
  Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV), pp. 305–321, 2018.
Daniel Yamins. An optimization-based approach to understanding sensory systems. The Cognitive
  Neurosciences, 4(V1):381, 2020.
Daniel LK Yamins, Ha Hong, Charles F Cadieu, Ethan A Solomon, Darren Seibert, and James J
  DiCarlo. Performance-optimized hierarchical models predict neural responses in higher visual
  cortex. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 111(23):8619–8624, 2014.
Yao-Yuan Yang, Moto Hira, Zhaoheng Ni, Anjali Chourdia, Artyom Astafurov, Caroline Chen,
  Ching-Feng Yeh, Christian Puhrsch, David Pollack, Dmitriy Genzel, Donny Greenberg, Edward Z.
  Yang, Jason Lian, Jay Mahadeokar, Jeff Hwang, Ji Chen, Peter Goldsborough, Prabhat Roy, Sean
  Narenthiran, Shinji Watanabe, Soumith Chintala, Vincent Quenneville-Bélair, and Yangyang Shi.
  Torchaudio: Building blocks for audio and speech processing. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.15018,
  2021.
Noga Zaslavsky, Charles Kemp, Terry Regier, and Naftali Tishby. Efficient compression in color
  naming and its evolution. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 115(31):7937–7942,
  2018.
Tianyi Zhang, Varsha Kishore, Felix Wu, Kilian Q. Weinberger, and Yoav Artzi. Bertscore: Evaluating
  text generation with bert. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2020. URL
  https://openreview.net/forum?id=SkeHuCVFDr.


                                                 13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


S UPPLEMENTARY MATERIALS

A       S TIMULI AND DATA

A.1     C ODE AND DATA AVAILABILITY

A link is provided to the public, containing all the data collected for this project during the review
stage.2 It includes the new human behavioral data, the computational experiments with machine
learning models, and all the necessary analyses scripts for producing the results. Additionally, the
repository includes the Dallinger/PsyNet source codes for reproducing the behavioral experiments.
Finally, we present an interactive visualization for exploring the similarity between stimuli as
experienced by humans and different methods reported in the paper.3

B       B EHAVIORAL PARADIGMS

B.1     PARTICIPANTS

The exact number of participants for each of the 9 new behavioral experiments is reported in Table 1.


                        Table 1: Behavioral experiment summary table.
 Modality      Paradigm   Respect     Total stimuli Trials per   Section           N     Pre-screening
                                                    participant
    Images       Tags        Animals          120             60         2.2.4     56        LX
    Images       Tags       Furniture         120             60         2.2.4     58        LX
    Images       Tags       Vegetables        120             60         2.2.4     57        LX
     Audio     Similarity   Emotions          100             85         2.2.2    252        HT
     Audio     Captions     Emotions         1,000            50         2.2.3    151       HT, LX
     Audio       Tags       Emotions         1,000            50         2.2.4    217       HT, LX
     Video     Similarity   Activities        100             85         2.2.2    284        HT
     Video     Captions     Activities       1,000            50         2.2.3    196       HT, LX
     Video       Tags       Activities       1,000            50         2.2.4    221       HT, LX
     N ote. ‘N ’ denotes the number of participants included in the analysis; ‘LX’ denotes the LexTALE
     English proficiency pre-screening task; ‘HT’ denotes the headphone test.


B.2     I MPLEMENTATION

All behavioral experiments were implemented using the Dallinger4 and PsyNet (Harrison et al., 2020)
frameworks. Dallinger is a modern tool for experiment hosting and deployment which automates
the process of participant recruitment and compensation by integrating cloud-based services such as
Heroku5 with online crowd-sourcing platforms such as AMT. PsyNet is a novel experiment design
framework that builds on Dallinger and allows for flexible specification of experiment timelines as
well as providing support for a wide array of tasks across different modalities (visual, auditory and
audio-visual). Participants interact with the experiment through their web-browser, which in turn
communicates with a backend Python server responsible for the experiment logic.

B.3     P RE - SCREENING

A common technique for filtering out participants that are likely to deliver low-quality responses,
as well as automated scripts (bots), is to implement pre-screening tasks prior to the main part of
    2
    Code and data: https://osf.io/kzbr5/?view_only=3dea58e008ce41c290ef0f374bdbf444
    3
    Interactive plots:   https://words-are-all-you-need.s3.amazonaws.com/index.
html
  4
    https://dallinger.readthedocs.io/
  5
    https://www.heroku.com/


                                                  14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


each experiment. Failing the pre-screening tasks results in early termination of the experiment.
Nevertheless, participants are still compensated for their time regardless of whether they fail or
succeed on a pre-screener to ensure fair compensation. The role of pre-screeners in our studies was to
realize two main criteria for data quality, namely, a) to be able to collect high-quality text descriptors,
and b) to ensure that participants are able to inspect the target stimuli properly (in particular the audio
component in prosody and videos). To do this, we implemented two pre-screening tasks, an English
proficiency test and a standardized headphone test (used only for audio and video experiments). Table
1 provides details on which pre-screeners were used in each of the behavioral experiments.


   Figure 6: Example trial from the LexTALE pre-screening task (Lemhöfer & Broersma, 2012).


English proficiency test. To test participants’ English proficiency, we used LexTALE, a lexical
decision task developed in Lemhöfer & Broersma (2012). In each trial, participants were briefly
presented (1 second) with either a real English word or a made up word that does not exist. Participants
were instructed to guess whether the word was real or not. A total of 12 trials (half of them being real
words) were presented, and 8 of them needed to be correct for the participant to pass. The presented
words were: hasty, fray, stoutly, moonlit, scornful, unkempt, mensible, kilp, plaintively, crumper,
plaudate, alberation. An example trial is shown in Figure 6.


        Figure 7: Example trial from the headphone pre-screening test (Woods et al., 2017).


Headphone test. We used the headphone test developed by Wood et al. (Woods et al., 2017), which
is used as a standard pre-screener for high-quality auditory psychophysics data-collection procedures
(Milne et al., 2021). The test is designed to ensure that the participants are wearing headphones
and are able to perceive subtle differences in volume. The task consists of a forced choice task, in
which three consecutive tones are played, and the participant has to identify which of them is the
quietest. Crucially, these tones are constructed to exhibit a phase cancellation effect when not using
headphones, and therefore making it difficult for non-headphone users to identify the quietest tone.
Participants had to answer 4 out of 6 trials correctly to pass this test. An example trial is shown in
Figure 7.


                                                   15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


              Figure 8: Screenshot from the similarity judgment task over video pairs.


B.4   S IMILARITY JUDGMENTS

In the present work, we collected similarity judgments across audio and video datasets. Each dataset
comprised of 4,950 unique pairs corresponding to the number of unordered subsets that contain
two distinct objects (i.e., excluding self-similarity), within a set of 100 stimuli. We did not collect
similarity judgments over the three datasets of images, as these were provided in Peterson et al.
(2018) (and used here with permission). The experiments proceeded as follows: upon completion of
the consent form and the pre-screening tasks, participants received instructions regarding the main
experiment:

         Audio. In this experiment we are studying how people perceive emotions. In each
         round you will be presented with two different recordings and your task will be to
         simply judge how similar are the emotions of the speakers.

         Video. In this experiment we are studying how people perceive activities. In each
         round you will be presented with two different videos and your task will be to
         simply judge how similar are the activities in them.

The instructions then continued as follows:

         You will have seven response options, ranging from 0 (’Completely Dissimilar’) to
         6 (’Completely Similar’). Choose the one you think is most appropriate. Note: no
         prior expertise is required to complete this task, just choose what you intuitively
         think is the right answer.

         The quality of your responses will be automatically monitored, and you
         will receive a bonus at the end of the experiment in proportion to your quality
         score. The best way to achieve a high score is to concentrate and give each round
         your best attempt.

         The experiment will begin now. You will take up to 85 rounds where you
         have to answer this question. Remember to pay careful attention in order to get the
         best bonus!


                                                 16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


As described in the instructions, in each trial, participants rated the similarity between a pair of
sounds (how similar are the emotions of the two speakers?) or videos (how similar are the activities
in the following two videos?) on a scale ranging from 0 (completely dissimilar) to 6 (completely
similar) (Figure 8). Overall, participants completed 85 trials on a random subset of the possible pairs.
To further motivate participants to provide good responses, we gave them an additional performance
bonus for providing consistent data. Among the 85 trials, 5 trials were repeated for consistency
checking. The responses were converted into a performance score by computing the Spearman
correlation between the original and repeat ratings. Perfect scores resulted in a 10 cent bonus.

B.5     C APTIONS

We collected free-text captions for the video and audio datasets. Captions for the image datasets were
previously collected in Marjieh et al. (2022) and used here with permission. After completing the
consent form and pre-screening tests, participants received the following instructions:

          Audio. In this experiment we are studying how people describe emotions. You will
          be presented with different recordings of speakers and your task will be to describe
          their emotions. In doing so, please keep in mind the following instructions
             • Describe all the important aspects of the recording.

          Video. In this experiment we are studying how people describe activities in videos.
          You will be presented with different videos of activities and your task will be to
          describe their content. In doing so, please keep in mind the following instructions
             • Describe all the important activities in the video.

As well as the following guidelines adapted from Marjieh et al. (2022):

             • Do not start the sentences with "There is" or "There are".
             • Do not describe unimportant details.
             • You are not allowed to copy and paste descriptions.
             • Descriptions should contain at least 5 words.
             • Descriptions should contain at least 4 unique words.
          Note: No prior expertise is required to complete this task, just describe what you
          intuitively think is important as accurately as possible.

          The quality of your captions will be monitored automatically and provid-
          ing low quality and repetitive responses could result in early termination of the
          experiment and hence a lower bonus.

          You will describe up to 50 recordings.

These guidelines were enforced to ensure that participants deliver sufficiently informative captions
that are not repetitive. In each trial of the main experiment, participants described a single audio
(please describe the emotions of the speaker) or video stimulus (please describe the activity in
the video). Overall, participants described up to 50 randomly presented stimuli. To filter out bad
participants that tend to deliver repeated responses, in each trial (excluding the first 4 trials) we
computed the mean edit distance between their current response and all previous responses that they
previously provided using the partial_ratio function in thefuzz6 Python package for fuzzy
string matching. This function returns for a pair of input strings a matching score between 0 and 100
(100 being identical strings). Early termination was enforced if the mean response matching score
was above 80. The idea here was to prevent participants from copying and pasting the same response
over and over again (or varying it only slightly).

B.6     TAGS

For the image, audio, and video datasets, we collected tag data, i.e., concise labels that describe the
salient features of a stimulus. To do so, we developed a novel tag mining paradigm called STEP-Tag in
   6
       https://github.com/seatgeek/thefuzz


                                                   17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 9: Screenshot of an example tag mining task for videos. The tag “picking” received 5 stars
(very relevant), whereas the tag “apple” is flagged (marked as irrelevant).

                            Dataset (# of stimuli)      mean     std    total
                            Vegetables (120)             3.2     1.1     385
                            Furniture (120)              5.2     1.7     627
                            Animals (120)                8.2     2.7     988
                            Audio-emotions (1000)        9.1     3.5    9092
                            Video-activities (1000)      8.5     2.9    8482

       Table 2: Mean, standard deviation, and total number of tags collected for each dataset.


which each stimulus was treated as a separate “chain” (see Figure 2 in the paper). When the stimulus
was presented for the first time, the participant was asked to provide at least one tag. For the following
iterations, we sequenced participants so that each of them had to rate the tags provided by participants
from the previous iterations within the same chain. The rating was either choosing between one (not
very relevant) to five stars (very relevant), or marking the tag as completely irrelevant by using the
flag icon (see Figure 9). Participants could optionally introduce new tags that will subsequently be
presented to other participants assigned to the same chain. Participants could only provide tags that
were not already present, and they had to be in lower-case letters. To discourage frequent use of long
word combinations, a pop-up window appeared if participants used two or more white spaces (i.e.,
three or more words) to warn that long combinations should only be used when completely necessary.
This process continued for at least 10 iterations, after which we checked at each consequent iteration
whether the chain was “full”. We considered a chain to be full if its latest iteration had at least 2
tags that were rated at least 3 times and had a mean rating of 3 stars. If a chain was not full after 20
iterations, we stopped collecting further iterations. Since each experimental batch lasted for a fixed
duration of less than one day, in some cases we did not complete all chains, and a few chains had
fewer iterations (3 for vegetables, 6 for animals and 2 for furniture, out of 120 chains each). Our
experiment incentivized participants to provide new tags by paying them a performance bonus of 0.01
USD for every up-vote (i.e., not flagged) given by other participants. On the contrary, if two or more
tags of the same participant were flagged by others, the participant was excluded (the participant
received a warning after the first flag). We provide summary statistics on the number of collected
tags in Table 2.
After accepting the consent form and passing the pre-screening tasks, participants received introduc-
tory instructions regarding the main experiment:

         Images. Rate & Tag animals/furniture/vegetables! Thanks for participating in this
         game! In this game you will:


                                                   18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


            • Watch images of animals/furniture/vegetables.
            • Rate tags that other players have given.
            • Add new tags that you think are missing.

         Audio. Rate & Tag emotions! Thanks for participating in this game! In this game
         you will:
            • Listen to a speech fragment and focus on the emotional content of the record-
              ing.
            • Rate tags that other players have given.
            • Add new tags that you think are missing.

         Video. Rate & Tag activities! In this game you will:
            • Watch a video and focus on the activities happening.
            • Rate tags that other players have given.
            • Add new tags that you think are missing.

Participants then received further instructions regarding the rules of the game

         Images. After watching the animal/furniture/vegetable you will see tags given
         by other players that describe the animal/furniture/vegetable. You should rate the
         relevance of each tag by clicking the appropriate amount of stars (1 star not very
         relevant, 5 stars very relevant). If you think that the tag is a mistake or completely
         irrelevant, you should flag it by clicking the flag icon. If you are the first person
         seeing this animal/furniture/vegetable, you may see no previous tags. You can also
         add your own tag that is relevant to describe the animal/furniture/vegetable. Your
         tag will then be rated by other players who are playing the game simultaneously.

         Audio. After listening to the recording, you will see tags given by other players
         that describe the emotions in the speech fragment. You should rate the relevance
         of each tag by clicking the appropriate amount of stars (1 star not very relevant, 5
         stars very relevant). If you think that the tag is a mistake or completely irrelevant,
         you should flag it by clicking the flag icon. If you are the first person listening to
         this speech sample, you may see no previous tags. You can also add your own tag
         that is relevant to describe the emotions in the speech fragment. Your tag will then
         be rated by other players who are playing the game simultaneously.

         Video. After watching the video, you will see tags given by other players that
         describe the activities in the video. You should rate the relevance of each tag
         by clicking the appropriate amount of stars (1 star not very relevant, 5 stars very
         relevant). If you think that the tag is a mistake or completely irrelevant, you should
         flag it by clicking the flag icon. If you are the first person watching this video,
         you may see no previous tags. You can also add your own tag that is relevant to
         describe the activities in the video. Your tag will then be rated by other players
         who are playing the game simultaneously.

Finally, participants received the following guidelines regarding the tag input and the bonus scheme:

         Keep tags short. A word like “green grass" should rather be submitted as “green"
         and “grass", whereas a compound word such as “red wine" cannot be separated,
         since “red wine" means something different than just “red" and “wine".

         Bonus rules.
            • If the tag you provide gets rated as a relevant tag (i.e., not flagged) by other
              players
            • If your tag is unique and have not been introduced by others


                                                  19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                   Modality     STEP      Captions
                                   Audio         230         187
                                   Video         264         291

           Table 3: Median of overall participants’ time spent per stimulus (in seconds).


         Note: Simply writing many and irrelevant tags is not a good idea because other
         players might flag your tag. Your experiment will terminate early if there are too
         many red flags!

         Please try to use a variety of words to describe the animal / furniture / vegetable
         / emotion in the speech fragment / activities in the video, and use the entire star
         rating scale for your responses.

B.6.1    VALIDATING STEP-TAG
We conducted a small, exploratory ablation study to validate STEP-Tag as a procedure for collecting
diverse, accurate, and informative tags. First, we compared using multiple tags from the last iteration
of STEP-Tag to using just a single randomly-selected highly-rated tag from the last iteration. We
found that using a single tag greatly decreased correlation with human similarity (i.e., for the video
dataset, the best-performing method on multiple tags had a correlation of r = 0.74 while the best-
performing method on single labels had a correlation of r = 0.35). Second, we compared tags from
the first iteration of STEP-Tag (equivalent to collecting tags without an adaptive procedure) to tags
from the last iteration. We found that using first iteration tags greatly decreased correlation with
human similarity (i.e., for the video dataset, the ‘Tags CNNB mean (no split)’ method, the correlation
from the last iteration was r = 0.74 and from the first iteration it was r = 0.44; for ‘Tags overlap’ it
was r = 0.56 from the last iteration and r = 0.38 from the first iteration). Finally, we extracted the
Kinetics-200 labels for each video to compare the tags from STEP-Tag against the kinds of labels
typically collected for machine learning datasets. We found that using labels decreased the correlation
with human similarity (i.e., the best-performing method on pipeline tags had a correlation of r = 0.74
while the best-performing method on dataset labels had a correlation of r = 0.64).

B.7     D URATION OF STEP- TAG AND CAPTIONS

To compare STEP-tag and captions, we computed the median of overall participants’ time spent per
stimulus (see Table 3). The times were only collected for the audio and video modality (captions
for the image datasets were already collected by Marjieh et al. (2022)). We see that both methods
consume roughly similar amounts of time, which is desirable as our analysis suggests that in some
domains (e.g., video) tags yield the best results whereas in others (e.g., audio) captions do.

C     P REDICTION METHODS

We used two main types of methods to predict human similarity judgments. The first class (“DNN-
based methods", described in section C.1) make use of pre-trained embedding models. In the second
class of models (“Word Frequency Analysis methods", described in the section C.2) simple feature
extraction techniques are used instead of pre-trained deep learning models. Figure 1 depicts schematic
overview of all prediction methods that we used.

C.1     DNN- BASED METHODS

The DNN-based methods use various embeddings and deep learning representations to predict human
similarity judgments. These methods could be further split into three groups based on the kinds of
input data they process, namely if they use a single sensory modality that is either image, audio
or video (“unimodal models"; see subsection C.1.1), or use text that is either tag or captions (“text
embeddings"; see subsection C.1.2), or use both (“multimodal models"). In addition, we also tested
the performance of “stacked" representations, where the sensory and textual embedding of a select


                                                  20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


number of models were concatenated into a single long embedding. Overall, the computation time of
embedding methods took about two weeks on an x1.16xlarge Amazon Web Services instance with
64 vCPUs and 976 GiB of memory.

C.1.1   U NIMODAL DNN- BASED METHODS


 Table 4: All 30 image baseline models occurring in the top 50 best models reported in Figure 3A.
               Model name       Average score SD score Top 1            Number of
                                                             accuracy parameters (M)
           1   Swin                   0.66            0.06      81.52      23.37
           2   ConvNeXT               0.64            0.07       N/A       348.15
           3   NF-ResNet              0.62            0.04      80.65      23.51
           4   NFNet l0               0.61            0.08      82.75      32.77
           5   ResNetV2               0.60            0.11       N/A       928.34
           6   NF-RegNet              0.59            0.05      79.29      9.26
           7   VGG16                  0.58            0.11      73.35      134.27
           8   VGG19                  0.58            0.11      74.21      139.58
           9   ViT                    0.58            0.12      75.95      6.16
          10   ResMLP                 0.57            0.07      83.59      128.37
          11   Twins-SVT              0.57            0.06      81.68      23.55
          12   Twins-PCPVT            0.57            0.04      81.09      23.59
          13   VGG13                  0.57            0.11      71.59      128.96
          14   CaiT                   0.57            0.04      82.19      17.18
          15   VGG11                  0.57            0.10      70.36      128.77
          16   gMLP                   0.56            0.06      79.64      19.17
          17   PIT                    0.56            0.03      78.19      10.23
          18   DeiT                   0.56            0.03      72.17      5.52
          19   ConViT                 0.56            0.03      73.11      5.52
          20   TNT                    0.56            0.03      81.52      23.37
          21   CoaT                   0.55            0.04      78.43      5.35
          22   gMixer                 0.55            0.05      78.04      24.34
          23   XCiT                   0.55            0.04      82.57      11.92
          24   IG ResNeXt             0.53            0.13      85.44      826.36
          25   Visformer              0.52            0.02      82.11      39.45
          26   RepVGG                 0.52            0.11      80.21      81.26
          27   CLIP image             0.50            0.11       N/A       102.01
          28   JXNesT                 0.50            0.07      81.42      16.67
          29   ECAResNet              0.47            0.14      80.45      28.11
          30   DenseNet               0.47            0.12      74.74      6.95
   N ote. Performance accuracy on ImageNet was based on Wightman (2019) and was not available
   for all models.


Image models We used 560 pre-trained models from the Pytorch Image Models (timm) repository
(Wightman, 2019). We chose this repository as it contains an extensive and highly diverse set of
pre-trained models in terms of architecture backbones, model sizes, and training sets. The repository
includes models published from 2014 to 2022 that use various training sets (such as ImageNet1k,
ImageNet21k, Instagram, etc.), training procedures objectives (e.g., pre-training, fine-tuning, self-
supervision, weak supervision, etc.) and architectures (e.g., VGG, ResNet, Inception, Transformer,
etc.). The repository also reports various evaluation metrics for each model (e.g., their ImageNet
performance).
For each model, we computed the embedding from the last layer (typically before the final softmax
layer; see below and Figure 10 for a preliminary analysis for the effect of layer depth in audio
models). We then computed the cosine similarity between pairs of embedding vectors to produce a
similarity matrix. The entire list of the performance of all models is detailed in the OSF repository


                                                 21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                           Models
         0.5
                                                                hubert-base          wav2vec-large_10m

                                                                hubert-large         wav2vec-large_960h
         0.4
                                                                hubert-large_asr     wav2vec-large_lv60k

                                                                hubert-xlarge        wav2vec-large_lv60k_100h
         0.3
 Score


                                                                hubert-xlarge_asr    wav2vec-large_lv60k_10m

         0.2                                                    wav2vec-base         wav2vec-large_lv60k_960h

                                                                wav2vec-base_100h    wav2vec-large_XLSR53

         0.1                                                    wav2vec-base_10m     wavlm-base

                                                                wav2vec-base_960h    wavlm-base+
         0.0   Close to output            Close to input
                                                                wav2vec-large_100h   wavlm-large
                            Layer depth


Figure 10: Scores for individual layers of audio models scaled to the total number of layers. Models
are colored by their meta architecture.


associated with this paper 7 . Table 4 presents additional details for the top 42 image baseline models
in Figure 3A including their average score (correlation to human judgments) across the three image
datasets, the standard deviation (SD) of this score (across datasets, repeated runs and available model
parameters in Wightman (2019)), their ImageNet accuracy, and their number of trainable parameters.
Figure 4A shows the correlation to human similarity as a function of the number of parameters for
all 569 models. In general, we found that models that have more parameters perform better (Figure
4A). Plotting all the embedding technique correlations against the number of training parameters of
their respective models showed statistically significant positive correlation (r = 0.39, p < 0.001).
However, one possible explanation for this could be the improved performance of newer models,
which typically have more parameters, on various computer vision tasks. To test this, we computed
the performance (i.e., correlation with human similarity) of the various models as a function of
their accuracy on ImageNet (Deng et al., 2009) - which was provided in Wightman (2019) for all
models except for CLIP (whose implementation came from a different repository) as summarized in
Figure 4B. We found a positive correlation between the two metrics (r = 0.26, p < 0.001), though
with some clear exceptions. For example, the vision transformer BEiT (Bao et al., 2021) and the
convolutional architecture EfficientNet (Tan & Le, 2019) achieved high accuracy on ImageNet but
performed poorly on human data. On the other hand, the vision transformer Swin (Liu et al., 2021)
and the convolutional architecture ConvNext (Liu et al., 2022) both performed well on ImageNet
and human similarity. This suggests that architecture and number of parameters are better predictors
of similarity judgments than performance on ImageNet. Further analysis is required to determine
what kind of architectural components actually contribute to more human-like performance (Langlois
et al., 2021).

Audio models We used all pre-trained wav2vec 2.0 (Baevski et al., 2020) and HuBERT (Hsu et al.,
2021) models available in torchaudio (Yang et al., 2021). We also extracted embeddings from
WavLM (Chen et al., 2021) and data2vec audio models (Baevski et al., 2022). Furthermore, we used
additional wav2vec 2.0 and HuBERT models that were either specialized on emotion recognition
or speaker identification (wen Yang et al., 2021; Wagner et al., 2022; Ravanelli et al., 2021). The
performance of HuBERT, wav2vec 2.0, and WavLM models is shown in Figure 3B. Additional details
about the models are displayed in Table 5.
In addition, we explored the correlation between the audio models and human similarity data as
a function of the layer in the model. Earlier literature has suggested that similarity to human
representations may depend on the layer of the model (Kell et al., 2018; Yamins et al., 2014; Yamins,
     7
         https://osf.io/kzbr5/?view_only=3dea58e008ce41c290ef0f374bdbf444


                                                           22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                     Table 5: All audio baseline models used in the analysis.
                  Model name                            Emotion       Number of
                                                        correlation parameters (M)
             1    wav2vec 2.0 lv60k (100h)                   0.49             317
             2    wav2vec 2.0 lv60k (960h)                   0.49             317
             3    wav2vec 2.0 lv60k                          0.51             317
             4    wav2vec 2.0 lv60k (10m)                    0.51             317
             5    HuBERT xlarge ASR                          0.45            1000
             6    HuBERT xlarge                              0.46            1000
             7    HuBERT large ASR                           0.46             300
             8    wav2vec 2.0 large XLSR53                   0.47             317
             9    HuBERT large                               0.46             300
            10    wav2vec 2.0 (Audeering, emotion)           0.49             317
            11    HuBERT base                                0.41              90
            12    WavLM large                                0.46           316.62
            13    HuBERT base (superb, emotion)              0.42              90
            14    HuBERT base (superb, speaker)              0.42              90
            15    WavLM base+                                0.41            94.70
            16    wav2vec 2.0 base (960h)                    0.38              95
            17    WavLM base                                 0.39            94.70
            18    wav2vec 2.0 base                           0.34              95
            19    wav2vec 2.0 base (10m)                     0.34              95
            20    wav2vec 2.0 base (superb, emotion)         0.34              95
            21    wav2vec 2.0 base (superb, speaker)         0.34              95
            22    wav2vec 2.0 base (100h)                    0.32              95
            23    HuBERT large (superb, emotion)             0.29             300
            24    HuBERT large (superb, speaker)             0.29             300
            25    wav2vec 2.0 large (100h)                   0.32             317
            26    wav2vec 2.0 large (superb, emotion)        0.31             317
            27    wav2vec 2.0 large (superb, speaker)        0.31             317
            28    wav2vec 2.0 large (960h)                   0.31             317
            29    wav2vec 2.0 large (10m)                    0.31             317
            30    data2vec audio large (960h)                0.31           313.28
            31    data2vec audio base (100h)                 0.23           313.28
            32    data2vec audio large (100h)                0.23           313.28
            33    data2vec audio large (10m)                 0.21           313.28
            34    wav2vec 2.0 (SpeechBrain, emotion)         0.11              95
            35    data2vec audio base (960h)                 0.16            93.16
            36    data2vec audio base (10m)                  0.15            93.16


2020). We expected that the layers closer to the input of the model (where the representation is
more low-level) to be less predictive. In general, we found that this was the case (Figure 10). In
some variants of wav2vec, however, intermediate representations performed better, possibly due to
the misalignment of the training task of wav2vec with the emotion task. This analysis confirms the
choice we made in the paper to mostly use the last two layers of the models. Preliminary analysis of
the image and video models also explored different layers, but the results were similar to those we
presented in audio, and are therefore not reported here.

Video models We extracted embeddings from the ‘Slow’ (a 3D ResNet; see Feichtenhofer et al.
(2019)), Slowfast (a 2-path model with one path capturing semantics and the other capturing fine
details; see Feichtenhofer et al. (2019)), and X3d (a model that initially start as a simple 2D image
classifier but is expanded in several axes; see Feichtenhofer (2020)) architectures implemented in
pytorchvideo (Fan et al., 2021). All video models were pre-trained on the Kinetics-400 dataset
(Kay et al., 2017). The performance of the models is displayed in Figure 3C. Numeric correlation
values are detailed in Table 6 along with model accuracy (Top1 and Top5) on Kinetics-400, and the
number of parameters in each model. The accuracies and parameter counts are listed as reported in


                                                 23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Fan et al. (2021). As with previous modalities, the number of parameters appears to be positively
correlated with correlation to human similarity.

                     Table 6: All video baseline models used in the analysis.
             Model name     Correlation Kinetics-400 Kinetics-400             Number of
                                              Top1 Acc       Top5 Acc parameters (M)
        1    Slowfast r50             0.65              76.94          92.69               34.57
        2    Slowfast r101            0.64              77.90          93.27               62.83
        3    Slow r50                 0.61              74.58          91.63               32.45
        4    X3d M                    0.53              75.94          92.72                3.79
        5    X3d S                    0.49              73.33          91.27                3.79
        6    X3d XS                   0.48              69.12          88.63                3.79


C.1.2    T EXT EMBEDDING METHODS
Caption text embedding. Since there are multiple captions per stimulus, an aggregation procedure
had to be applied to produce a single embedding vector for each stimulus. In our main analysis,
for each stimulus, we extracted the embedding for each associated caption and averaged these
embeddings together before computing cosine similarity between the mean embeddings. We also
tried an alternative approach of concatenating the captions together into a single paragraph, which
we then passed through the LLMs to compute a single embedding per stimulus. We found that this
did not consistently improve performance and in many cases even decreased it, though we note
that we did not experiment with different permutations of the concatenated captions, nor did we
extensively study other ways to combine them together. Future work could explore other techniques
for pre-processing captions and aggregating representations from multiple captions in ways that
would improve correlation with human similarity judgments.
Tag text embedding. We experimented with several algorithms for computing similarity between
sets (or multi-sets) of tags. The algorithms described in this section all involve using ConceptNet
NumberBatch (CNNB) (Speer et al., 2017) as the embedding backbone for turning discrete tags into
continuous vector representations. For each stimulus, we took the tags remaining in the final iteration,
and tested whether they were found in the dictionary for our embedding model. If a tag was not
found and if it contained no spaces, we tried to correct the spelling before trying to look it up in the
dictionary again. If a tag contained spaces, we split it into individual words, correct their spelling,
and averaged together the embedded representations of those words that were found in the dictionary.
Tags that were not found even after spelling correction and splitting were excluded from the set and
did not contribute to the final representation. For the methods marked ‘(no split)’ we did not split
multi-word tags, instead we just excluded multi-word tags that were not found in the embedding
model dictionary. In the following, we describe the different techniques used to generate predictions
based on tag embeddings.
Tags CNNB overlap. For each pair of stimuli, we counted the number of ‘almost identical’ tag
embeddings, defined as every respective element of the two embeddings being less than a certain
threshold apart (in our case, this threshold was 0.1). We then set similarity for that pair of stimuli
to be this count, i.e., the number of ‘almost identical’ tags, normalized by the total number of tags
across the respective two sets.
Tags CNNB quantized. This method involves quantizing tags using cosine similarity to find the
number of unique tags. For each pair of stimuli, we counted the number of tags assigned to the first
stimulus that had cosine similarity greater than a certain threshold (in our case, this threshold was 0.7)
to at least one tag of the second stimulus (call this value NA ) and vice-versa (NB ). The minimum of
these two values is the number of unique, shared tags between the two sets (min(NA , NB )). The total
number of unique tags across the two sets is then the total number of tags in each set (TA + TB ) minus
the maximum number of shared tags (max(NA , NB )). We compute similarity as the ratio of the
number of unique, shared tags to the total number of unique tags, SAB = TA +Tmin(N         A ,NB )
                                                                                     B −max(NA ,NB )
                                                                                                     . For
example, suppose the two sets of tags are A : {a, b, c, g} and B : {a, b, d, e}, so TA = TB = 4, and
that a, c have cosine similarity of 0.8. The number of tags from set A found in set B is NA = 3, and
those from B found in A is NB = 2. The number of unique, shared tags is min(NA , NB ) = 2 (since


                                                   24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


{a, b, c} can be represented by {a, b}), and the total number of unique tags is 4 + 4 − 3 = 5 (since
{a, b, c, g, a, b, d, e} can be represented by {a, b, d, e, g}). The assigned similarity is then SAB = 25 .
Tags CNNB mean. The set of tag embeddings for each stimulus were averaged together to form a
single embedding assigned to the respective stimulus. We then computed cosine similarity on the
embeddings of each pair of stimuli.
Tags CNNB mean (no split). Same as above, but without splitting multi-word tags (i.e., ones that
contain spaces) during the embedding process.
All spelling corrections in the algorithms listed above were performed using the Python package
pyspellchecker8 , taking the top corrected recommendation returned by the spell checker in
each case.
Tags to caption Roberta (SimCSE). Additionally, for the images datasets, we experimented with
converting sets of tags into captions and then using those captions with our best-performing LLM
(‘sup-simcse-roberta-large’) the same way we do with user-generated captions. To convert a set of
tags into a caption, we joined the set of tags with commas and prepended them with the phrase “This
is an image of”.

C.1.3     OTHER DNN-BASED M ETHODS
For the image datasets, we also considered several other methods that made use of DNNs but do not
fit into the categories described above.

GPT3 prompting We experimented with prompting GPT3 (Brown et al., 2020), a large pre-trained
language model, to directly output similarity judgments as a text-completion problem rather than
having to access model embeddings as we did above. We used a few-shot prompting approach where
in each prompt we included three context examples of pairs of tag sets and their associated similarity
rating. We then provided the pair of tag sets for the two images that we wanted to get a similarity
rating for but left the rating empty for the model to fill in.
Here is an example prompt with the GPT3 response bolded and in square brackets:
People described pairs of images using words.
How similar are the two images in each pair on a scale of 0-1 where 0 is completely dissimilar and 1
is completely similar?

Here are the descriptions of image one: tortoise, slow, protected, shell, turtle, scaly, old, cold-blooded
Here are the descriptions of image two: monkey, ape, mammal, black and white, hairy, agile, primate,
smart, tree-dwelling
Rating: 0.05

Here are the descriptions of image one: rhinoceros, horn, gray, standing, heavy body, endangered,
wild, africa, african
Here are the descriptions of image two: tiger, open mouth, stripes, feline, predator
Rating: 0.27

Here are the descriptions of image one: goat, eye, leg
Here are the descriptions of image two: mammal, wide-nosed, mandrill, primate, baboon, smart
Rating: 0.19

Here are the descriptions of image one: black, primate, mammal, hairy, chimpanzee, africa, african,
great ape, smart, omnivore
Here are the descriptions of image two: zebra, striped, two-toned, wild, staring, mammal, equine,
herd animal, africa
Rating: [0.14]
We repeated this four times for each pair of images in each image dataset with a different set of
context examples during each repetition and averaged together the GPT responses to get a final
   8
       https://pyspellchecker.readthedocs.io/en/latest/


                                                   25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


similarity prediction for each pair. In total, creating the context examples required having access
to human similarity judgments over only 12 pairs of images. We found that this approach yielded
surprisingly good predictions, with an average correlation of r = 0.62 across the image datasets. We
believe this approach merits future investigation to determine whether prompt engineering can further
increase the performance.

Image captioning models We experimented with using pre-trained image captioning models to
generate captions for our images and then using those captions with our best-performing LLM (‘sup-
simcse-roberta-large’) the same way we do with user-generated captions. We used three pre-trained
image captioning models from HuggingFace (‘flamingo-mini’, ‘vilt-b32-finetuned-vqa’, and ‘vit-
gpt2-image-captioning’) to generate text descriptions for our images. However, the performance was
quite poor with an average of r = 0.29 across the three models. As a result, O(N ) language-based
methods cannot easily be reduced to O(1) even when domain-relevant pre-trained caption models are
available.

C.2     W ORD F REQUENCY A NALYSIS METHODS

In this work, we also conducted an additional evaluation of prediction models beyond embedding-
based techniques (described in the previous section). Specifically, we compared the predictions
of embedding-based models, which utilize deep learning representations, with those of traditional
methods of text mining.
Before the word frequency analysis, we performed the following initial pre-processing steps

         • For caption data, we concatenated all the captions describing the same stimulus into a single
           long “document.”
         • For tag data, we wanted to prioritize tags that appeared earlier in the tag-mining chains and
           were rated higher. To that end, we gathered all tags from all iterations and duplicated tags
           from a given iteration based on the ratings they received. For example, if the tag “tomato”
           received three stars, then we would add the repeated tokens “tomato, tomato, tomato” to
           the aggregated list (“document”). In a given iteration, flagged tags are removed, but if they
           are rated later, then they are included. The total number of repetitions per token is equal
           to the sum of all the stars they received in all iterations. As a result, each token is repeated
           multiple times, which we take into consideration in consequent analysis.

For the next steps, we used the Matlab text analytics toolbox 9 . Unless otherwise specified, we
used default parameters for all functions. To generate similarity matrices, we applied the following
methods:
Co-occurrence method. In this approach, we simply counted the number of repeated pairs of words
in documents i and j and normalized by the total number of pairs. Formally, we use wi to denote the
word list of a document i. Let wi,k be the k-th word in the wi list of words, and let |wi | denote the
length of the list. We denote by δ(c, d) the indicator function that returns 1 if and only if the word c is
identical to the word d, and 0 otherwise. We computed the co-occurrence score S(wi , wj ) according
to the following formula:
                                                 P P
                                                          δ(wi,k , wj,l )
                                  S(wi , wj ) = k l
                                                        |wi ||wj |
We suggest using this method only with tags and not with captions.
Co-occurrence-rep. This method was applied only to tags. We used an identical procedure to the
Co-occurrence method, except that we did not separate the words within a tag as separate tokens and
instead treated the entire tag (that may include multiple words) as a single token.
Rouge score. In this approach, similarity was estimated by computing the rouge score of
the word lists associated with each pair of documents. The Rouge score was computed using
rougeEvaluationScore (Rouge, 2004). We suggest using this method only with tags and not
with captions.
   9
       https://mathworks.com/products/text-analytics.html


                                                    26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


The following methods make use of tokenized data and a pre-processing procedure that we found
effective. Pre-processing was applied to both tag and caption data and tokenization was performed as
follows:

       • We separate all text into single words by applying the tokenizedDocument function.
       • We added part of speech information using the addPartOfSpeechDetails function.
       • We performed Lemmatization using the normalizeWords function.
       • We erased punctuation from the token using the erasePunctuation function.
       • We removed stopwords using the removeStopWords function.
       • We removed words with less than two characters or more than 15 characters.
       • We created a bag of words representation of each tokenized document using the
         bagOfWords function.
       • We also removed words that were not present in more than two documents using the
         InfrequentWords function.

With the results of these pre-processing steps, we then computed similarity matrices based on the
following methods:
bm25S. We used bm25+ to compute similarity between documents (Barrios et al., 2016) using
Matlab’s bm25Similarity function. This function represents TF-IDF-like retrieval functions
used in document retrieval. We used a variant that has a normalization function that properly handles
documents with a long list of words.
tf-idf-cosine. We computed pairwise cosine similarities between document pairs using the TF-IDF
matrix derived from their word counts and Matlab’s cosineSimilarity function.

C.3   S UPERVISED M ETHODS

Several previous studies investigated improving correlations by applying and fine-tuning simple linear
transformations to embedding vectors z T Wz where W = diag(w1 , . . . , wd ) via a cross-validated
ridge regression procedure that could be fit to ground-truth similarity judgments. The parameters
of the diagonal reweighting matrix W are fitted to a training subset of stimuli and used to predict
similarity of pairs in a held-out validation set Peterson et al. (2018); Marjieh et al. (2022). To
be consistent and make results comparable, here we report the results of performing this 6-fold
cross-validated linear transformation (LT-CCV) on the model embeddings and datasets considered
in this work. The analysis was carried out using the RidgeCV package from the scikit-learn
Python library Pedregosa et al. (2011). Results with both normalized (‘LT CCV (norm)’) and un-
normalized (‘LT CCV’) regressors are shown in Figure 11; see RidgeCV documentation for details
on normalization 10 . We see that the linear transformation does not consistently improve performance
(and can even decrease it) when applied to many of the modality-based or stacked embeddings, but it
does frequently improve performance when applied to caption embeddings. Due to their instability
and risk of overfitting, we do not use these methods in our main analysis.


  10
     https://scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/generated/sklearn.linear_model.
RidgeCV.html


                                                 27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                          image                                  audio                                    video
         0.8

         0.6


                                                                                                                                 Raw
         0.4

         0.2

         0.8


                                                                                                                                 LT CCV
         0.6
 Score


         0.4

         0.2

         0.8


                                                                                                                                 LT CCV (norm)
         0.6

         0.4

         0.2
                                        Baseline


                                                                                    Baseline


                                                                                                                      Baseline
               Caption-


                                                      Caption-


                                                                                               Caption-
                           Stacked


                                                                  Stacked


                                                                                                           Stacked
                only


                                                       only


                                                                                                only


                                wav2vec 2.0 large lv60k (10m)               Slow r50           ConvNeXT base in22k

                                wav2vec 2.0 large lv60k (100h)              Slowfast r50       Swin base patch4 window7 224 in22k

   Baseline model               wav2vec 2.0 large lv60k (960h)              Slowfast r101      Swin large patch4 window7 224

                                wav2vec 2.0 large lv60k                     X3d M              ViT base r50 s16 384

                                wav2vec 2.0 large XLSR53                    X3d S              ViT huge patch14 224 in21k


 Figure 11: Effect of fine-tuning model embeddings using a small subset of similarity judgments.


                                                                 28
