Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


LS-IQ: I MPLICIT R EWARD R EGULARIZATION FOR
I NVERSE R EINFORCEMENT L EARNING
 Firas Al-Hafez1 , Davide Tateo1 , Oleg Arenz1 , Guoping Zhao2 , Jan Peters1,3
 1
  Intelligent Autonomous Systems, 2 Locomotion Laboratory
 3
  German Research Center for AI (DFKI), Centre for Cognitive Science, Hessian.AI
 TU Darmstadt, Germany
 {name.surname}@tu-darmstadt.de



                                               A BSTRACT
             Recent methods for imitation learning directly learn a Q-function using an implicit
             reward formulation rather than an explicit reward function. However, these meth-
             ods generally require implicit reward regularization to improve stability and often
             mistreat absorbing states. Previous works show that a squared norm regularization
             on the implicit reward function is effective, but do not provide a theoretical anal-
             ysis of the resulting properties of the algorithms. In this work, we show that using
             this regularizer under a mixture distribution of the policy and the expert provides
             a particularly illuminating perspective: the original objective can be understood as
             squared Bellman error minimization, and the corresponding optimization problem
             minimizes a bounded χ2 -Divergence between the expert and the mixture distribu-
             tion. This perspective allows us to address instabilities and properly treat absorb-
             ing states. We show that our method, Least Squares Inverse Q-Learning (LS-IQ),
             outperforms state-of-the-art algorithms, particularly in environments with absorb-
             ing states. Finally, we propose to use an inverse dynamics model to learn from
             observations only. Using this approach, we retain performance in settings where
             no expert actions are available.1


1        I NTRODUCTION
Inverse Reinforcement Learning (IRL) techniques have been developed to robustly extract behaviors
from expert demonstration and solve the problems of classical Imitation Learning (IL) methods (Ng
et al., 1999; Ziebart et al., 2008). Among the recent methods for IRL, the Adversarial Imitation
Learning (AIL) approach (Ho & Ermon, 2016; Fu et al., 2018; Peng et al., 2021), which casts the
optimization over rewards and policies into an adversarial setting, have been proven particularly
successful. These methods, inspired by Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) (Goodfellow
et al., 2014), alternate between learning a discriminator, and improving the agent’s policy w.r.t.
a reward function, computed based on the discriminator’s output. These explicit reward methods
require many interactions with the environment as they learn both a reward and a value function.
Recently, implicit reward methods (Kostrikov et al., 2020; Arenz & Neumann, 2020; Garg et al.,
2021) have been proposed. These methods directly learn the Q-function, significantly accelerating
the policy optimization. Among the implicit reward approaches, the Inverse soft Q-Learning (IQ-
Learn) is the current state-of-the-art. This method modifies the distribution matching objective by
including reward regularization on the expert distribution, which results in a minimization of the χ2 -
divergence between the policy and the expert distribution. However, whereas their derivations only
consider regularization on the expert distribution, their practical implementations on continuous
control tasks have shown that regularizing the reward on both the expert and policy distribution
achieves significantly better performance.
The contribution of this paper is twofold: First, when using this regularizer, we show that the result-
ing objective minimizes the χ2 divergence between the expert and a mixture distribution between the
expert and the policy. We then investigate the effects of regularizing w.r.t. the mixture distribution
on the theoretical properties of IQ-Learn. We show that this divergence is bounded, which translates
     1
         The code is available at https://github.com/robfiras/ls-iq


                                                      1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


to bounds on the reward and Q-function, significantly improving learning stability. Indeed, the re-
sulting objective corresponds to least-squares Bellman error minimization and is closely related to
Soft Q-Imitation Learning (SQIL) (Reddy et al., 2020). Second, we formulate Least Squares Inverse
Q-Learning (LS-IQ), a novel IRL algorithm. By following the theoretical insight coming from the
analysis of the χ2 regularizer, we tackle many sources of instabilities of the IQ-Learn approach:
the arbitrariness of the Q-function scales, exploding Q-functions targets, and reward bias Kostrikov
et al. (2019), i.e., assuming that absorbing states provide the null reward. We derive the LS-IQ
algorithm by exploiting structural properties of the Q-function and heuristics based on expert opti-
mality. This results in increased performance on many tasks and, in general, more stable learning
and less variance in the Q-function estimation. Finally, we extend the implicit reward methods to
the IL from observations setting by training an Inverse-Dynamics Model (IDM) to predict the expert
actions, which are no longer assumed to be available. Even in this challenging setting, our approach
retains performance similar to the one where expert actions are known.
Related Work. The vast majority of IRL and IL methods build upon the Maximum Entropy
(MaxEnt) IRL framework (Ziebart, 2010). In particular, Ho & Ermon (2016) introduce Generative
Adversarial Imitation Learning (GAIL), which applies GANs to the IL problem. While the original
method minimizes the Jensen-Shannon divergence to the expert distribution, the approach is ex-
tended to general f -divergences (Ghasemipour et al., 2019), building on the work of Nowozin et al.
(2016). Among the f -divergences, the Pearson χ2 divergence improves the training stability for
GANs (Mao et al., 2017) and for AIL (Peng et al., 2021). Kostrikov et al. (2019) introduce a replay
buffer for off-policy updates of the policy and discriminator. The authors also point out the problem
of reward bias, which is common in many imitation learning methods. Indeed, AIL methods implic-
itly assign a null reward to these states, leading to survival or termination biases, depending on the
chosen divergence. Kostrikov et al. (2020) improve the previous work introducing recent advances
from offline policy evaluation (Nachum et al., 2019). Their method, ValueDice, uses an inverse Bell-
man operator that expresses the reward function in terms of its Q-function, to minimize the reverse
Kullback-Leibler Divergence (KL) to the expert distribution. Arenz & Neumann (2020) derive a
non-adversarial formulation based on trust-region updates on the policy. Their method, O-NAIL,
uses a standard Soft-Actor Critic (SAC) (Haarnoja et al., 2018) update for policy improvement. O-
NAIL can be understood as an instance of the more general IQ-Learn algorithm (Garg et al., 2021),
which can optimize different divergences depending on an implicit reward regularizer. Garg et al.
(2021) also show that their algorithm achieves better performance using the χ2 divergence instead
of the reverse KL. Reddy et al. (2020) propose a method that uses SAC and assigns fixed binary
rewards to the expert and the policy. Swamy et al. (2021) provide a unifying perspective on many
of the methods mentioned above, explicitly showing that GAIL, ValueDice, MaxEnt-IRL, and SQIL
can be viewed as moment matching algorithms. Lastly, Sikchi et al. (2023) propose a ranking loss
for AIL, which trains a reward function using a least-squares objective with ranked targets.


2   P RELIMINARIES

Notation. A Markov Decision Process (MDP) is a tuple (S, A, P, r, γ, µ0 ), where S is the state
space, A is the action space, P : S × A × S → R+ is the transition kernel, r : S × A → R
is the reward function, γ is the discount factor, and µ0 : S → R+ is the initial state distribu-
tion. At each step, the agent observes a state s ∈ S from the environment, samples an action
a ∈ A using the policy π : S × A → R+ , and transitions with probability P (s′ |s, a) into
the next state s′ ∈PS, where it receives the reward Rr(s, a). We define an occupancy measure
                        ∞
ρπ (s, a) = π(a|s) t=0 γ t µπt (s), where µπt (s′ ) = s,a µπt (s)π(a|s)P (s′ |s, a)da ds is the state
distribution for t > 0, with µπ0 (s) = µ0 (s). The occupancy measure allows us to denote the ex-
                                                      P∞
pected reward under policy π as Eρπ [r(s, a)] ≜ E[ t=0 γ t r(st , at )], where s0 ∼ µ0 , at ∼ π(.|st )
and st+1 ∼ P (.|st , at ) for t > 0. Furthermore, RS×A = {x : S × A → R} denotes the set of
functions in the state-action space and R denotes the extended real numbers R ∪ {+∞}. We refer
to the soft value functions as Ṽ (s) and Q̃(s, a), while we use V (s) and Q(s, a) to denote the value
functions without entropy bonus.
Inverse Reinforcement Learning as an Occupancy Matching Problem. Given a set of demon-
strations consisting of states and actions sampled from an expert policy πE , IRL aims at finding
a reward function r(s, a) from a family of reward functions R = RS×A assigning high reward to


                                                  2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


samples from the expert policy πE and low reward to other policies. We consider the framework pre-
sented in Ho & Ermon (2016), which derives the maximum entropy IRL objective with an additional
convex reward regularizer ψρ : RS×A → R from an occupancy matching problem

          max min Lρ (r, π) = max min −βHρ (π) − Eρπ [r(s, a)] + EρπE [r(s, a)] − ψρ (r),                (1)
          r∈R π∈Π                r∈R    π∈Π

with the space of policies Π = RS×A , the discounted cumulative entropy bonus Hρ (π) =
Eρπ [− log(π(a|s))], and a constant β controlling the entropy bonus. Note that the inner optimiza-
tion is a maximum entropy Reinforcement Learning (RL) objective (Ziebart, 2010), for which the
optimal policy is given by
                                                      1
                                        π ∗ (a|s) =      exp (Q̃(s, a)),                                 (2)
                                                      Zs
             R
where Zs = â exp Q̃(s, â) dâ is the partition function and Q̃(s, a) is the soft action-value function,
which is given for a certain reward function by the soft Bellman operator (B̃ π Q̃)(s, a) = r(s, a) +
γEs′ ∼P (.|s,a) Ṽ π (s′ ), where Ṽ π (s′ ) = Ea∼π(.|s) [Q̃(s, a) − log π(a|s)].
Garg et al. (2021) transform Equation 1 from reward-policy space to Q̃-policy space using the inverse
soft Bellman operator (T̃ π Q̃)(s, a) = Q̃(s, a) − γEs′ ∼P (.|s,a) Ṽ π (s′ ) to get a one-to-one correspon-
dence between the reward and the Q̃-function. This operator allows to change the objective function
Lρ from reward-policy to Q-policy space, from now on denoted as Jρ
                                 max min Lρ (r, π) = max min Jρ (Q̃, π) ,                                (3)
                                  r∈R π∈Π                Q̃∈Ω̃ π∈Π

where Ω̃ = RS×A is the space of Q̃-functions. Furthermore, they use Equation 2 to extract the
optimal policy πQ̃ given a Q̃-function to drop the inner optimization loop in Equation 1 such that
                                           h                                      i
             max Jρ (Q̃, πQ̃ ) = max EρπE Q̃(s, a) − γEs′ ∼P (.|s,a) [Ṽ π (s′ )] − βHρ (πQ̃ )           (4)
             Q̃∈Ω̃               Q̃∈Ω̃       h                                      i
                                       − Eρπ Q̃(s, a) − γEs′ ∼P (.|s,a) [Ṽ π (s′ )] − ψρ (T̃ π Q̃).
Practical Reward Regularization. Garg et al. (2021) derive a regularizer enforcing an  L2 norm-
penalty on the reward on state-action pairs from the expert, such that ψπE (r) = c EρπE r(s, a)2
with c being a regularizer constant. However, in continuous action spaces, this regularizer causes
instabilities. In practice, Garg et al. (2021) address this instabilities by using the regularizer to the
mixture
                         ψρ (r) = α c EρπE r(s, a)2 + (1 − α) c Eρπ r(s, a)2 ,

                                                                                                         (5)
where α is typically set to 0.5. It is important to note that this change of regularizer does not allow
the direct extraction of the policy from Equation 1 anymore. Indeed, the regularizer in Equation 5
also depends on the policy. Prior work did not address this issue. In the following sections, we will
provide an in-depth analysis of this regularizer, allowing us to address the aforementioned issues
and derive the correct policy update. Before we introduce our method, we use Proposition A.1
in Appendix A to change the objectives Lρ and Jρ from expectations under occupancy measures
to expectations under state-action distributions dπE and dπ , from now on denoted as L and J ,
respectively.

3    L EAST S QUARES I NVERSE Q-L EARNING
In this section, we introduce our proposed imitation learning algorithm, which is based on the oc-
cupancy matching problem presented in Equation 1 using the regularizer defined in Equation 5. We
start by giving an interpretation of the resulting objective as a χ2 divergence between the expert
distribution and a mixture distribution of the expert and the policy. We then show that the regular-
izer allows us to cast the original objective into a Bellman error minimization problem with fixed
binary rewards for the expert and the policy. An RL problem with fixed rewards is a unique setting,
which we can utilize to bound the Q-function target, provide fixed targets for the Q-function on
expert states instead of doing bootstrapping, and adequately treat absorbing states. However, these
techniques need to be applied on hard Q-functions. Therefore, we switch from soft action-value
functions Q̃ to hard Q-functions, by introducing an additional entropy critic. We also present a reg-
ularization critic allowing us to recover the correct policy update corresponding to the regularizer
in Equation 5. Finally, we propose to use an IDM to solve the imitation learning from observations
problem.


                                                        3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


3.1   I NTERPRETATION AS A S TATISTICAL D IVERGENCE
Ho & Ermon (2016) showed that their regularizer results in a Jensen-Shannon divergence minimiza-
tion between the expert’s and the policy’s state-action distribution. Similarily, Garg et al. (2021)
showed that their regularizer ψπE (r) results in a minimization of the χ2 divergence. However, the
regularizer presented in Equation 5 is not investigated yet. We show that this regularizer minimizes
a χ2 divergence between the expert’s state-action distribution and a mixture distribution between
the expert and the policy. Therefore, we start with the objective presented in Equation 1 and note
that strong duality – maxr∈R minπ∈Π L = minπ∈Π maxr∈R L – follows straightforwardly from
the minimax theorem (Von Neumann, 1928) as −H(π), −Edπ [r(s, a)] and ψ(r) are convex in π,
and −Edπ [r(s, a)], EdπE [r(s, a)] and ψ(r) are concave in r (Ho & Ermon, 2016). We express the χ2
divergence between the expert’s distribution and the mixture distribution using its variational form,
             dπE +dπ
                                               h             2
                                                               i
  2χ2 dπE       2
                       =sup 2EdπE [r(s,a)]−Ed˜ r(s,a)+ r(s,a)
                                                          4
             | {z   }    r
               dmix
                      =sup EdπE [r(s,a)]−Edπ [r(s,a)]−cαEdπE r(s,a)2 −c(1−α)Edπ r(s,a)2 , (6)

                          r
with the regularizer constant c = 1/2 and α = 1/2. Now, if the optimal reward is in R, the original
objective from Equation 1 becomes an entropy-regularized χ2 divergence minimization problem
                                                                   dπE +dπ
                              max min L = min 2χ2 dπE                 2
                                                                             − βH(π) .                                           (7)
                              r∈R π∈Π         π∈Π

Equation 7 tells us that the regularized IRL objective optimizes the reward to match a divergence
while optimizing the policy to minimize the latter. When the divergence to be matched is unbounded,
the optimal reward is also unbounded, causing instability during learning. Unlike the χ2 -divergence
between the agent’s and the expert’s distribution, the χ2 -divergence to the mixture distribution is
bounded to [0, 1⁄c] as shown in Proposition A.3, and its optimal reward
                                                      1 dπE (s, a) − dπ (s, a)
                                      r∗ (s, a) =                              ,                                                 (8)
                                                      c dπE (s, a) + dπ (s, a)
is also bounded in the interval [−1/c, 1/c] as shown in Proposition A.2.

3.2   A R EINFORCEMENT L EARNING P ERSPECTIVE ON D ISTRIBUTION M ATCHING

In the following, we present a novel perspective on Equation 4 allowing us to better understand
the effect of the regularizer. Indeed, for the regularizer defined in Equation 5, we can interpret this
objective as an entropy-regularized least squares problem, as shown by the following proposition:

Proposition 3.1 Let rQ̃ (s, a) = (T̃ π Q̃)(s, a) be the implicit reward function of a Q̃-function, then
                                       ˜ a) = αdπ (s, a) + (1 − α)dπ (s, a), the solution of Equa-
for ψ(rQ̃ ) = c Ed˜[rQ̃ (s, a)2 ] with d(s,         E
tion 4 under state-action distributions equals the solution of an entropy-regularized least squares
minimization problem such that arg minQ̃∈Ω̃ L(Q̃, πQ̃ ) = arg maxQ̃∈Ω̃ J (Q̃, πQ̃ ) with
                            h                        2 i                       h                        2 i       β
      L(Q̃, πQ̃ ) = αEdπE       rQ̃ (s, a) − rmax          + (1 − α)Edπ            rQ̃ (s, a) − rmin          +     H(πQ̃ ) ,    (9)
                                                                          Q̃                                      c
              1                  1
where rmax = 2αc and rmin = − 2(1−α)c .

The proof is provided in Appendix A.3. The resulting objective in Equation 9 is very similar to
the one in the Least Squares Generative Adversarial Networks (LSGANs) (Mao et al., 2017) setting,
where rQ̃ (s, a) can be interpreted as the discriminator, rmax can be interpreted as the target for expert
samples, and rmin can be interpreted as the target for samples under the policy π. For α = 0.5 and
c = 1, resulting in rmax = 1 and rmin = −1, Equation 9 differs from the discriminator’s objective in
the LSGANs setting only by the entropy term.
Now replacing the implicit reward function with the inverse soft Bellman operator and rearranging
the terms yields
                                                                              2
        L(Q̃, πQ̃ ) =αEdπE    Q̃(s, a) − (rmax + γEs′ ∼P (.|s,a) [Ṽ π (s′ )]                                                   (10)
                                                                                          2   β
                   + (1 − α)Edπ          Q̃(s, a) − (rmin + γEs′ ∼P (.|s,a) [Ṽ π (s′ )])    + H(πQ̃ )
                                   Q̃                                                         c
                      2                           2             β
                  =α δ (dπE , rmax ) + (1 − α) δ (dπ , rmin ) + H(πQ̃ ) ,                                                       (11)
                                                                c


                                                              4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


where δ 2 is the squared soft Bellman error. We can deduce the following from Equation 11:
χ2 -regularized IRL under a mixture can be seen as an RL problem with fixed rewards rmax
and rmin for the expert and the policy. This insight allows us to understand the importance of the
regularizer constant c: it defines the target rewards and, therefore, the scale of the Q-function. The
resulting objective shows strong relations to the SQIL algorithm, in which also fixed rewards are
used. However, SQIL uses rmax = 1 and rmin = 0, which is infeasible in our setting for α < 1.
While the entropy term appears to be another difference, we note that it does not affect the critic
update, where πQ̃ is fixed. As in SQIL, the entropy is maximized by extracting the MaxEnt policy
using Equation 2.
Stabilizing the training in a fixed reward setting is straightforward. We can have a clean solution
to the reward bias problem – c.f., Section 3.4 –, and we can provide fixed Q-target for the expert
and clipped Q-function targets for the policy – c.f., Section 3.5 & 3.7 to improve learning stability
significantly. However, we must switch from soft to hard action-value functions by introducing an
entropy critic to apply these techniques. Additionally, we show how to recover the correct policy
update corresponding to the regularizer in Equation 5 by introducing a regularization critic.

3.3       E NTROPY AND R EGULARIZATION C RITIC
We express the Q̃-function implicitly using Q̃(s, a) = Q(s, a) + Hπ (s, a) decomposing it into a
hard Q-function and an entropy critic
                                        "∞                                                            #
                                         X          ′
                     Hπ (s, a) = EP,π           −γ t −t+1 β log π(at′ +1 |st′ +1 ) st = s, at = a .          (12)
                                        t′ =t

This procedure allows us to stay in the MaxEnt formulation while retaining the ability to operate
on the hard Q-function. We replace the soft inverse Bellman operator with the hard optimal inverse
Bellman operator (T Q)(s, a) = Q(s, a) − γEs′ ∼P (.|s,a) V ∗ (s′ ), with the optimal value function
V ∗ (s) = maxa Q(s, a).
As mentioned before, the regularizer introduced in Equation 5 incorporates yet another term depend-
ing on the policy. Indeed, the inner optimization problem in Equation 1—the term in the brackets—is
not purely the MaxEnt problem anymore, but includes the term −kEdπ [r(s, a)2 ] with k = c(1 − α).
To incorporate this term into our final implicit action-value function Q† (s, a), we learn an additional
regularization critic
                                                "∞                                              #
                                                             t′ −t
                                                 X                               2
                            C(s, a) = EP,π               γ           r(st′ , at′ ) st = s, at = a .          (13)
                                                 t′ =t

such that Q† (s, a) = Q(s, a) + Hπ (s, a) + k C(s, a). Using Q† , we obtain the exact solution to the
inner minimization problem in Equation 2. In practice, we learn a single critic G π combining Hπ
and C. We train the latter independently using the following objective

            2                 π                       2                        ′ ′       π ′     ′   2
      min
       π
          δG  = min
                 π
                    E dπ   (G   (s, a) − (k rQ (s, a)   + E  ′
                                                            s ∼P   γ(−β log π(a |s ) + G  (s , a  ) ))   ,   (14)
      G          G                                                       a′ ∼π

which is an entropy-regularized Bellman error minimization problem given the squared implicit
reward rQ scaled by k.

3.4       T REATMENT OF A BSORBING S TATES
Another technical aspect neglected by IQ-Learn is the proper treatment of absorbing states. Garg
et al. (2021) treat absorbing states by adding an indicator ν—where ν = 1 if s′ is a terminal state—in
front of the discounted value function in the inverse Bellman operator
                            (Tiqπ Q)(s, a) = Q(s, a) − (1 − ν)γEs′ ∼P (.|s,a) V π (s′ ) .                    (15)
This inverse Bellman operator is obtained by solving the forward Bellman operator for r(s, a) under
the assumption that the value of absorbing states is zero. However, as pointed out by Kostrikov
et al. (2019), such an assumption may introduce termination or survival bias; the value of absorbing
states also needs to be learned. Our perspective provides a clear understanding of the effect of
the inverse Bellman operator in Equation 15: The objective in Equation 10 will regress the Q-
function of transitions into absorbing states towards rmax or rmin , respectively. However, based
on Equation 9, the implicit reward of absorbing states should be regressed toward rmax or rmin .

                                                                     5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Instead, we derive our inverse operator from the standard Bellman
operator while exploiting that the value of the absorbing state sA is
independent of the policy π
      π
          Q)(s,a)=Q(s,a)−γEs′ ∼P (.|s,a) (1−ν)V π (s′ )+νV (sA ) .

   (Tlsiq                                                                 (16)

We further exploit that the value of the absorbing state can be com-
                                      rA
puted in closed form as V (sA ) = 1−γ    , where rA equals rmax on ex-
pert states and rmin on policy states. Please note that the correspond-
ing forward Bellman operator converges to the same Q-function, de-
spite using the analytic value of absorbing states instead of bootstrap-
ping, as we show in Appendix A.5. When applying our inverse opera-
tor in Equation 16 to Equation 9, we correctly regress the Q-function
of transitions into absorbing states towards their discounted return.
We show the resulting full objective in Appendix A.4.
We show the effect of our modified operator on the toy task depicted
in Figure 1 (top), where the black point mass is spawned in either of
the four dark blue squares and has to reach the green area in the mid-
dle. Once the agent enters the red area, the episode terminates. The
expert always takes the shortest path to the green area, never visiting          Figure 1: Point mass toy task
                                                                                 (top) with success rate plot
the red area. The operator proposed by IQ-Learn does not sufficiently
                                                                                 (bottom). Here, we compare
penalize the agent for reaching absorbing states, preventing the IQ-             the standard IQ-Learn operator
Learn agent from reaching the goal consistently, as can be seen from             to the modified operator.
the orange graph in Figure 1 (bottom). In contrast, when using our
operator Tlsiq , the agent solves the task successfully.

3.5    A N A LTERNATIVE F ORMULATION FOR THE E XPERT R ESIDUAL M INIMIZATION
The first term in Equation 9 defines the squared Bellman error minimization problem on the distri-
bution dπE
                             α δ 2 (dπE , rmax ) = αEdπE (rQ (s, a) − rmax )2 .

                                                                                                          (17)
Due to bootstrapping, this minimization can become challenging, even for a fixed expert policy, as
it does not fix the scale of the Q-function unless the trajectory reaches an absorbing state. This
problem arises particularly on expert data for cyclic tasks, where we generate trajectories up to
a fixed horizon. The lack of a fixed scale increases the variance of the algorithm, affecting the
performance negatively.
Therefore, we propose a modified objective, analyzing Equation 17. The minimum of this term is
achieved when rQ (s, a) = rmax for all reachable (s, a) under dπE . Thus, the objective of this term is
to push the reward, on expert trajectories, towards rmax . If we consider this minimum, each transition
in the expert’s trajectory has the following Q-value:
                                  ∞
                                  X                  rmax
                   QπE (s, a) =         γ t rmax =        = Qmax ,   with s, a ∼ dπE (s, a).              (18)
                                  t=0
                                                     1−γ

As the objective of our maximization on expert distribution is equivalent to pushing the value of the
expert’s states and actions towards Qmax , we propose to replace the bootstrapping target with the
fixed target Qmax resulting in the following new objective:
                                               h                                           2 i
      Llsiq (Q)=αEdπE (Q(s,a)−Qmax )2 +(1−α)Edπ Q(s,a)−(rmin +γEs′ ∼P (.|s,a) [V ∗ (s′ )]) .

                                                                                                          (19)

Note that we skip the terminal state treatment for clarity. The full objective is shown in Appendix
A.4. Also, we omit the entropy term as we incorporate the latter now in Hπ (s, a). This new objective
incorporates a bias toward expert data. Therefore, it is not strictly equivalent to the original problem
formulation. However, it updates the Q-function toward the same ideal target, while providing a
simpler and more stable optimization landscape. Empirically, we experienced that this modification,
while only justified intuitively, has a very positive impact on the algorithm’s performance.


                                                          6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


3.6   L EARNING FROM O BSERVATIONS

In many real-world tasks, we do not have access to expert actions, but only to observations of expert’s
behavior (Torabi et al., 2019b). In this scenario, AIL methods, such as GAIfO (Torabi et al., 2019a),
can be easily adapted by learning a discriminator only depending on the current and the next state.
Unfortunately, it is not straightforward to apply the same method to implicit rewards algorithms
that learn a Q-function. The IQ-Learn method (Garg et al., 2021) relies on a simplification of the
original objective to perform updates not using expert actions but rather actions sampled from the
policy on expert states. However, this reformulation is not able to achieve good performance on
standard benchmarks as shown in our experimental results.
A common practice used in the literature is to train an IDM. This approach has been previously used
in behavioral cloning (Torabi et al., 2018; Nair et al., 2017) and for reinforcement learning from
demonstrations (Guo et al., 2019; Pavse et al., 2020; Radosavovic et al., 2021). Following the same
idea, we generate an observation-only version of our method by training an IDM online on policy
data and using it for the prediction of unobserved actions of the expert. We modify the objective in
Equation 19 to
                      h                           2 i            h                                              2 i
  Llsiq-o (Q)=αEdπE       Q(s,Γω (s,s′ ))−Qmax          +ᾱEdπ       Q(s,a)−(rmin +γEs′ ∼P (.|s,a) [V ∗ (s′ )]) , (20)

with the dynamics model Γω (s, s′ ), its parameters ω and ᾱ = (1 − α). We omit the notation for
absorbing states and refer to Appendix A.4 instead. Notice that the IDM is only used to evaluate the
expert actions, and is trained by solving the following optimization problem
                                min LΓ (ω) = min Edπ ,P ∥Γω (s, s′ ) − a∥22 ,

                                                                                                                 (21)
                                  ω               ω

where the expectation is performed on the state distribution generated by the learner policy π. While
the mismatch between the training distribution and the evaluation distribution could potentially cause
problems, our empirical evaluation shows that on the benchmarks we achieve performance similar
to the action-aware algorithm. We give more details on this approach in Appendix B.

3.7   P RACTICAL A LGORITHM                                               Algorithm 1 LS-IQ
We now instantiate a practical version of our algorithm Initialize: Qθ , πϕ , Gζ and optionally Γω
in this section. An overview of our method is shown in             for step t in {1,...,N } do
                                                                    Sample mini-batches Dπ and DπE
Algorithm 1. In practice, we use parametric functions to
approximate Q, π, G and Γ, and optimize the latter us-              (opt.) Predict actions for DπE using Γω
ing gradient ascent on surrogate objective functions that           DπE ←{{s,Γω (s,s′ ),s′ }|∀{s,s′ }∈DπE }
                                                                    Update the Q-function using Eq. 20
approximate the expectations under dπ and dπE using the             θt+1 ←θt +κQ ∇θ [J (θ,Dπ ,DπE )]
datasets Dπ and DπE . Further, we use target networks,
as already suggested by the Garg et al. (2021). How-                (opt.) Update G-function using Eq. 14
                                                                    ζt+1 ←ζt −κG ∇ζ [δG2 (ζ,Dπ )]
ever, while the objective in Equation 4 lacked intuition
about the usage of target networks, the objective in Equa-          Update Policy πϕ using the KL
tion 11 is equivalent to a reinforcement learning objec-            ϕt+1 ←ϕt −κπ ∇ϕ [DKL (πϕ∥πQ̃ )]
tive, in which target networks are a well-known tool for            (opt.) Update Γω using Eq. 21
stabilization. Further, we exploit our access to the hard           ωt+1 ←ωt −κΓ ∇ω [LΓ (ω,Dπ )]
Q-function as well as our fixed reward target setting to           end for
                                                                                               rmax
calculate the maximum and minimum Q-values possible, Qmin = r1−γ          min
                                                                                and Qmax = 1−γ      , and clip
the output of target network to that range. Note that this also holds for the absorbing states. In doing
so, we ensure that the target Q always remains in the desired range, which was often not the case
with IQ-Learn. Target clipping prevents the explosion of the Q-values that can occur due to the use
of neural approximators. This technique allows the algorithm to recover from poor value function
estimates and prevents the Q-function from leaving the set of admissible functions. Finally, we
found that training the policy on a small fixed expert dataset anneals the entropy bonus of expert
trajectories, even if the policy never visits these states and actions. To address this problem, we clip
the entropy bonus on expert states to a running average of the maximum entropy on policy states.
In continuous action spaces, Zs is intractable, which is why we can not directly extract the optimal
policy using Equation 2. As done in previous work (Haarnoja et al., 2018; Garg et al., 2021),
we use a parametric policy πϕ to approximate πQ̃ by minimizing the KL DKL (πϕ ∥ πQ̃ ). In our
implementation, we found it unnecessary to use a double-critic update. This choice reduces the


                                                           7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


           Atlas
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.00     500   1000    1500
          Ant-v3                   Walker2d-v3                 Hopper-v3                   Humanoid-v3
1.0                         1.0                         1.0                         1.0
0.8                         0.8                         0.8                         0.8
0.6                         0.6                         0.6                         0.6
0.4                         0.4                         0.4                         0.4
0.2                         0.2                         0.2                         0.2
0.00     500   1000    1500 0.00    500     1000   1500 0.00   500      1000   1500 0.00    500   1000   1500
               SQIL           IQ     IQv0          LSIQ        LSIQ-H          LSIQ-HC        Expert
Figure 2: Comparison of different versions of LS-IQ. Abscissa shows the normalized discounted cumulative
reward. Ordinate shows the number of training steps (×103 ). The first row shows the results and an exemplary
trajectory – here the trained LS-IQ agent – on a locomotion task using an Atlas robot. The second row shows
4 MuJoCo Gym tasks, for which the expert’s cumulative rewards are → Hopper:3299.81, Walker2d:5841.73,
Ant:6399.04, Humanoid:6233.45


computational and memory requirements of the algorithm, making it comparable to SAC. Finally,
we replace V ∗ (s) with V π (s) on the policy expectation, as we do not have access to the latter in
continuous action spaces.

4      E XPERIMENTS
We evaluate our method on six MuJoCo environments: Ant-v3, Walker2d-v3, Hopper-v3,
HalfCheetah-v3, Humanoid-v3, and Atlas. The latter is a novel locomotion environment introduced
by us and is further described in Appendix C.1. We select the following baselines: GAIL (Ho &
Ermon, 2016), VAIL (Peng et al., 2019), IQ-Learn (Garg et al., 2021) and SQIL (Reddy et al.,
2020). For a fair comparison, all methods are implemented in the same framework, Mush-
roomRL (D’Eramo et al., 2021). We verify that our implementations achieve comparable results
to the original implementations by the authors. We use the hyperparameters proposed by the origi-
nal authors for the respective environments and perform a grid search on novel environments. The
original implementation of IQ-Learn evaluates two different algorithm variants depending on the
given environment. We refer to these variants as IQv0—which uses telescoping (Garg et al., 2021)
to evaluate the agent’s expected return in Equation 4—, and IQ—which directly uses Equation 4—
and evaluate both variants on all environments. For our method, we use the same hyperparameters
as IQ-Learn, except for the regularizer coefficient c and the entropy coefficient β, which we tune on
each environment. We only consider equal mixing, i.e., α = 0.5.
In our first experiment, we perform ablations on the different design choices of LSIQ. We evaluate
the following variants: LSIQ-HC uses a (combined) entropy critic and regularization critic, LSIQ-H
only uses the entropy critic, and LSIQ does not use any additional critic, similar to IQ-Learn. We
use ten seeds and five expert trajectories for these experiments. For the Atlas environment, we use
100 trajectories. We also consider IQ, IQv0, and SQIL as baselines and show the learning curves
for four environments in Figure 2. The learning curves on the HalfCheetah environment can be
found in Appendix C.6. It is interesting to note that IQ-Learn without telescoping does not perform
well on Atlas, Walker, and Hopper, where absorbing states are more likely compared to Ant and
HalfCheetah, which almost always terminate after a fixed amount of steps. We hypothesize that
the worse performance on Walker and Hopper is caused by reward bias, as absorbing states are not
sufficiently penalized. IQv0 would suffer less from this problem as it treats all states visited by the
agent as initial states, which results in stronger reward penalties for these states. We conduct further
ablation studies showing the influence of the proposed techniques, including an ablation study on
the effect of fixed targets, clipping on the target Q-value, entropy clipping for the expert, as well as


                                                      8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                  Ant-v3                     Walker2d-v3                       Hopper-v3                     Humanoid-v3


                                                                                                                                  States and Actions
1.00                              1.00                              1.00                          1.00
0.75                              0.75                              0.75                          0.75
0.50                              0.50                              0.50                          0.50
0.25                              0.25                              0.25                          0.25
0.00                              0.00                              0.00                          0.00
       1          5    10    25          1     5          10   25          1    5     10     25          1     5        10   25
                  Ant-v3                     Walker2d-v3                       Hopper-v3                     Humanoid-v3
1.00                              1.00                              1.00                          1.00


                                                                                                                                  States Only
0.75                              0.75                              0.75                          0.75
0.50                              0.50                              0.50                          0.50
0.25                              0.25                              0.25                          0.25
0.00                              0.00                              0.00                          0.00
       1          5    10    25          1     5          10   25          1    5     10     25          1     5        10   25
           Gail       Vail         IQ              IQv0        SQIL            LSIQ        LSIQ-H             LSIQ-HC        Expert
Figure 3: Ablation study on the effect of the number of expert trajectories on different Mujoco environments.
Abscissa shows the normalized cumulative reward. Ordinate shows the number of expert trajectories. The first
row shows the performance when considering states and action, while the second row considers the performance
when using states only. Expert cumulative rewards identical to Figure 2.



the treatment of absorbing states in Appendix C. Our results show that the additional critics have
little effect, while fixing the targets significantly increases the performance.
For our main experiments, we only evaluate LSIQ and LSIQ-H, which achieve the best performance
in most environments. We compare our method to all baselines for four different numbers of expert
demonstrations, 1, 5, 10, and 25, and always use five seeds. We perform each experiment with and
without expert action. When actions are not available, we use a state transition discriminator (Torabi
et al., 2019a) for GAIL and VAIL, and IDMs for LSIQ (c.f., Section 3.6). In contrast, IQ-Learn
uses actions predicted on expert states by the current policy when no expert actions are available.
In the learning-from-observation setting, we do not evaluate SQIL, and we omit the plots for IQ,
which does not converge in any environment and focus only on IQv0. Figure 3 shows the final
expected return over different numbers of demonstrations for four of the environments. All learn-
ing curves, including the HalfCheetah environment, can be found in Appendix C.6 for state-action
setting and in Appendix C.5 for the learning-from-observation setting. Our experiments show that
LSIQ achieves on-par or better performance compared to all baselines. In particular, in the learning-
from-observation setting, LSIQ performs very well by achieving a similar return compared to the
setting where states and actions are observed.


5          C ONCLUSION

Inspired by the practical implementation of IQ-Learn, we derive a distribution matching algorithm
using an implicit reward function and a squared L2 penalty on the mixture distribution of the expert
and the policy. We show that this regularizer minimizes a bounded χ2 -divergence to the mixture
distribution and results in modified updates for the Q-function and policy. Our analysis reveals
an interesting connection to SQIL—which is not derived from an adversarial distribution matching
objective—and shows that IQ-Learn suffers from reward bias. We build on our insights to propose a
novel method, LS-IQ, which uses a modified inverse Bellman operator to address reward bias, target
clipping, fixed reward targets for policy samples, and fixed Q-function targets for expert samples.
We also show that the policy optimization of IQ-Learn is not consistent with regularization on the
mixture distribution and show how this can be addressed by learning an additional regularization
critic. In our experiments, LS-IQ outperforms strong baseline methods, particularly when learning
from observations, where we train an IDM for predicting expert actions. In future work, we will
quantify the bias introduced by the fixed Q-function target and investigate why this heuristic is
fundamental for stabilizing learning. We will also analyze the error propagation in the Q-function
target and derive theoretical guarantees on the Q-function approximation error.


                                                                     9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Calculations for this research were conducted on the Lichtenberg high-performance computer of
the TU Darmstadt. This work was supported by the German Science Foundation (DFG) under
grant number SE1042/41-1. Research presented in this paper has been partially supported by the
German Federal Ministry of Education and Research (BMBF) within the subproject “Modeling and
exploration of the operational area, design of the AI assistance as well as legal aspects of the use of
technology” of the collaborative KIARA project (grant no. 13N16274).

R EFERENCES
Alexander Amini, Wilko Schwarting, Ava Soleimany, and Daniela Rus. Deep evidential regression.
  In Proceeding of the Thirty-fourth Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, Virtual,
  December 2020.

Oleg Arenz and Gerhard Neumann. Non-adversarial imitation learning and its connections to ad-
  versarial methods. arXiv, August 2020.

Carlo D’Eramo, Davide Tateo, Andrea Bonarini, Marcello Restelli, and Jan Peters. Mushroomrl:
  Simplifying reinforcement learning research. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 22:1–5,
  2021.

Justin Fu, Katie Luo, and Sergey Levine. Learning robust rewards with adversarial inverse rein-
  forcement learning. In Proceeding of the International Conference on Learning Representations,
  Vancouver, Canada, April 2018.

Divyansh Garg, Shuvam Chakraborty, Chris Cundy, Jiaming Song, and Stefano Ermon. Iq-learn:
  Inverse soft-q learning for imitation. In Proceeding of the Thirty-fifth Conference on Neural
  Information Processing Systems, Sydney, Australia, December 2021.

Seyed Kamyar Seyed Ghasemipour, Richard Zemel, and Shixiang Gu. A divergence minimization
  perspective on imitation learning methods. In Proceeding of the Conference on Robot Learning,
  Osaka, Japan, November 2019.

Ian J. Goodfellow, Jean Pouget-Abadie, Mehdi Mirza, Bing Xu, David Warde-Farley, Sherjil Ozair,
  Aaron Courville, and Yoshua Bengio. Generative adversarial networks. In Proceeding of the
  Twenty-eighth Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, Montreal, Canada, De-
  cember 2014.

Xiaoxiao Guo, Shiyu Chang, Mo Yu, Gerald Tesauro, and Murray Campbell. Hybrid reinforce-
  ment learning with expert state sequences. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial
  Intelligence, volume 33, pp. 3739–3746, 2019.

Tuomas Haarnoja, Aurick Zhou, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. Soft actor-critic: Off-policy
  maximum entropy deep reinforcement learning with a stochastic actor. In Proceeding of the
  International Conference on Machine Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, July 2018.

Jonathan Ho and Stefano Ermon. Generative adversarial imitation learning. In NIPS 2016.

ICLR 2019. Proceeding of the International Conference on Learning Representations, New Orleans,
  United States, May 2019.

ICLR 2020. Proceeding of the International Conference on Learning Representations, Virtual, May
  2020.

Ilya Kostrikov, Kumar Krishna Agrawal, Debidatta Dwibedi, Sergey Levine, and Jonathan Tomp-
   son. Discriminator-actor-critic: Addressing sample inefficiency and reward bias in adversarial
   imitation learning. In ICLR 2019.

Ilya Kostrikov, Ofir Nachum, and Jonathan Tompson. Imitation learning via off-policy distrbution
   matching. In ICLR 2020.


                                                  10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Xudong Mao, Qing Li Haoran Xie, Raymond Y.K. Lau, Zhen Wang, and Stephen Paul Smolley.
  Least squares generative adversarial networks. In Proceeding of the IEEE International Confer-
  ence on ComputerVision (ICCV), Venice, Italy, October 2017.
Ofir Nachum, Yinlam Chow, Bo Dai, and Lihong Li. Dualdice: Behavior-agnostic estimation of
  discounted stationary distribution corrections. In Proceeding of the Thirty-third Conference on
  Neural Information Processing Systems, Vancouver, Canada, December 2019.
Ashvin Nair, Dian Chen, Pulkit Agrawal, Phillip Isola, Pieter Abbeel, Jitendra Malik, and Sergey
  Levine. Combining self-supervised learning and imitation for vision-based rope manipulation. In
  2017 IEEE international conference on robotics and automation (ICRA), pp. 2146–2153. IEEE,
  2017.
Andrew Ng, Daishi Harada, and Stuart Russell. Policy invariance under reward transformations:
  Theory and application to reward shaping. In Proceeding of the International Conference on
  Machine Learning, Bled, Slovenia, June 1999.
NIPS 2016. Proceeding of the Thirtieth Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems,
  Barcelona, Spain, December 2016.
Sebastian Nowozin, Botonf Cseke, and Ryota Tomioka. f-gan: Training generative neural samplers
  using variational divergence minimization. In NIPS 2016.
Brahma S Pavse, Faraz Torabi, Josiah Hanna, Garrett Warnell, and Peter Stone. Ridm: Reinforced
  inverse dynamics modeling for learning from a single observed demonstration. IEEE Robotics
  and Automation Letters, 5(4):6262–6269, 2020.
Xue Bin Peng, Angjoo Kanazawa, Sam Toyer, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. Variational dis-
  criminator bottleneck: Improving imitation learning, inverse rl, and gans by constraining infor-
  mation flow. In ICLR 2019.
Xue Bin Peng, Ze Ma, Pieter Abbeel, Sergey Levine, and Angjoo Kanazawa. Amp: Adversarial
  motion priors for stylized physics-based character control. ACM Transactions on Graphics, 40:1
  – 20, 2021.
Ilija Radosavovic, Xiaolong Wang, Lerrel Pinto, and Jitendra Malik. State-only imitation learning
   for dexterous manipulation. In 2021 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots
   and Systems (IROS), pp. 7865–7871. IEEE, 2021.
Siddharth Reddy, Anca D. Dragan, and Sergey Levine. Sqil: Imitation learning via reinforcement
  learning with sparse rewards. In ICLR 2020.
Harshit Sikchi, Akanksha Saran, Wonjoon Goo, and Scott Niekum. A ranking game for imitation
  learning. Transactions on Machine Learning Research, 2023.
Gokul Swamy, Sanjiban Choudhury, J. Andrew Bagnell, and Zhiwei Steven Wu. Of moments and
  matching: A game-theoretic framework for closing the imitation gap. In Proceeding of the Inter-
  national Conference on Machine Learning, Virtual, July 2021.
Faraz Torabi, Garrett Warnell, and Peter Stone. Behavioral cloning from observation. In Proceeding
  of the Twenty-Seventh International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI), pp. 4950–
  4957, Stockholm, Sweden, July 2018.
Faraz Torabi, Garrett Warnell, and Peter Stone. Generative adversarial imitation from observation.
  In Proceeding of the International Conference on Machine Learning, Long Beach, California,
  July 2019a.
Faraz Torabi, Garrett Warnell, and Peter Stone. Recent advances in imitation learning from observa-
  tion. In Proceeding of the Twenty-Eighth International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence
  (IJCAI), Macao, China, August 2019b.
John Von Neumann. Zur theorie der gesellschaftsspiele. Mathematische annalen, 100(1):295–320,
  1928. Translated to English by Sonya Bargman (Von Neumann, 1959).


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


John Von Neumann. On the theory of games of strategy. Contributions to the Theory of Games, 4:
  13–42, 1959.
Brian D. Ziebart. Modeling Purposeful Adaptive Behavior with the Principle of Maximum Causal
  Entropy. PhD thesis, University of Washington, 2010.
Brian D. Ziebart, Andrew Maas, J.Andrew Bagnell, and Anind K. Dey. Maximum entropy inverse
  reinforcement learning. In Proceeding of the Twenty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelli-
  gence, Chicago, United States, July 2008.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A     P ROOFS AND D ERIVATIONS
In this section, we present proofs of the propositions in the main paper. Furthermore, we provide
two additional propositions on the optimal reward function and the bounds for the χ2 -divergence
when considering the mixture distribution.

A.1    F ROM O CCUPANCY M EASURES TO D ISTRIBUTIONS
Based on Proposition A.1, the solution arg maxQ∈Ω̃ Jρ (Q̃, πQ̃ ) under occupancy measures equals
the solution arg maxQ̃∈Ω̃ J (Q̃, πQ̃ ) under state-action distributions. This result allows us to use the
following distribution matching problem from now on:

           max J (Q̃, πQ̃ ) = max EdπE rQ̃ (s, a) − Edπ rQ̃ (s, a) − ψ(rQ̃ ) − βH(πQ̃ ) ,               (22)
            Q̃∈Ω̃               Q̃∈Ω̃                                    Q̃


where we introduce the implicit reward rQ̃ (s, a) = Q̃(s, a) − γEs′ ∼P (.|s,a) [Ṽ π (s′ )] for comprehen-
sion, β is a constant controlling the entropy regularization, dπE is the state-action distribution of the
expert, and dπ is the state-action distribution under the policy.
Proposition A.1 Let maxr∈R minπ∈Π Lρ (π, r) be the dual problem of a regularized occupancy
matching optimization problem and L(π, r) be the Lagrangian of the regularized distribution match-
ing problem. Then it holds that Lρ (π, r) ∝ L(π, r) and Jρ (Q̃, πQ̃ ) ∝ J (Q̃, πQ̃ ).

Proof of Proposition A.1.
Starting from the definition of the occupancy measure of an arbitrary policy π, we compute the
normalizing constant as an integral:
                       Z                             Z                T
                                                                      X −1
                               ρπ (s, a)dsda =                 lim            γ t µπt (s)π(a|s) dsda
                        S×A                            S×A T →∞ t=0

                                                             T
                                                             X −1        Z
                                                   = lim            γt             µπt (s)π(a|s) dsda
                                                     T →∞                    S×A
                                                             t=0
                                                             T
                                                             X −1
                                                   = lim            γt · 1
                                                     T →∞
                                                             t=0
                                                      1
                                                   =                                                    (23)
                                                     1−γ
Now we compute the (discounted) state-action distribution as:
                                           ρπ (s, a)       ρπ (s, a)
                      dπ (s, a) = R                      =     1     = (1 − γ)ρπ (s, a)                 (24)
                                        S×A
                                            ρ(s,  a)dsda     1−γ
Thus, we have:
                                                              1
                                              ρπ (s, a) =        dπ (s, a)                              (25)
                                                             1−γ
Using equation 25 in the definition of the objective we obtain:
                                         Z
                                1                                                    1
                     J (π) =                       dπ (s, a)r(s, a)dsda =              Ed [r(s, a)]     (26)
                               1−γ           S×A                                    1−γ π

A derivation similar to equation 26 can be done for the entropy and the regularizer using equa-
                                                                                        1
tion 25. Substituting the derived formulas into equation 1 and collecting the constant 1−γ proves
the proposition.                                                                               ■

A.2    T HE B OUNDS OF THE χ2 D IVERGENCE ON M IXTURE D ISTRIBUTIONS

Proposition A.2 Given the Pearson χ2 -divergence between the distribution dπE and the mixture
distribution 0.5 dπE + 0.5 dπ in its variational form shown in Equation 6, the optimal reward is
given by
                                                         1 dπE (s, a) − dπ (s, a)
                                        r∗ (s, a) =                                                     (27)
                                                         c dπE (s, a) + dπ (s, a)
and is bounded such that r∗ (s, a) ∈ [−1/c, 1/c] for all s ∈ S, a ∈ A.


                                                             13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Proof of Proposition A.2. This proof follows the proof of Proposition 1 in Goodfellow et al. (2014).
We recall that the χ2 -divergence on a mixture in Equation 6 is
            dπE +dπ

 2χ2 dπE                                  EdπE [r(s,a)]−Edmix r(s,a)+kr(s,a)2

               2
                      =max 2
           | {z }      r∈R
               dmix

                             =max EdπE [r(s,a)]−Edπ [r(s,a)]−kEdπE r(s,a)2 −kEdπ r(s,a)2

                              r∈R
                                  Z Z
                                        dπE (s,a) r(s,a)−kr(s,a)2 −dπ (s,a) r(s,a)+kr(s,a)2 dads, (28)

                             =max
                               r∈R       S    A

where k =    1/4 for the conventional χ2 -divergence. We generalize the χ2 -divergence by setting
k = /2. For any a, b ∈ R \ {0}, the function y → a(y − 2c y 2 ) − b(y + 2c y 2 ) achieves its maximum
      c                   +

at 1c a−b                                   1   1
      a+b , which belongs to the interval [− /c, /c].

To conclude the proof, we notice that the reward function can be arbitrarily defined outside of
Supp(dπ ) ∪ Supp(dπE ), as it has no effect on the divergence.                               ■

Proposition A.3 The Pearson χ2 -divergence between the distribution dπE and the mixture distri-
bution 0.5 dπE + 0.5 dπ is bounded as follows
                                               dπE +dπ
                                0 ≤ 2χ2 dπE       2      ≤ 1c .                           (29)
                                               | {z  }
                                                                       dmix

Proof of Proposition A.3. To increase the readability, we drop the explicit dependencies on state
and action in the notation, and we write dπE and dπ for dπE (s, a) and dπ (s, a), respectively. The
lower bound is trivially true for any divergence and is reached when dπ = dmix = dπE . To prove
the upper bound, we use the optimal reward function from Equation 27 and plug it into Equation 28
with k = c/2
                                  Z Z
                 dπE +dπ
     2χ2 dπE                                     dπE r∗ (s,a)− 2c r∗ (s,a)2 −dπ r∗ (s,a)+ 2c r∗ (s,a)2 dads

                    2
                           =
                | {z }               S       A
                      dmix
                                                                                   2 !
                                                   dπE −dπ               dπE −dπ
                                  Z Z
                                                       1          c 1
                                =       d πE           c
                                                                − 2 c2
                                    S A            dπE +dπ               dπE +dπ
                                                                             2 !
                                         1   dπE −dπ        c 1    dπE −dπ
                                  −dπ c                  + 2 c2                   dads
                                             dπE +dπ               dπE +dπ
                                               2
                                               2dπE −2d2π −d2πE +2dπE dπ −d2π
                                  Z Z
                                =       d πE
                                    S A                  2c(dπE +dπ )2
                                         2
                                         2dπE −2dπ +d2πE −2dπE dπ +d2π
                                                    2
                                  −dπ                                          dads
                                                   2c(dπE +dπ )2
                                  Z Z 3
                                         dπE +d3π −dπE d2π −d2πE dπ                    (dπE −dπ )2
                                                                                 Z Z
                                                                               1
                                =                                      dads=                       dads
                                    S A        2c(dπE +dπ )2                  2c S A dπE +dπ
                                              d2πE          d2π
                                     Z Z
                                   1                                    dπE dπ
                                =                     +            −2            dads
                                  2c S A dπE +dπ dπE +dπ               dπE +dπ

                                   1             d πE                  dπ                −2dπ         1
                                =      EdπE                +Edπ                +EdπE                ≤ .       (30)
                                  2c           dπE +dπ             dπE +dπ              dπE +dπ       c
                                       |       {z        } |         {z      } |        {z      }
                                                       ≤1                     ≤1             ≤0

Note that the bound is tight, as the individual bounds of each expectation are only achieved in
conjunction.                                                                                 ■

Proposition A.4 Let χ2 dπE       αdπE + (1 − α)dπ be the Pearson χ2 -divergence between the
distribution dπE and the mixture distribution αdπE + (1 − α)dπ . Then it holds that:
                               χ2 dπE            αdπE + (1 − α)dπ ≤ (1 − α)χ2 dπE

                                                                                          dπ .

Proof of Proposition A.4.                    The proof follows straightforwardly from the joint convexity of f -
divergences:

        Df κP1 + (1 − κ)P2                       κQ1 + (1 − κ)Q2 ≤ κDf (P1 ∥ Q1 ) + (1 − κ)Df (P2 ∥ Q2 ) ,


                                                                  14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


where κ ∈ [0, 1] is the a mixing coefficient. The χ2 -divergence is an f -divergence with f (t) =
(t − 1)2 . Now using the χ2 -divergence, and let P = P1 = P2 = Q2 , D = Q1 , and α = (1 − κ):
                      χ2 P     αP + (1 − α)D ≤(1 − α) χ2 (P ∥ D) + αχ2 (P ∥ P )

                                                                   |    {z    }
                                                                        =0
                      χ2 P                             2

                               αP + (1 − α)D ≤(1 − α) χ P D .
Setting P = dπE and D = dπ concludes the proof.                                                                 ■

A.3   F ROM χ2 - REGULARIZED M AX E NT-IRL TO L EAST-S QUARES R EWARD R EGRESSION
We recall that the entropy-regularized IRL under occupancy measures is given by
                     Lρ (r, π) = (−βHρ (π) − Eρπ [r(s, a)]) + EρπE [r(s, a)] − ψρ (r).                      (31)
We also recall that using soft inverse Bellman operator to do the change of variable yields:
                                       h                                       i
                   Jρ (Q̃, πQ̃ ) = EρπE Q̃(s, a) − γEs′ ∼P (.|s,a) [Ṽ π (s′ )] − βHρ (πQ̃ )                (32)
                                         h                                       i
                                   − Eρπ Q̃(s, a) − γEs′ ∼P (.|s,a) [Ṽ π (s′ )] − ψρ (r).

We can now use Proposition A.1 to switch the objective from occupancy measures to distributions.
Proof of Proposition 3.1. Staring from the objective function in Equation 22, by expanding the
expectation and rearranging the terms, we obtain:
   J (Q̃, πQ̃ ) =EdπE rQ̃ (s, a) − Edπ rQ̃ (s, a) − c Ed˜ rQ̃ (s, a)2 − βH(πQ̃ )



                =EdπE rQ̃ (s, a) − Edπ rQ̃ (s, a)
                 − cα EdπE rQ̃ (s, a)2 − c(1 − α) Edπ rQ̃ (s, a)2 − βH(πQ̃ )



              = − EdπE cα rQ̃ (s, a)2 − rQ̃ (s, a) − Edπ c(1 − α) rQ̃ (s, a)2 + rQ̃ (s, a) − βH(πQ̃ )



              = − c α EdπE rQ̃ (s, a)2 − αc 1

                                              rQ̃ (s, a)
                                   h                                 i
                    +(1 − α) Edπ rQ̃ (s, a)2 + (1−α)c 1
                                                           rQ̃ (s, a) + βc H(πQ̃ )
                 1                  1
Defining rmax = 2αc and rmin = − 2(1−α)c and completing the squares we obtain:
                                                                             h                              i
   J (Q̃, πQ̃ ) = − c α EdπE rQ̃ (s, a)2 − αc   1
                                                   rQ̃ (s, a) + (1 − α) Edπ rQ̃ (s, a)2 + (1−α)c
                                                                                             1

                                                                                                 rQ̃ (s, a)
                                            2         2                 2      2
                      + βc H(πQ̃ ) + αc (rmax

                                                 − rmax  ) + (1 − α)c (rmin − rmin )

                = − c α EdπE rQ̃ (s, a)2 − αc   1                2
                                                                     + (1 − α) Edπ rQ̃ (s, a)2

                                                   rQ̃ (s, a) + rmax
                                                  i
                                              2                          2              2
                            1
                      + (1−α)c rQ̃ (s, a) + rmin    + βc H(πQ̃ ) + αc rmax  + (1 − α)c rmin
                              h                                                               2
                                                 1
                                                     2 i                                 1
                = − c α EdπE rQ̃ (s, a) − 2αc            + (1 − α) Edπ rQ̃ (s, a) + 2(1−α)c
                                           2                   2
                      + βc H(πQ̃ ) + αc rmax

                                                + (1 − α)c rmin   .
Finally, we obtain the following result:
                         h                   2 i              h                   2 i β
 J (Q̃, πQ̃ ) = −c α EdπE rQ̃ (s, a) − rmax      + (1 − α) Edπ rQ̃ (s, a) − rmin     + c H(πQ̃ ) + K,
                                                                                                   (33)
              2               2      1       1
where K = αc rmax + (1 − α)c rmin = 4αc + 4(1−α)c is a fixed constant.
Comparing Equation 9 with Equation 33 results in
                                        J (Q̃, πQ̃ ) + K ∝ L(Q̃, πQ̃ ).                                     (34)

Given that an affine transformation (with positive multiplicative constants) preserves the optimum,
arg maxQ̃∈Ω̃ J¯(Q̃, πQ̃ ) is the solution of the entropy-regularized least squares objective L(Q̃, πQ̃ ).

                                                                                                                ■

                                                      15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A.4   F ULL LS-IQ O BJECTIVE WITH T ERMINAL S TATES H ANDLING
Inserting our inverse Bellman operator derived in Section 3.4 into the least-squares objective defined
in Equation 9 and rearranging the terms yields the following objective for hard Q-functions:
                                            h                                      2 i
            L(Q, πQ ) = αE s,a∼dπE           (1 − ν) Q(s, a) − (rmax + γ V π (s′ )                            (35)
                            s′ ∼P (.|s,a)
                                                                         2
                                                                   rmax
                      + αE s,a∼dπE           ν Q(s, a) − (rmax + γ 1−γ
                            s′ ∼P (.|s,a)
                                                   h                                             2 i
                      + (1 − α)E s,a∼dπQ               (1 − ν) Q(s, a) − (rmin + γ V π (s′ ))
                                   s′ ∼P (.|s,a)
                                                                             2   β
                                                                     rmin
                      + (1 − α)E s,a∼dπQ       ν Q(s, a) − (rmin + γ 1−γ  )       + H(πQ )
                                                                                   c
                                s′ ∼P (.|s,a)
                                     h                                          i
                                                                              2
            L(Q, πQ ) = αE s,a∼dπE (1 − ν) Q(s, a) − (rmax + γ V π (s′ )

                                                                                                              (36)
                            s′ ∼P (.|s,a)
                                                               2
                                                         rmax
                      + αE s,a∼dπE           ν Q(s, a) − 1−γ
                            s′ ∼P (.|s,a)
                                                   h                                             2 i
                      + (1 − α)E s,a∼dπQ               (1 − ν) Q(s, a) − (rmin + γ V π (s′ ))
                                   s′ ∼P (.|s,a)
                                                                      2   β
                                                                rmin
                      + (1 − α)E s,a∼dπQ            ν Q(s, a) − 1−γ      + H(πQ ) .
                                                                          c
                                   s′ ∼P (.|s,a)


Now including the fixed target for the expert distribution introduced in Section 3.5 yields:
                                                                         2
                                                                   rmax
             Llsiq (Q, πQ ) = αE s,a∼dπE         (1 − ν) Q(s, a) − 1−γ                                        (37)
                                s′ ∼P (.|s,a)
                                                                   2
                                                             rmax
                          + αE s,a∼dπE           ν Q(s, a) − 1−γ
                                s′ ∼P (.|s,a)
                                                         h                                              2 i
                          + (1 − α)E s,a∼dπQ                 (1 − ν) Q(s, a) − (rmin + γ V π (s′ ))
                                        s′ ∼P (.|s,a)
                                                                          2   β
                                                                    rmin
                          + (1 − α)E s,a∼dπQ         ν Q(s, a) − 1−γ         + H(πQ )
                                                                              c
                                      s′ ∼P (.|s,a)
                                                                2
                                                          rmax
             Llsiq (Q, πQ ) = αE s,a∼dπE        Q(s, a) − 1−γ                                                 (38)
                                s′ ∼P (.|s,a)
                                                         h                                              2 i
                          + (1 − α)E s,a∼dπQ                 (1 − ν) Q(s, a) − (rmin + γ V π (s′ ))
                                        s′ ∼P (.|s,a)
                                                                            2   β
                                                                      rmin
                          + (1 − α)E s,a∼dπQ              ν Q(s, a) − 1−γ      + H(πQ ) ,
                                                                                c
                                        s′ ∼P (.|s,a)

where Equation 38 is the full LS-IQ objective for our hard Q-function. For the observations-only
setting we predict the expert’s actions using the IDM.

A.5   C ONVERGENCE OF OUR F ORWARD BACKUP O PERATOR
As described in Section 3.4, our inverse operator,
                    π
                        Q)(s, a) = Q(s, a) − γEs′ ∼P (.|s,a) (1 − ν)V π (s′ ) + νV (sA ) ,

                 (Tlsiq                                                                                       (39)
 is based on the standard Bellman backup operator, except that, instead of bootstrapping, we use the
known values for transitions into absorbing state. We will now show that repeatedly applying the
corresponding forward Operator
                   π
                        Q)(s, a) = r(s, a) + γEs′ ∼P (.|s,a) (1 − ν)V π (s′ ) + νV (sA ) ,

                 (Blsiq                                                                                       (40)
converges to the Q function. Our proof is based on the same technique that is commonly used
to prove convergence of the standard Bellmen operator, namely by showing that the Q function


                                                              16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Qπ (s, a) := r(s, a) + γEs′ ∼p(s′ |s,a) Ea′ ∼π(a′ |s′ ) Qπ (s′ , a′ ) is a fixed point of our operator, that is,
  π
(Blsiq Qπ )(s, a) = Qπ (s, a), and by further showing that our operator is a contraction,
                       π                   π
                   ||(Blsiq QA )(s, a) − (Blsiq QB )(s, a)||∞ ≤ γ||QA (s, a) − QB (s, a)||∞ ,                           (41)

were ||.||∞ is the maximum norm; here, we assume a finite states and actions for the sake of sim-
plicity.
                                                                π
Proposition A.5 The Q function of policy π is a fixed point of Blsiq ,
                                             π
                                           (Blsiq Qπ (s, a)) = Qπ (s, a) .                                              (42)

Proof of Proposition A.5. The proof follows straightforwardly from the fact that our forward
operator performs the same update as the standard Bellman operator, if applied to the actual Q
                                                         r(sA )
function of the policy, Qπ (s, a), since then V (sA ) := (1−γ)  = Ea′ ∼π(.|A ) Qπ (s′ , a′ )). Thus,
   π
        Qπ (s, a)) = r(s, a) + γEs′ ∼P (.|s,a) (1 − ν)V π (s′ ) + νV (sA )

 (Blsiq                                                                                                                 (43)
                  = r(s, a) + γEs′ ∼P (.|s,a) (1 − ν)Ea′ ∼π(a′ |s′ ) Qπ (s′ , a′ ) + νEa′ ∼π(.|s′ ) Qπ (s′ , a′ )

                                                                                                                        (44)
                  = r(s, a) + γEs′ ∼P (.|s,a) Ea′ ∼π(.|s′ ) Qπ (s′ , a′ ) = Qπ (s, a) .                                 (45)

                                                                                                                         ■
                                      π
Proposition A.6 The forward operator Blsiq is a contraction,
                       π                   π
                   ||(Blsiq QA )(s, a) − (Blsiq QB )(s, a)||∞ ≤ γ||QA (s, a) − QB (s, a)||∞ .                           (46)

Proof of Proposition A.6.
                       π                   π
                     (Blsiq QA )(s, a) − (Blsiq QB )(s, a)                                                              (47)
                                                           ∞

                  = max γEs ∼P (.|s,a) Ea ∼π(a |s ) (1 − ν)(QA (s′ , a′ ) − QB (s′ , a′ ))

                               ′           ′      ′ ′                                                                   (48)
                      s,a

                  ≤γ max Es′ ∼P (.|s,a) Ea′ ∼π(a′ |s′ ) (QA (s′ , a′ ) − QB (s′ , a′ ))

                                                                                                                        (49)
                        s,a

                  ≤γ max
                      ′ ′
                          QA (s′ , a′ ) − QB (s′ , a′ )                                                                 (50)
                       s ,a

                  =γ QA (s, a) − QB (s, a)                                                                              (51)
                                                  ∞

                                                                                                                         ■


                                                          17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


      Start
               Run          Append to                     Update
              Policy       Replay Buffer                   IDM


              Update          Update                       Infer
                                                                                Expert Buffer
              Policy         Q-function                   Actions



                           Figure 4: Training procedure of the IDM in LS-IQ.



B     L EARNING FROM O BSERVATIONS

This section describes the IDM in greater detail. Figure 4 illustrates the training procedure of the
IDM in LS-IQ. As can be seen, the IDM uses the replay buffer data generated by an agent to infer
the actions from state transitions. Therefore, the simple regression loss from Equation 21 is used.
At the beginning of training, the IDM learns on transitions generated by a (random) agent. Once
the agent gets closer to the expert distribution, the IDM is trained on transitions closer to the ex-
pert. The intuition behind the usage of an IDM arises from the idea that, while two agents might
produce different trajectories and, consequently, state-action distributions, the underlying dynamics
are shared. This allows the IDM to infer more information about an action corresponding to a state
transition than a random action predicted by the policy includes, as done by Garg et al. (2021). The
experiments in Section 4 show that using an IDM yields superior or on-par performance w.r.t. the
baselines in the state-only scenario.
While we only present a deterministic IDM, we also experimented with stochastic ones. For in-
stance, we modeled the IDM as a Gaussian distribution and trained it using a maximum likelihood
loss. We also tried a fully Bayesian approach to impose a prior, where we learned the parameters of
a Normal-Inverse Gamma distribution and used a Student’s t distribution for predicting actions of
state transitions, as done by Amini et al. (2020). However, stochastic approaches did not show any
notable benefit, therefore we stick to the simple deterministic approach.


C     E XPERIMENTS

This section contains environment descriptions and additional results that have been omitted in the
main paper due to space constraints.


C.1     T HE ATLAS L OCOMOTION E NVIRONMENT

The Atlas locomotion environment is a novel locomotion environment introduced by us. This en-
vironment aims to train agents on more realistic tasks, in contrast to the Mujoco Gym tasks, which
generally have fine-tuned dynamics explicitly targeted towards reinforcement learning agents. The
Atlas environment fixes the arms by default, resulting in 10 active joints. Each joint is torque-
controlled by one motor. The state space includes all joint positions and velocities as well as 3D
forces on the front and back foot, yielding a state-dimensionality of Ds = 20 + 2 · 2 · 3 = 32. The
action space includes the desired torques for each joint motor, yielding an action dimensionality of
Da = 10. Optionally, the upper body with the arms can be activated, extending the number of joints
and actuators to 27. The Atlas environment is implemented using Mushroom-RL’s (D’Eramo et al.,
2021) Mujoco interface.
For the sake of completeness, we added the cumulative reward plots – in contrast to the discounted
cumulative reward plots as in Figure 2 – with an additional VAIL agent in Figure 5. The reward used
as a metric for the performance is defined as r = exp(−(vπ − vπE )2 ), where vπ is the agent’s upper
body velocity and vπE is the expert’s upper body velocity. The expert’s walking velocity is 1.25 ms .
The code for the environment as well as the expert data is available at https://github.com/
robfiras/ls-iq.


                                                  18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                  Atlas
                                1.00
                                0.75
                                0.50
                                0.25
                                0.00
                                       0       500          1000     1500
         LSIQ        LSIQ-H        LSIQ-HC           Vail      IQ       IQv0        SQIL         Expert
Figure 5: Training results and an exemplary trajectory – here the trained LSIQ agent – of a locomotion task
using as simulated Atlas robot. Abscissa shows the normalized cumulative reward. Ordinate shows the number
of training steps (×103 ).


C.2   A BLATION S TUDY: A BSORBING S TATE T REATMENT AND TARGET Q C LIPPING

Figure 6 presents ablations on the effects of the proposed treatment of absorbing states and the
clipping of the Q-function target on an LSIQ agent with bootstrapping. To see the pure effect of
the absorbing state treatment and the clipping, we did not include fixed targets. Note that the fixed
target implicitly treats absorbing states of the expert, as it provides the same target for states and
actions transitioning towards absorbing states. We have chosen a LSIQ agent without an entropy
and regularization critic. The experiments are conducted on the Humanoid-v3 task, as the tasks
HalfCheetah-v3, Ant-v3, either do not have or have very rare absorbing states, and Walker-v3 and
Hopper-v3 are too easy to see the effects. We use a regularizer constant of c = 0.5 and a mixing
                                                                         1
parameter of α = 0.5 yielding a maximum reward of rmax = 2(1−0.5)0.5           = 2 and a minimum
                          1                                                          rmax
reward of rmin = − 2(1−0.5)0.5 = −2. This yields a maximum Q-value of Qmax = 1−γ          = 200 and a
                                rmin
minimum Q-value of Qmin = 1−γ = −200. The rows show the different agent configurations: First,
LSIQ with clipping and absorbing state treatment; second, LSIQ with clipping but no absorbing
state treatment; and lastly, LSIQ without clipping and no treatment of absorbing states – which is
equivalent to SQIL with symmetric reward targets. For a better understanding of the effect, the plots
show the individual seeds of a configuration. As can be seen, the first LSIQ agent can successfully
learn the task and regresses the Q-value of the transitions towards absorbing states to the minimum
Q-value of -200. The second configuration does not treat absorbing states and is not able to learn
the task with all seeds. As can be seen, the average Q-value of absorbing states is between -2 and
-6. Taking a closer look at the first two plots in the second row, one can see that those seeds did
not learn, whose average Q-value on non-absorbing transitions is close or even below the average
Q-values of states and actions yielding to absorbing states. This strengthens the importance of our
terminal state treatment, which pulls Q-values of states and action towards absorbing states to the
lowest possible Q-value and, therefore, avoids a termination bias. Finally, one can see the problem
of exploding Q-value in the last LSIQ configuration. This is evident by the scale of the abscissa,
highlighted in the plots. Interestingly, while some seeds still perform reasonably well despite the
enormously high Q-value, it clearly correlates to the high variance in the cumulative reward plot.

C.3   A BLATION S TUDY: I NFLUENCE OF FIXED TARGETS AND E NTROPY C LIPPING

To show the effect of the fixed target (c.d., Section 3.5) and the entropy clipping (c.f., 3.7), we
conducted a range of ablation studies for different versions of LSIQ on all Mujoco task. The results
are shown in Figure 7 for the LSIQ version only with an entropy critic and in Figure 8 for the
LSIQ version with an entropy and a regularization critic. As can be seen from the Figures, the
version with the fixed target and the entropy clipping performs at best. It is especially noteworthy
that the entropy clipping becomes of particular importance on tasks that require a high temperature
parameter β, which is the case for the Humanoid-v3 environment.


                                                      19
 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                                 Q-Value Policy                                Cumulative Reward



  Abs. Treatment
                                                                      100
                                                                                                                    6000

    Clipping &                                                          0
                                                                                                                    4000


                                                                      100                                           2000


                                                                      200                                             0
                                                                            0    200        400      600      800          0     200    400      600   800
    No Abs. Treatment


                        Q-Value Absorbing Policy                                 Q-Value Policy                                Cumulative Reward
                                                                     100                                            6000
       Clipping &


                        2

                                                                      50                                            4000
                        4


                        6                                              0                                            2000


                        8                                                                                             0
                            0           200     400    600    800          0     200        400     600       800          0     200    400      600   800

                         Q-Value Absorbing Policy                                                                              Cumulative Reward
No Abs. Treatment


                                1e7                                  2.0
                                                                           1e8   Q-Value Policy
                        1.0                                                                                         6000
  No Clipping &


                        0.5
                                                                     1.5
                        0.0                                                                                         4000

                        0.5                                          1.0

                                                                                                                    2000
                        1.0
                                                                     0.5
                        1.5
                                                                     0.0                                              0
                        2.0                                                0     200        400     600       800          0     200    400      600   800
                              0         200      400    600    800
 Figure 6: Ablation study on the effect of the proposed treatment of absorbing states and the clipping of the
 Q-value target on a LSIQ agent with bootstrapping (no fixed targets). The experiments are conducted on
 the Humanoid-v3 task, with an expert reaching a cumulative reward of 6233.45. Multiple lines in each plot
 show the individual seeds. The first column presents the average Q-value of states and actions yielding to an
 absorbing state visited by the policy. The second column presents the average Q-value of all states and actions
 that do not yield in absorbing states visited by the policy. The third column presents the cumulative reward.
 The rows present the ablations done to the LSIQ agent. Ordinate shows the number of training steps (×103 ).

                                    Ant-v3                           HalfCheetah-v3                                  Hopper-v3
  1.0                                                       1.0                                        1.0
  0.8                                                       0.8                                        0.8
  0.6                                                       0.6                                        0.6
  0.4                                                       0.4                                        0.4
  0.2                                                       0.2                                        0.2
  0.00                            500         1000     1500 0.00       500         1000           1500 0.00          500         1000     1500

                            Walker2d-v3                              Humanoid-v3
  1.0                                                       1.0
  0.8                                                       0.8
  0.6                                                       0.6
  0.4                                                       0.4
  0.2                                                       0.2
  0.00                            500         1000     1500 0.00       500         1000           1500

 Figure 7: Comparison of different versions of LSIQ-H (Regularization Critic): First, the bootstrapping ver-
 sion → LSIQ-H; second, the bootstrapping version with entropy clipping → LSIQ-H+EC; thirdly, the fixed
 target version with entropy clipping → LSIQ-H+EC+FT. IQ and SQIL are added for reference. Abscissa shows
 the normalized discounted cumulative reward. Ordinate shows the number of training steps (×103 ). Experi-
 ments are conducted with 5 expert trajectories and five seeds. Expert cumulative rewards → Hopper:3299.81,
 Walker2d:5841.73, Ant:6399.04, HalfCheetah:12328.78, Humanoid:6233.45


                                                                                       20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


            Ant-v3                      HalfCheetah-v3                      Hopper-v3
1.0                              1.0                              1.0
0.8                              0.8                              0.8
0.6                              0.6                              0.6
0.4                              0.4                              0.4
0.2                              0.2                              0.2
0.00      500      1000     1500 0.00      500      1000     1500 0.00      500     1000     1500

         Walker2d-v3                     Humanoid-v3
1.0                              1.0
0.8                              0.8
0.6                              0.6
0.4                              0.4
0.2                              0.2
0.00      500      1000     1500 0.00      500      1000     1500

Figure 8: Comparison of different versions of LSIQ-HC (Entropy+Regularization Critic): First, the boot-
strapping version → LSIQ-HC; second, the bootstrapping version with entropy clipping → LSIQ-HC+EC;
thirdly, the fixed target version with entropy clipping → LSIQ-HC+EC+FT. IQ and SQIL are added for refer-
ence. Abscissa shows the normalized discounted cumulative reward. Ordinate shows the number of training
steps (×103 ). Experiments are conducted with 5 expert trajectories and five seeds. Expert cumulative rewards
→ Hopper:3299.81, Walker2d:5841.73, Ant:6399.04, HalfCheetah:12328.78, Humanoid:6233.45


C.4    A LL E XPERIMENT R ESULTS OF THE DIFFERENT V ERSION OF LSIQ

Figure 9 presents all the plots presented in Figure 2 with the additional Humanoid-v3 results. Fig-
ure 10 and Figure 11 correspond to Figure 3 but show all five environments. The corresponding
learning curves are shown in Appendix C.6 and C.5.

            Ant-v3                      HalfCheetah-v3                      Hopper-v3
1.0                              1.0                              1.0
0.8                              0.8                              0.8
0.6                              0.6                              0.6
0.4                              0.4                              0.4
0.2                              0.2                              0.2
0.00      500      1000     1500 0.00      500      1000     1500 0.00      500     1000     1500

         Walker2d-v3                     Humanoid-v3
1.0                              1.0
0.8                              0.8
0.6                              0.6
0.4                              0.4
0.2                              0.2
0.00      500      1000     1500 0.00      500      1000     1500

Figure 9: Comparison of different versions of LS-IQ. Now also with the Humanoid-v3 environment. Abscissa
shows the normalized discounted cumulative reward. Ordinate shows the number of training steps (×103 ).
Expert cumulative rewards → Hopper:3299.81, Walker2d:5841.73, Ant:6399.04, HalfCheetah:12328.78, Hu-
manoid:6233.45


                                                     21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


              Ant-v3                          HalfCheetah-v3                    Hopper-v3
1.00                               1.00                              1.00
0.75                               0.75                              0.75
0.50                               0.50                              0.50
0.25                               0.25                              0.25
0.00                               0.00                              0.00
       1     5        10      25          1      5     10       25          1    5       10      25
           Walker2d-v3                        Humanoid-v3
1.00                               1.00
0.75                               0.75
0.50                               0.50
0.25                               0.25
0.00                               0.00
       1     5        10      25          1      5     10       25

Figure 10: Comparison of the effect of the number of expert trajectories on different Mujoco environments.
States and actions from the expert are provided to the agent. All plots are added here for the sake of complete-
ness. Abscissa shows the normalized cumulative reward. Ordinate shows the number of expert trajectories.
The first row shows the performance when considering states and action, while the second row considers the
performance when using states only. Training results are averaged over five seeds per agent. The shaded area
constitutes the 95% confidence interval. Expert cumulative rewards → Hopper:3299.81, Walker2d:5841.73,
Ant:6399.04, HalfCheetah:12328.78, Humanoid:6233.45


              Ant-v3                          HalfCheetah-v3                    Hopper-v3
1.00                               1.00                              1.00
0.75                               0.75                              0.75
0.50                               0.50                              0.50
0.25                               0.25                              0.25
0.00                               0.00                              0.00
       1     5        10      25          1      5     10       25          1    5       10      25
           Walker2d-v3                        Humanoid-v3
1.00                               1.00
0.75                               0.75
0.50                               0.50
0.25                               0.25
0.00                               0.00
       1     5        10      25          1      5     10       25

Figure 11: Comparison of the effect of the number of expert trajectories on different Mujoco environments.
Only expert states are provided to the expert. All plots are added here for the sake of completeness. Abscissa
shows the normalized cumulative reward. Ordinate shows the number of expert trajectories. The first row
shows the performance when considering states and action, while the second row considers the performance
when using states only. Training results are averaged over five seeds per agent. The shaded area constitutes
the 95% confidence interval. Expert cumulative rewards → Hopper:3299.81, Walker2d:5841.73, Ant:6399.04,
HalfCheetah:12328.78, Humanoid:6233.45


                                                      22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


C.5        I MITATION L EARNING FROM S TATES O NLY – F ULL T RAINING C URVES

The learning curves for the learning from observation experiments can be found in Figure 12, 13, 14
and 15 for 1, 5, 10 and 25 expert demonstrations, respectively.

                    Ant-v3                      HalfCheetah-v3                           Hopper-v3
1.00                                    1.0                                       1.0
0.75                                    0.8                                       0.8
0.50                                    0.6                                       0.6
0.25                                    0.4                                       0.4
0.00                                    0.2                                       0.2
       0       500       1000      1500 0.00          500          1000      1500 0.00   500   1000     1500
             Walker2d-v3                          Humanoid-v3
1.0                                     1.0
0.8                                     0.8
0.6                                     0.6
0.4                                     0.4
0.2                                     0.2
0.00           500       1000      1500 0.00          500          1000      1500

Figure 12: Training performance of different agents on Mujoco Tasks when using 1 expert trajectory consisting
of only states. Abscissa shows the normalized discounted cumulative reward. Ordinate shows the number of
training steps (×103 ). Training results are averaged over five seeds per agent. The shaded area constitutes
the 95% confidence interval. Expert cumulative rewards → Hopper:3299.81, Walker2d:5841.73, Ant:6399.04,
HalfCheetah:12328.78, Humanoid:6233.45



                    Ant-v3                      HalfCheetah-v3                           Hopper-v3
1.00                                    1.0                                       1.0
0.75                                    0.8                                       0.8
0.50                                    0.6                                       0.6
0.25                                    0.4                                       0.4
0.00                                    0.2                                       0.2
       0       500       1000      1500 0.00          500          1000      1500 0.00   500   1000     1500

            Walker2d-v3                        Humanoid-v3
1.0                                  1.0
0.8                                  0.8
0.6                                  0.6
0.4                                  0.4
0.2                                  0.2
0.00          500      1000     1500 0.00       500         1000      1500

Figure 13: Training performance of different agents on Mujoco Tasks when using 5 expert trajectory consisting
of only states. Abscissa shows the normalized discounted cumulative reward. Ordinate shows the number
of training steps (×103 ). Training results are averaged over ten seeds per agent. The shaded area constitutes
the 95% confidence interval. Expert cumulative rewards → Hopper:3299.81, Walker2d:5841.73, Ant:6399.04,
HalfCheetah:12328.78, Humanoid:6233.45


                                                             23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


               Ant-v3                        HalfCheetah-v3                          Hopper-v3
1.00                                1.0                                  1.0
0.75                                0.8                                  0.8
0.50                                0.6                                  0.6
0.25                                0.4                                  0.4
0.00                                0.2                                  0.2
       0    500       1000     1500 0.00        500        1000     1500 0.00        500       1000      1500
           Walker2d-v3                        Humanoid-v3
1.0                                 1.0
0.8                                 0.8
0.6                                 0.6
0.4                                 0.4
0.2                                 0.2
0.00        500      1000      1500 0.00        500        1000     1500

Figure 14: Training performance of different agents on Mujoco Tasks when using 10 expert trajectory consist-
ing of only states. Abscissa shows the normalized discounted cumulative reward. Ordinate shows the number
of training steps (×103 ). Training results are averaged over five seeds per agent. The shaded area constitutes
the 95% confidence interval. Expert cumulative rewards → Hopper:3299.81, Walker2d:5841.73, Ant:6399.04,
HalfCheetah:12328.78, Humanoid:6233.45


               Ant-v3                        HalfCheetah-v3                          Hopper-v3
1.00                                1.0                                  1.0
0.75                                0.8                                  0.8
0.50                                0.6                                  0.6
0.25                                0.4                                  0.4
0.00                                0.2                                  0.2
       0    500       1000     1500 0.00        500        1000     1500 0.00        500       1000      1500
           Walker2d-v3                        Humanoid-v3
1.0                                 1.0
0.8                                 0.8
0.6                                 0.6
0.4                                 0.4
0.2                                 0.2
0.00        500      1000      1500 0.00        500        1000     1500

Figure 15: Training performance of different agents on Mujoco Tasks when using 25 expert trajectory consist-
ing of only states. Abscissa shows the normalized discounted cumulative reward. Ordinate shows the number
of training steps (×103 ). Training results are averaged over five seeds per agent. The shaded area constitutes
the 95% confidence interval. Expert cumulative rewards → Hopper:3299.81, Walker2d:5841.73, Ant:6399.04,
HalfCheetah:12328.78, Humanoid:6233.45


                                                      24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


C.6        I MITATION L EARNING FROM S TATES AND ACTIONS – F ULL T RAINING C URVES

The learning curves for the experiments where states and actions are observed can be found in
Figure 16, 17, 18 and 19 for 1, 5, 10 and 25 expert demonstrations, respectively.

                 Ant-v3                     HalfCheetah-v3                          Hopper-v3
1.00                                1.0                                 1.0
0.75                                0.8                                 0.8
0.50                                0.6                                 0.6
0.25                                0.4                                 0.4
0.00                                0.2                                 0.2
       0       500    1000     1500 0.00        500        1000    1500 0.00        500       1000      1500
             Walker2d-v3                      Humanoid-v3
1.0                                 1.0
0.8                                 0.8
0.6                                 0.6
0.4                                 0.4
0.2                                 0.2
0.00          500    1000      1500 0.00        500        1000    1500

Figure 16: Training performance of different agents on Mujoco Tasks when using 1 expert trajectory. Abscissa
shows the normalized discounted cumulative reward. Ordinate shows the number of training steps (×103 ).
Training results are averaged over five seeds per agent. The shaded area constitutes the 95% confidence inter-
val. Expert cumulative rewards → Hopper:3299.81, Walker2d:5841.73, Ant:6399.04, HalfCheetah:12328.78,
Humanoid:6233.45


                 Ant-v3                     HalfCheetah-v3                          Hopper-v3
1.00                                1.0                                 1.0
0.75                                0.8                                 0.8
0.50                                0.6                                 0.6
0.25                                0.4                                 0.4
0.00                                0.2                                 0.2
       0       500    1000     1500 0.00        500        1000    1500 0.00        500       1000      1500
             Walker2d-v3                      Humanoid-v3
1.0                                 1.0
0.8                                 0.8
0.6                                 0.6
0.4                                 0.4
0.2                                 0.2
0.00          500    1000      1500 0.00        500        1000    1500

Figure 17: Training performance of different agents on Mujoco Tasks when using 5 expert trajectories. Abscissa
shows the normalized discounted cumulative reward. Ordinate shows the number of training steps (×103 ).
Training results are averaged over ten seeds per agent. The shaded area constitutes the 95% confidence inter-
val. Expert cumulative rewards → Hopper:3299.81, Walker2d:5841.73, Ant:6399.04, HalfCheetah:12328.78,
Humanoid:6233.45


                                                      25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


              Ant-v3                       HalfCheetah-v3                        Hopper-v3
1.00                               1.0                                1.0
0.75                               0.8                                0.8
0.50                               0.6                                0.6
0.25                               0.4                                0.4
0.00                               0.2                                0.2
       0    500      1000     1500 0.00       500        1000    1500 0.00       500      1000      1500
           Walker2d-v3                      Humanoid-v3
1.0                                1.0
0.8                                0.8
0.6                                0.6
0.4                                0.4
0.2                                0.2
0.00        500     1000      1500 0.00       500        1000    1500

Figure 18: Training performance of different agents on Mujoco Tasks when using 10 expert trajectories. Ab-
scissa shows the normalized discounted cumulative reward. Ordinate shows the number of training steps
(×103 ). Training results are averaged over five seeds per agent. The shaded area constitutes the 95% con-
fidence interval. Expert cumulative rewards → Hopper:3299.81, Walker2d:5841.73, Ant:6399.04, HalfChee-
tah:12328.78, Humanoid:6233.45


              Ant-v3                       HalfCheetah-v3                        Hopper-v3
1.00                               1.0                                1.0
0.75                               0.8                                0.8
0.50                               0.6                                0.6
0.25                               0.4                                0.4
0.00                               0.2                                0.2
       0    500      1000     1500 0.00       500        1000    1500 0.00       500      1000      1500
           Walker2d-v3                      Humanoid-v3
1.0                                1.0
0.8                                0.8
0.6                                0.6
0.4                                0.4
0.2                                0.2
0.00        500     1000      1500 0.00       500        1000    1500

Figure 19: Training performance of different agents on Mujoco Tasks when using 25 expert trajectories. Ab-
scissa shows the normalized discounted cumulative reward. Ordinate shows the number of training steps
(×103 ). Training results are averaged over five seeds per agent. The shaded area constitutes the 95% con-
fidence interval. Expert cumulative rewards → Hopper:3299.81, Walker2d:5841.73, Ant:6399.04, HalfChee-
tah:12328.78, Humanoid:6233.45


                                                    26
