Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


PV3D: A 3D G ENERATIVE M ODEL FOR P ORTRAIT
V IDEO G ENERATION
 Eric Zhongcong Xu1∗ , Jianfeng Zhang2∗, Jun Hao Liew2 , Wenqing Zhang2 ,
 Song Bai2 , Jiashi Feng2 , Mike Zheng Shou1†
 1
   Show Lab, National University of Singapore 2 ByteDance
 {zhongcongxu,zhangjianfeng}@u.nus.edu
 {junhao.liew,wenqingzhang,jshfeng}@bytedance.com
 {songbai.site, mike.zheng.shou}@gmail.com

                                                 A BSTRACT

             Recent advances in generative adversarial networks (GANs) have demonstrated
             the capabilities of generating stunning photo-realistic portrait images. While some
             prior works have applied such image GANs to unconditional 2D portrait video
             generation and static 3D portrait synthesis, there are few works successfully ex-
             tending GANs for generating 3D-aware portrait videos. In this work, we propose
             PV3D, the first generative framework that can synthesize multi-view consistent
             portrait videos. Specifically, our method extends the recent static 3D-aware im-
             age GAN to the video domain by generalizing the 3D implicit neural represen-
             tation to model the spatio-temporal space. To introduce motion dynamics into
             the generation process, we develop a motion generator by stacking multiple mo-
             tion layers to synthesize motion features via modulated convolution. To alleviate
             motion ambiguities caused by camera/human motions, we propose a simple yet
             effective camera condition strategy for PV3D, enabling both temporal and multi-
             view consistent video generation. Moreover, PV3D introduces two discriminators
             for regularizing the spatial and temporal domains to ensure the plausibility of the
             generated portrait videos. These elaborated designs enable PV3D to generate 3D-
             aware motion-plausible portrait videos with high-quality appearance and geome-
             try, significantly outperforming prior works. As a result, PV3D is able to support
             downstream applications such as static portrait animation and view-consistent mo-
             tion editing. Code and models are available at https://showlab.github.io/pv3d.


1       I NTRODUCTION

Recent progress in generative adversarial networks (GANs) has led human portrait generation to
unprecedented success (Karras et al., 2020; 2021; Skorokhodov et al., 2022) and has spawned a
lot of industrial applications (Tov et al., 2021; Richardson et al., 2021). Generating portrait videos
has emerged as the next challenge for deep generative models with wider applications like video
manipulation (Abdal et al., 2022) and animation (Siarohin et al., 2019). A long line of work has been
proposed to either learn a direct mapping from latent code to portrait video (Vondrick et al., 2016;
Saito et al., 2017) or decompose portrait video generation into two stages, i.e., content synthesis and
motion generation (Tian et al., 2021; Tulyakov et al., 2018; Skorokhodov et al., 2022).
Despite offering plausible results, such methods only produce 2D videos without considering the un-
derlying 3D geometry, which is the most desirable attribute with broad applications such as portrait
reenactment (Doukas et al., 2021), talking face animation (Siarohin et al., 2019), and VR/AR (Cao
et al., 2022). Current methods typically create 3D portrait videos through classical graphics tech-
niques (Wang et al., 2021b; Ma et al., 2021; Grassal et al., 2022), which require multi-camera sys-
tems, well-controlled studios, and heavy artist works. In this work, we aim to alleviate the effort of
creating high-quality 3D-aware portrait videos by learning from 2D monocular videos only, without
the need of any 3D or multi-view annotations.
    ∗
        Equal contribution, work done during an internship at ByteDance
    †
        Corresponding author


                                                        1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 1: Our PV3D can generate photo-realistic portrait videos with diverse motions and dynamic
3D geometry. We render surfaces extracted by marching cubes. The video frames and shape (normal
map) can be rendered from arbitrary viewpoints. Please see our project page for video results.


Recent 3D-aware portrait generative methods have witnessed rapid advances (Schwarz et al., 2020;
Gu et al., 2022; Chan et al., 2021; Niemeyer & Geiger, 2021; Or-El et al., 2022; Chan et al., 2022).
Through integrating implicit neural representations (INRs) (Sitzmann et al., 2020; Mildenhall et al.,
2020) into GANs (Karras et al., 2019; 2020), they can produce photo-realistic and multi-view con-
sistent results. However, such methods are limited to static portrait generation and can hardly be
extended to portrait video generation due to several challenges: 1) it remains unclear how to ef-
fectively model 3D dynamic human portrait in a generative framework; 2) learning dynamic 3D
geometry without 3D supervision is highly under-constrained; 3) entanglement between camera
movements and human motions/expressions introduces ambiguities to the training process. To this
end, we propose a 3D Portrait Video generation model (PV3D), the first method that can gener-
ate high-quality 3D portrait videos with diverse motions while learning purely from monocular 2D
videos. PV3D enables 3D portrait video modeling by extending 3D tri-plane representation (Chan
et al., 2022) to the spatio-temporal domain. In this paper, we comprehensively analyze various de-
sign choices and arrive at a set of novel designs, including decomposing latent codes into appearance
and motion components, temporal tri-plane based motion generator, proper camera pose sequence
conditioning, and camera-conditioned video discriminators, which can significantly improve the
video fidelity and geometry quality for 3D portrait video generation.
As shown in Figure 1, despite being trained from only monocular 2D videos, PV3D can generate
a large variety of photo-realistic portrait videos under arbitrary viewpoints with diverse motions
and high-quality 3D geometry. Comprehensive experiments on various datasets including Vox-
Celeb (Nagrani et al., 2017), CelebV-HQ (Zhu et al., 2022) and TalkingHead-1KH (Wang et al.,
2021a) well demonstrate the superiority of PV3D over previous state-of-the-art methods, both qual-
itatively and quantitatively. Notably, it achieves 29.1 FVD on VoxCeleb, improving upon a concur-
rent work 3DVidGen (Bahmani et al., 2022) by 55.6%. PV3D can also generate high-quality 3D
geometry, achieving the best multi-view identity similarity and warping error across all datasets.
Our contributions are three-fold. 1) To our best knowledge, PV3D is the first method that is capable
to generate a large variety of 3D-aware portrait videos with high-quality appearance, motions, and
geometry. 2) We propose a novel temporal tri-plane based video generation framework that can
synthesize 3D-aware portrait videos by learning from 2D videos only. 3) We demonstrate state-of-
the-art 3D-aware portrait video generation on three datasets. Moreover, our PV3D supports several
downstream applications, i.e., static image animation, monocular video reconstruction, and multi-
view consistent motion editing.


2   R ELATED W ORK

2D video generation. Early video generation works (Vondrick et al., 2016; Saito et al., 2017) pro-
pose to learn a video generator to transform random vectors directly to video clips. While recent
video generation works adopt a similar paradigm to design the video generator, i.e., disentangle the
video content and motion (trajectory), then control them by different random noises. For the video


                                                 2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


content, most of the works build their frameworks on top of generative adversarial networks (GAN)
designed for image domain, such as StyleGAN (Karras et al., 2019) and INR-GAN (Skorokhodov
et al., 2021). Based on image GANs, video GAN works further extend the generation process to
temporal domain using various motion generation approaches. MoCoGAN (Tulyakov et al., 2018)
and its following work MoCoGAN-HD (Tian et al., 2021) generate the motion code sequence au-
toregressively, which is implemented as random process. StyleGAN-V (Skorokhodov et al., 2022)
also generates a motion code sequence for each frame, while the motion codes are sampled sepa-
rately and thus its generator can synthesize video frames independently. In contrast, DiGAN (Yu
et al., 2022) only sample one motion code for the entire video and the motion for each frame is
generated by the INR network using time instant. This compact video code design is in line with
the property of temporal consistency, e.g., a talking person only move the lips or twinkles, while the
face shape does not change rapidly (Tewari et al., 2019).
3D-aware generation. Image GANs (Karras et al., 2020; 2021) have demonstrated impressive
capability in synthesizing high-resolution photo-realistic images. By incorporating implicit neu-
ral representations (Mildenhall et al., 2020; Sitzmann et al., 2020) or differentiable neural render-
ing (Kato et al., 2018) into GANs, recent works (Schwarz et al., 2020; Niemeyer & Geiger, 2021;
Chan et al., 2021; Shi et al., 2021) can produce multi-view consistent images. However, most of
them are limited at image quality and resolution due to the heavy computation cost of traditional 3D
representations. Follow-up works are proposed to address this issue by either developing an efficient
3D representation (Chan et al., 2022; Deng et al., 2022; Schwarz et al., 2022; Zhao et al., 2022) or
dividing image generation into two stages (Gu et al., 2022; Or-El et al., 2022; Zhang et al., 2022b),
i.e., generating low-resolution images by volume rendering (Max, 1995) and then refine them using
super-resolution approaches. However, these methods are limited to static object generation. Re-
cently, CoRF (Zhuang et al., 2022) proposes to condition the static 3D GAN on estimated motion
features. In addition, a concurrent work 3DVidGen (Bahmani et al., 2022) has been proposed to
extend unconditional 3D-aware generation into video domain. Although 3DVidGen can generate
plausible results with changing viewpoints, its video fidelity and multi-view consistency are unsat-
isfactory. Moreover, 3DVidGen does not present or evaluate 3D geometry quality, making its 3D
geometry generation ability unclear, which hinders its applicability in the scenarios requiring good
3D geometry (Yuan et al., 2022). In contrast, our PV3D aims to synthesize realistic videos with
high-quality detailed geometry.

3     PV3D: 3D P ORTRAIT V IDEO G ENERATION
3.1   OVERVIEW

Problem formulation. Given a monocular 2D portrait video collection D = {vn }N      n=1 consisting
of N video sequences, the goal of 3D-aware portrait video generation is to learn a generator G that
synthesizes videos given joint conditions of random noise z, camera viewpoint c and timestep t
without relying on 3D geometry or multi-view supervision.
            ti tj                         Tri-plane t           i                 ∆t
                                                                                                real/fake


                         Motion
                                                                                        Video


                                   wm
                                                                                        Disc


                         Layer

             zm
                                       T-Tri-plane


                                                                     Resolution
                                       Synthesis


                                                     ci
                                                                       Super


                                                                                       cond
                                                      Tri-plane tj
             za
                                                                                                real/fake
                                                                                        Image
                                                                                         Disc


                        Mapping
                        Network    wa
                              Motion Generator       cj
            ci cj                                                                      cond

Figure 2: PV3D creates portrait video frames from appearance code za , motion code zm , timesteps
{ti , tj }, and camera poses {ci , cj }. Motion layers and mapping network encode inputs into inter-
mediate motion code wm and style code wa , respectively. To incorporate temporal dynamics, the
temporal tri-plane synthesis network extends 3D tri-plane (Chan et al., 2022) to spatio-temporal do-
main. Two camera-conditioned discriminators regularize the image quality and motion plausibility.

Framework. The overview of our proposed framework is shown in Figure 2. PV3D formulates
3D-aware portrait video generation task as v = R(G(z|c, t), c) where the generator G(·) first gen-


                                                               3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


erates 3D-aware spatio-temporal representation, followed by volume rendering and super-resolution
(denoted as R(·)) to obtain the final video sequence. In this work, our generator G builds upon tri-
plane representation from EG3D (Chan et al., 2022) and extends it to spatio-temporal representation
for video synthesis, which we denote as temporal tri-plane. Instead of jointly modeling appearance
and motion dynamics within a single latent code z, we factorize the 3D video generation into ap-
pearance and motion generation components. Specifically, our PV3D takes two independent latent
codes, i.e., appearance code za ∼ N (0, I) and motion code zm ∼ N (0, I) as inputs. We condition
the generator on za to synthesize varying video appearance, e.g., genders, skin colors, hair styles,
glasses, etc., and use zm to model motion dynamics, e.g., a person opening his/her mouth.
During training, we randomly sample two timesteps {ti , tj } and their corresponding camera poses
{ci , cj } for one video. Following EG3D, we project the appearance code za and camera pose c into
intermediate appearance code wa for content synthesis. As for the motion component, we develop
motion layer to encode motion code zm and timesteps {ti , tj } into intermediate motion code wm .
Our temporal tri-plane synthesis network generates tri-plane features based on wa and wm . With
the generated tri-plane at {ti , tj }, volume rendering (Max, 1995) is applied to synthesize frames
with camera pose ci and cj , respectively. The rendered frames are then upsampled and refined by a
super-resolution module. To ensure the fidelity and plausibility of the generated frame content and
motion, we develop two discriminators Dimg and Dvid to supervise the training of G. Both Dimg and
Dvid are camera-conditioned, which can leverage 3D priors.

3.2   3D- AWARE V IDEO G ENERATOR

Challenges. Existing 3D-aware image GANs can only model static scenes and it remains unclear
how to model motion dynamics, such as topological changes of a scene (Park et al., 2022). A
straightforward approach is to directly combine the motion condition with latent code, camera pose,
and timestep, and feed them to the encoder to generate 3D representations for video rendering.
However, such a naive design cannot generate temporally consistent and motion-plausible portrait
videos because the generation of video content and motion is highly entangled. Besides, learning
3D-aware portrait video appearance and geometry from monocular 2D videos only is highly under-
constrained, making the model training difficult and generation quality poor. Another challenge is
that motions caused by camera pose changes (e.g., camera movements) and head pose changes (e.g.,
look up, turn left) are highly entangled. This introduces ambiguities to the training process, largely
increasing model’s learning difficulties.
Prior works typically incorporate motion features by either manipulating the latent code for pre-
trained image generator (Tian et al., 2021) or simply conditioning 3D representation on latent code
and timestep (Bahmani et al., 2022). Nevertheless, such designs cannot guarantee temporal consis-
tency and motion diversity. To address these challenges, we decouple the latent code into appearance
and motion components and propose a motion generator to model temporal dynamics. Such design
not only preserves the high-fidelity and multi-view consistency of each frame but also enables the
synthesis of videos with temporal coherence and motion diversity. Secondly, we propose a camera
conditioning strategy to alleviate the motion ambiguity issue and thus facilitates convergence.
Synthesis of motion dynamics. To generate motion at each timestep in a video, we condition the
generator on latent codes za and zm , timesteps {ti , tj } and camera poses {ci , cj }. Without loss of
generality, we only describe the generation process for timestep ti and camera pose ci . As shown in
Figure 3, we introduce K motion layers into the synthesis layers of motion generator. Each motion
                                                                                      i,k
layer encodes motion code zm and timestep ti into intermediate motion code wm             . In particular,
the motion code is first multiplied with timestep to encode temporal information, followed by a
lightweight mapping head Hm with leaky ReLU activation. A multi-layer perceptron (MLP) then
                     i,k
encodes them into wm     . In other words, the k-th motion layer computes
                                     i,k          k
                                    wm   = MLPk (Hm (zm ∗ ti )),                                      (1)
where k ∈ {0, 1, ..., K}. i ∈ {0, 1, ..., N } denotes the frame index while N represents the total
                                                                    i,k
number of frames in one video. These intermediate motion codes wm       are then passed to the tem-
poral tri-plane synthesis network to modulate the static appearance features via adaptive instance
normalization (AdaIN) (Karras et al., 2019) to incorporate temporal dynamics.
In practice, we employ an equivalent operator, i.e., modulated convolution (Karras et al., 2020),
to compute motion features. We then fuse it with the appearance features controlled by wai . The


                                                    4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


fused features are passed to the next synthesis layer iteratively to generate tri-planes. This process
is formulated as
                fk = Sk1 (f ∗ + ModConv(f ∗ , wm
                                               i,k
                                                   ), wai ), where f ∗ = Sk0 (fk−1 , wai ).                                 (2)
Here, Sk0 and Sk1 denote the first and second synthesis block (ModConv) in k-th synthesis layer,
while fk denotes the feature map synthesized by the k-th layer.
Motion diversity and temporal consistency. Recent works (Tov et al., 2021; Shen et al., 2020;
Richardson et al., 2021) investigate the semantic meaning of intermediate latent code space (W + )
in pre-trained StyleGAN model, and discover that one can perform diverse manipulation of im-
age content by using different style codes at different style-modulation layers. We made similar
observation for PV3D (Appendix A.2). Specifically, t                                     Motion Layer
                                                             i               k
                                                                            Hm
mixing latent codes in shallow layers only brings coarse


                                                                                                    LReLU


                                                                                                            MLP
level changes on facial attributes, such as expressions, zm


                                                                                               FC
                                                                                                 i,k
hair, etc, which reduces the diversity. On the other                                          wm
hand, mixing style code in deeper layers leads to dras-
tic changes in image content. As a result, identities will ci                    ModConv


                                                                       Mapping
                                                                       Network
no longer be preserved, causing severe temporal incon-


                                                                                                                  ModConv
                                                                                     ModConv
                                                                                 …


                                                                                                                                …
sistency.                                                   za
To preserve the identity in generated videos, we care-                 wai                                                  k
fully select K synthesis layers, such that k ≤ K, for
incorporating motion features. Choosing a suitable K           Figure 3: Architecture of the k-th syn-
increases temporal consistency and improves our motion         thesis layer in motion generator. Motion
generator’s capacity for modeling diverse motions. Be-         layer encodes zm and ti into intermedi-
                                                                                   i,k
sides, this synthesis layer selection also alleviates the      ate motion code wm      . Motion features
overfitting of RGB video frames, which improves the            are computed by modulating appearance
quality of 3D geometry.                                        features which are conditioned on wai .
Alleviating motion ambiguities by camera sequence condition. Learning 3D-aware portrait video
generation from 2D videos faces another challenge, i.e., the entangled face motions and camera
movements bring motion ambiguities. The concurrent work 3DVidGen (Bahmani et al., 2022) sim-
ply shares one camera pose for the entire video. However, this approach ignores motion ambiguity
that harms video fidelity and geometry quality. Differently, we condition the generator on pre-
estimated camera pose sequences (Appendix A.3). It has two advantages. 1) Suppose that we are
only interested in the faces, a camera rotating around a static face is equivalent to rotating the face in
front of a static camera. Generating head rotation directly is challenging due to the large topological
changes of the scene. By conditioning our generator on ci at each time instant ti , we can model
the head rotation by rotating camera for observation instead of deforming the 3D scene, making
our model easy to optimize. 2) Given the camera pose sequence, our generator can encode view-
dependent features for each frame to leverage 3D priors. Such a simple design effectively improves
the multi-view consistency and facilitates the learning of dynamics in 3D geometry as verified in
our experiments.

3.3   C ONDITIONAL D ISCRIMINATORS

Due to the lack of regularization in video generation procedure, the generated videos may present
implausible contents or unreasonable motions. To ensure the plausibility of portrait video genera-
tion, we introduce a discriminator module to guide the generation process. In particular, the module
consists of an image discriminator Dimg for evaluating video appearance quality and a video dis-
criminator Dvid for ensuring video motion plausibility.
Our image discriminator Dimg follows EG3D’s discriminator architecture and uses camera poses
as conditions to guide the generator to learn correct 3D priors and thus it can produce multi-view
consistent portraits. We apply Dimg on each generated frame Ii (at timestep ti ) independently, which
can be formulated as pimg = Dimg (Ii , ci ), where pimg denotes the real/fake probability.
Our PV3D generates two images {Ii , Ij } jointly at two random timesteps {ti , tj } for each video
during training, we thus design a camera-conditioned dual-frame video discriminator Dvid to facili-
tate motion-plausible portrait video generation. Specifically, we first concatenate the generated two
frames {Ii , Ij } channel-wisely to obtain an image pair. To help encode temporal information, we


                                                    5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


further concatenate the timestep difference ∆t = tj − ti with the image pair. Our video discrim-
inator learns to differentiate the real and generated image pairs based on motion features extracted
from this hybrid input. To alleviate motion ambiguity and model view-dependent effects, we further
condition Dvid on the corresponding camera poses {ci , cj }. Our video discriminator is formulated as
pvid = Dvid ([Ii , Ij , ∆t], [ci , cj ]), where pvid indicates the probability of each image pair being sam-
pled from real data distribution. Although Dvid only takes two frames as inputs, it can effectively
learn ordinal information (Appendix A.5) and help produce motion-plausible results as verified in
our experiments (Section 4.3). Moreover, such a simple design largely improves training efficiency
and stability compared with previous methods that take long sequences as conditions (Tulyakov
et al., 2018; Tian et al., 2021).

3.4   T RAINING AND I NFERENCE

Training. To synthesize an image I ∈ RH×W ×3 based on tri-plane T , we shoot rays r(s) = o + sd
out from the camera origin o along direction d at each pixel (Mildenhall et al., 2020). In prac-
tice, we sample query points xr along each ray and get the features for each point by interpolat-
ing them in T . The features are passed to the decoder to predict color c and density σ such that
[σ(r(s), c(r(s))] = Decoder(Interp(xr , T )), where Decoder is an MLP with softplus activation,
Interp denotes interpolation. The pixel value is calculated by volume rendering as:
                   Z sf                                              Z s
            I(r) =      p(s)σ(r(s))c(r(s))ds, where p(t) = exp −          σ(r(s))ds .         (3)
                      sn                                                      sn


We compute the non-saturating GAN loss (Goodfellow et al., 2020) Limg and Lvid and R1 regular-
ization loss (Mescheder et al., 2018) LR1 . Following EG3D, we use dual image discriminator which
takes both the low-resolution raw image and high-resolution image as inputs. We also compute
density regularization Lσ on the generated video frames. The overall loss is formulated as:
                           LGadv = LGimg + LGvid + Lσ , LD      D      D
                                                         adv = Limg + Lvid + LR1 .                      (4)

Inference. Although trained on sparse frames only, our generator can synthesize contiguous frames
during inference. For each video, we generate frames at timestep ti , where i ∈ {0, 1, ..., N }, N
denotes the maximum number of frames. The mapping network in our generator takes camera
pose ci for each frame to generate intermediate appearance code wai . However, during training,
each frame has its camera pose. This brings discrepancy in intermediate appearance codes within
the video, which harms the temporal consistency. We propose to share the same ci for the mapping
network in inference, which largely improves temporal consistency as demonstrated in experiments.

4     E XPERIMENTS
We study the following questions in our experiments. 1) Can PV3D generate high-quality portrait
videos with dynamic 3D geometry and multi-view consistency? 2) How does each component in
our PV3D model take effect? 3) What are the performance of PV3D in downstream applications?
To answer these, we conduct extensive experiments on several human portrait video datasets.

4.1   DATASETS

We experiment on three face video datasets, i.e., VoxCeleb (Nagrani et al., 2017; Chung et al.,
2018), CelebV-HQ (Zhu et al., 2022), and TalkingHead-1KH (Wang et al., 2021a). These datasets
contain talking face clips of different identities extracted from online videos. We balance the video
clips for each identity and preprocess the videos using a standard pipeline (Appendix A.3).

4.2   C OMPARISONS

Baselines. We compare PV3D against four state-of-the-art methods for 3D-aware video generation:
(1) the concurrent work 3DVidGen (Bahmani et al., 2022); (2) StyleNeRF+MCG-HD: combining
the SOTA 3D image GAN model StyleNeRF (Gu et al., 2022) with the SOTA multi-stage video gen-
eration work MoCoGAN-HD (Tian et al., 2021); (3) EG3D+MCG-HD: combining EG3D (Chan


                                                     6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


StyleNeRF + MCG-HD    EG3D + MCG-HD           3DVidGen        3DVidGen (EG3D)        PV3D (Ours)

 Figure 4: Qualitative comparisons between PV3D and baselines, see our project page for videos.

et al., 2022) with MoCoGAN-HD; (4) 3DVidGen (EG3D): replacing the 3D image GAN backbone
in 3DVidGen with EG3D.
Evaluation metrics. We evaluate PV3D and baseline models by Frechet Video Distance
(FVD) (Unterthiner et al., 2018), Multi-view Identity Consistency (ID) (Shi et al., 2021), Chamfer
Distance (CD), and Multi-view Image Warping Errors (WE) (Zhang et al., 2022a;b). The evaluation
metrics for multi-view consistency are originally proposed for 3D image generation. We extend
these metrics to multiple frames which are suitable for 3D video generation tasks. Please refer to
Appendix A.4 for more details on our evaluation metrics.
Quantitative evaluations. Table 1 summarizes the quantitative comparisons between PV3D and
baseline models. First, we observe that PV3D outperforms all of the baseline models on all datasets
w.r.t. FVD, ID, and WE, which shows our PV3D can generate videos with diverse content and
plausible motions while maintaining high multi-view consistency within videos. It is worth not-
ing that our PV3D has a higher CD than StyleNeRF+MCG-HD. This is because CD computes the
distance between two point clouds rendered from frontal and side views. As illustrated in Fig-
ure 4, StyleNeRF+MCG-HD fails to synthesize detailed 3D geometry, thus leading to lower CD
than PV3D. A similar observation is made in TalkingHead-1KH where MCG-HD+EG3D baseline
fails to generate videos with diverse motion, which also leads to smaller CD. On the other hand,
PV3D is able to generate high-quality dynamic 3D geometry with better multi-view consistency.
Qualitative evaluations. Figure 4 shows the qualitative comparisons. We first observe that both
StyleNeRF+MCG-HD and EG3D+MCG-HD produce poor results because their multi-stage frame-
work design is not end-to-end trainable, resulting in implausible motions. Compared with them,
3DVidGen and its EG3D counterpart achieve relatively better video fidelity. However, the geometry
quality and motion diversity of 3DVidGen are still not comparable with PV3D due to their straight-
forward motion condition design. Differently, our PV3D produces temporally consistent and motion
plausible videos with high-quality geometry.
       Table 1: Quantitative comparisons, with best results bold and second best underlined.
                              VoxCeleb        CelebV-HQ      TalkingHead-1KH
                         FVD↓ ID↑ CD↓ WE↓ FVD↓ ID↑ CD↓ WE↓ FVD↓ ID↑ CD↓ WE↓
      StyleNeRF+MCG-HD 348.7 0.70 1.08 36.06     134.4 0.80 1.13 38.73   292.7 0.75 5.34 49.29
      EG3D+MCG-HD      222.1 0.80 1.57 10.57     298.4 0.77 3.34 10.74   262.4 0.78 1.39 11.54
      3DVidGen         65.5 0.75 3.40 44.55       63.6 0.77 3.80 37.30    83.0 0.76 4.35 46.47
      3DVidGen (EG3D)   56.3 0.71 3.65 24.55      66.2 0.70 3.83 26.34    89.8 0.65 4.56 35.48
      PV3D (Ours)         29.1 0.81 1.34 9.76     39.3 0.81 1.21 8.18     66.6 0.80 2.33 10.73


4.3     A BLATION S TUDIES

In this section, we conduct ablation studies of PV3D on VoxCeleb dataset as it contains more diverse
motions and appearances as well as more balanced identity distributions.
Motion layer position. PV3D computes and fuses motion features in selected synthesis layers, i.e.,
the first K layers in our motion generator with a default setting of K = 4 (denoted as middle). To
study the effect of motion layer position, we insert motion layers until early (K = 2) and late (K


                                                 7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023



Table 2: Ablations of PV3D on VoxCeleb. We vary the motion layers, motion generator architecture,
camera conditions, and discriminator architectures to study their effects.

 Pos. FVD↓ CD↓ WE↓         Mot. FVD↓ CD↓ WE↓          Cam. FVD↓ CD↓ WE↓      Vid. Dis. FVD↓ CD↓ WE↓
  early 40.2 2.32 10.60 MLP 41.1 1.33 9.86           All 32.1 2.49 11.32 w/o Cam 34.9 4.38 10.84
 middle 29.1 1.34 9.76     Naive 36.9 1.05 10.21 Non 55.3 3.28 23.71 w/o ∆t 38.7 1.54 10.04
   late 33.3 6.24 11.56 zm →za 37.7 1.07 9.86 Map 38.0 1.47 10.19 w/ both 29.1 1.34 9.76
 learned 30.5 1.81 10.31   Ours 29.1 1.34 9.76 MapT 29.1 1.34 9.76 (d) The effect of different
(a) The effect of motion (b) The effect of motion (c) The effect of camera conditions in video dis-
layer positions.         generator architectures. condition in generator.  criminator.

= 7) stages. Moreover, we design a simple learnable parameter for each motion layer and optimize
this weight for motion feature fusion (denoted as learned). The results are summarized in Table 2a.
We observe that when the motion layers are too shallow, the model’s capacity for modeling dynamics
is limited and both video quality and multi-view consistency degrade. However, if we insert motion
features into all the synthesis layers (late), FVD is still higher and 3D geometry is largely affected
because (1) appearance feature manipulation space is large but hard to optimize, which harms motion
plausibility; (2) our training process is highly under-constrained. In this case, the model can easily
overfit the RGB frames, which hinders the learning of geometry. Similarly, although the video
quality improves when using learnable fusion weights, the multi-view consistency is not as good as
reflected by CD and WE metrics because the model still tends to produce better RGB content at the
cost of worse geometry due to the lack of 3D supervision.
Motion generator. Table 2b summarizes the ablations on our motion generator architectures. Our
video generator takes two random codes, i.e., za and zm . We first study the effect of introducing an
independent motion code by replacing motion code zm with za . It can be observed that although
CD reduces by 0.3, all other metrics deteriorate especially FVD, suggesting that motion plausibility
is affected when motion code is removed. A similar observation is made in naive implementation.
Replacing modulated convolution with simple MLP significantly increases FVD, implying MLP is
less effective than modulated convolution in manipulating appearance features.
Camera conditions. We investigate how different camera conditioning strategies could affect gen-
eration performance. In each training iteration, we sample two video frames along with their camera
poses. Thus, we have three options for camera conditioning (sharing camera pose or not) in our gen-
erator: (1) All: condition the whole generator (both mapping network and rendering) on the shared
camera pose; (2) Non: condition the whole generator on the camera pose of each frame; (3) Map:
only share camera pose for mapping network, and use different camera pose to render frames.
As shown in Table 2c, sharing one camera has poor multi-view consistency, with 2.49 CD and 11.32
WE. On the other hand, using non-shared cameras leads to even worse performance. This is because
our mapping network takes a camera pose when computing appearance code. Therefore, changing
the camera across video frames would bring rapid changes to the appearance code, leading to tem-
poral inconsistency. An alternative is to only share camera poses in the mapping network. However,
this strategy works poorly because the camera pose discrepancy in generation process hinders the
convergence. On the contrary, sharing the same camera pose in the mapping network only during
inference stage (MapT) facilitates the training and preserves temporal consistency. Hence, we use
MapT as our default setting.
Discriminator conditions. Table 2d shows the effect of camera pose and time difference condi-
tions in the video discriminator. We can observe that camera conditions in video discriminator can
largely improve 3D geometry, while time difference helps improve temporal coherence by encoding
auxiliary temporal information.

4.4   A PPLICATIONS

Static portrait animation. Our generator can independently generate video frame at a certain
timestep instead of generating from the first frame auto-regressively. This flexible architecture en-
ables static portrait animation. Given the input image and the estimated camera pose, we fix our gen-
erator and optimize latent code at timestep t = 0. The inversion is performed in W + space (Richard-
son et al., 2021; Abdal et al., 2019). As shown in Figure 5, the GAN inversion based on our generator
also produces high-quality 3D shape for the input frame. We then keep the latent code fixed and ran-


                                                  8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


domly sample a motion code to drive the portrait with natural motion. With the 3D priors learned
by our PV3D, the synthesized videos can also be rendered under arbitrary viewpoints.
                     input   inversion                      animation       multi-view


                                                                        t
                                                                            t=0    t = 10


                                                                        t
                                                                            t=0    t = 10



Figure 5: Given static portraits, we fix the video generator and optimize the intermediate appearance
code in W + space to perform inversion. By sampling a random motion code, we can animate the
static portraits with natural motion and synthesize portrait videos with multi-view consistency.
Monocular video reconstruction and motion editing. Given a video and its pre-estimated camera
pose sequence, we can directly reconstruct the video based on our pretrained generator. For the
video content, we also optimize the intermediate appearance code in W + space. As for the motion
component, we experimentally find that z+  m space is more effective. Specifically, we inverse zm for
each video frame individually. Figure 6 illustrates the results for reconstruction, our PV3D provides
a simple solution for 3D reconstruction on monocular videos. Thanks to the disentangled design of
motion and appearance components in PV3D, we can fix appearance codes and sample new motion
codes to manipulate the motion of input videos in the 3D domain.
      input


                                              w/o 3D                                             w/o 3D
                                             geometry                                           geometry
      inversion
      Rand z0m
      Rand z1m


                                         t   t=0   t = 10                                   t   t=0   t = 10


Figure 6: PV3D provides a quick solution for 3D reconstruction on monocular videos. Thanks to the
disentanglement of appearance and motion in PV3D, the motion of input videos can be manipulated
by changing motion codes. The results can still maintain multi-view consistency.

5   C ONCLUSION
This work introduces the first 3D-aware generative model, PV3D, for synthesizing multi-view con-
sistent portrait videos with high-quality 3D geometry. By employing independent latent codes for
appearance and motion, PV3D can leverage temporal tri-plane synthesis to address the challenges in
3D-aware portrait video generation. Moreover, we condition PV3D on camera pose sequence to al-
leviate the challenging motion ambiguities. We demonstrate that PV3D can generate both temporal
and multi-view consistent portrait videos with diverse motions and dynamic 3D geometry. Besides,
PV3D supports downstream applications such as static portrait animation, 3D video reconstruction,
and multi-view consistent motion editing. We believe our method will facilitate the desired practical
applications in VR/AR and visual effects.

6   ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This project is supported by the National Research Foundation, Singapore under its NRFF Award
NRF-NRFF13-2021-0008 and the Ministry of Education, Singapore, under the Academic Research
Fund Tier 1 (FY2022).


                                                        9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


7   E THNICS S TATEMENT
Static portrait animation, monocular video reconstruction, and editing could be misused for generat-
ing fake videos or manipulating authentic videos for improper or illegal purposes. These potentially
harmful applications may pose a societal threat. We strictly forbid these kinds of abuses. In addi-
tion, our video generator may contain bias for face results due to the unbalanced video distribution
in training datasets.

8   R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT
To ensure reproducibility, we describe the implementation details in Appendix. A.1. The dataset
preprocessing steps are introduced thoroughly in Appendix. A.3, including video sources, training
data balance, face video alignment pipeline, and camera pose estimation approach. Our code and
models are publicly available at https://showlab.github.io/pv3d.

R EFERENCES
Rameen Abdal, Yipeng Qin, and Peter Wonka. Image2stylegan: How to embed images into the
  stylegan latent space? In ICCV, 2019.
Rameen Abdal, Peihao Zhu, Niloy J Mitra, and Peter Wonka. Video2stylegan: Disentangling local
  and global variations in a video. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.13996, 2022.
Sherwin Bahmani, Jeong Joon Park, Despoina Paschalidou, Hao Tang, Gordon Wetzstein, Leonidas
  Guibas, Luc Van Gool, and Radu Timofte. 3d-aware video generation. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2206.14797, 2022.
Adrian Bulat and Georgios Tzimiropoulos. How far are we from solving the 2d & 3d face alignment
  problem? (and a dataset of 230,000 3d facial landmarks). In ICCV, 2017.
Chen Cao, Tomas Simon, Jin Kyu Kim, Gabe Schwartz, Michael Zollhoefer, Shun-Suke Saito,
  Stephen Lombardi, Shih-En Wei, Danielle Belko, Shoou-I Yu, et al. Authentic volumetric avatars
  from a phone scan. ACM Trans. on Graphics, 2022.
Joao Carreira and Andrew Zisserman. Quo vadis, action recognition? a new model and the kinetics
  dataset. In CVPR, 2017.
Eric R Chan, Marco Monteiro, Petr Kellnhofer, Jiajun Wu, and Gordon Wetzstein. pi-gan: Periodic
  implicit generative adversarial networks for 3d-aware image synthesis. In CVPR, 2021.
Eric R Chan, Connor Z Lin, Matthew A Chan, Koki Nagano, Boxiao Pan, Shalini De Mello, Orazio
  Gallo, Leonidas J Guibas, Jonathan Tremblay, Sameh Khamis, et al. Efficient geometry-aware 3d
  generative adversarial networks. In CVPR, 2022.
Joon Son Chung, Arsha Nagrani, and Andrew Zisserman. Voxceleb2: Deep speaker recognition.
  INTERSPEECH, 2018.
William HE Day and Herbert Edelsbrunner. Efficient algorithms for agglomerative hierarchical
 clustering methods. Journal of classification, 1984.
Jiankang Deng, Jia Guo, Niannan Xue, and Stefanos Zafeiriou. Arcface: Additive angular margin
   loss for deep face recognition. In CVPR, 2019a.
Yu Deng, Jiaolong Yang, Sicheng Xu, Dong Chen, Yunde Jia, and Xin Tong. Accurate 3d face
  reconstruction with weakly-supervised learning: From single image to image set. In CVPRw,
  2019b.
Yu Deng, Jiaolong Yang, Jianfeng Xiang, and Xin Tong. Gram: Generative radiance manifolds for
  3d-aware image generation. CVPR, 2022.
Michail Christos Doukas, Stefanos Zafeiriou, and Viktoriia Sharmanska. Headgan: One-shot neural
 head synthesis and editing. In ICCV, 2021.


                                                10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Gereon Fox, Ayush Tewari, Mohamed Elgharib, and Christian Theobalt. Stylevideogan: A temporal
  generative model using a pretrained stylegan. arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.07224, 2021.
Ian Goodfellow, Jean Pouget-Abadie, Mehdi Mirza, Bing Xu, David Warde-Farley, Sherjil Ozair,
  Aaron Courville, and Yoshua Bengio. Generative adversarial networks. Communications of the
  ACM, 2020.
Philip-William Grassal, Malte Prinzler, Titus Leistner, Carsten Rother, Matthias Nießner, and Justus
  Thies. Neural head avatars from monocular rgb videos. In CVPR, 2022.
Jiatao Gu, Lingjie Liu, Peng Wang, and Christian Theobalt. Stylenerf: A style-based 3d aware
   generator for high-resolution image synthesis. In ICLR, 2022.
Tero Karras, Samuli Laine, and Timo Aila. A style-based generator architecture for generative
  adversarial networks. In CVPR, 2019.
Tero Karras, Samuli Laine, Miika Aittala, Janne Hellsten, Jaakko Lehtinen, and Timo Aila. Analyz-
  ing and improving the image quality of stylegan. In CVPR, 2020.
Tero Karras, Miika Aittala, Samuli Laine, Erik Härkönen, Janne Hellsten, Jaakko Lehtinen, and
  Timo Aila. Alias-free generative adversarial networks. NeurIPS, 2021.
Hiroharu Kato, Yoshitaka Ushiku, and Tatsuya Harada. Neural 3d mesh renderer. In CVPR, 2018.
Shugao Ma, Tomas Simon, Jason Saragih, Dawei Wang, Yuecheng Li, Fernando De La Torre, and
  Yaser Sheikh. Pixel codec avatars. In CVPR, 2021.
Nelson Max. Optical models for direct volume rendering. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and
  Computer Graphics, 1995.
Lars Mescheder, Andreas Geiger, and Sebastian Nowozin. Which training methods for gans do
  actually converge? In ICML, 2018.
Ben Mildenhall, Pratul P Srinivasan, Matthew Tancik, Jonathan T Barron, Ravi Ramamoorthi, and
  Ren Ng. Nerf: Representing scenes as neural radiance fields for view synthesis. In ECCV, 2020.
Arsha Nagrani, Joon Son Chung, and Andrew Zisserman. Voxceleb: a large-scale speaker identifi-
  cation dataset. INTERSPEECH, 2017.
Michael Niemeyer and Andreas Geiger. Giraffe: Representing scenes as compositional generative
 neural feature fields. In CVPR, 2021.
Roy Or-El, Xuan Luo, Mengyi Shan, Eli Shechtman, Jeong Joon Park, and Ira Kemelmacher-
  Shlizerman. Stylesdf: High-resolution 3d-consistent image and geometry generation. CVPR,
  2022.
Keunhong Park, Utkarsh Sinha, Peter Hedman, Jonathan T Barron, Sofien Bouaziz, Dan B Goldman,
  Ricardo Martin-Brualla, and Steven M Seitz. Hypernerf: A higher-dimensional representation for
  topologically varying neural radiance fields. SIGGRAPH, 2022.
Pascal Paysan, Reinhard Knothe, Brian Amberg, Sami Romdhani, and Thomas Vetter. A 3d face
  model for pose and illumination invariant face recognition. In 2009 sixth IEEE international
  conference on advanced video and signal based surveillance, pp. 296–301. Ieee, 2009.
Elad Richardson, Yuval Alaluf, Or Patashnik, Yotam Nitzan, Yaniv Azar, Stav Shapiro, and Daniel
  Cohen-Or. Encoding in style: a stylegan encoder for image-to-image translation. In CVPR, 2021.
Masaki Saito, Eiichi Matsumoto, and Shunta Saito. Temporal generative adversarial nets with sin-
 gular value clipping. In ICCV, 2017.
Katja Schwarz, Yiyi Liao, Michael Niemeyer, and Andreas Geiger. Graf: Generative radiance fields
  for 3d-aware image synthesis. NeurIPS, 2020.
Katja Schwarz, Axel Sauer, Michael Niemeyer, Yiyi Liao, and Andreas Geiger. Voxgraf: Fast 3d-
  aware image synthesis with sparse voxel grids. NeurIPS, 2022.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Yujun Shen, Jinjin Gu, Xiaoou Tang, and Bolei Zhou. Interpreting the latent space of gans for
  semantic face editing. In CVPR, 2020.
Yichun Shi, Divyansh Aggarwal, and Anil K Jain. Lifting 2d stylegan for 3d-aware face generation.
  In CVPR, 2021.
Aliaksandr Siarohin, Stéphane Lathuilière, Sergey Tulyakov, Elisa Ricci, and Nicu Sebe. First order
  motion model for image animation. NeurIPS, 2019.
Vincent Sitzmann, Julien Martel, Alexander Bergman, David Lindell, and Gordon Wetzstein. Im-
  plicit neural representations with periodic activation functions. NeurIPS, 2020.
Ivan Skorokhodov, Savva Ignatyev, and Mohamed Elhoseiny. Adversarial generation of continuous
  images. In CVPR, 2021.
Ivan Skorokhodov, Sergey Tulyakov, and Mohamed Elhoseiny. Stylegan-v: A continuous video
  generator with the price, image quality and perks of stylegan2. CVPR, 2022.
Ayush Tewari, Florian Bernard, Pablo Garrido, Gaurav Bharaj, Mohamed Elgharib, Hans-Peter Sei-
  del, Patrick Pérez, Michael Zollhofer, and Christian Theobalt. Fml: Face model learning from
  videos. In CVPR, 2019.
Yu Tian, Jian Ren, Menglei Chai, Kyle Olszewski, Xi Peng, Dimitris N Metaxas, and Sergey
  Tulyakov. A good image generator is what you need for high-resolution video synthesis. In
  ICLR, 2021.
Omer Tov, Yuval Alaluf, Yotam Nitzan, Or Patashnik, and Daniel Cohen-Or. Designing an encoder
 for stylegan image manipulation. ACM Trans. on Graphics, 2021.
Sergey Tulyakov, Ming-Yu Liu, Xiaodong Yang, and Jan Kautz. Mocogan: Decomposing motion
  and content for video generation. In CVPR, 2018.
Thomas Unterthiner, Sjoerd Van Steenkiste, Karol Kurach, Raphael Marinier, Marcin Michalski,
  and Sylvain Gelly. Towards accurate generative models of video: A new metric & challenges.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:1812.01717, 2018.
Carl Vondrick, Hamed Pirsiavash, and Antonio Torralba. Generating videos with scene dynamics.
  NeurIPS, 2016.
Ting-Chun Wang, Arun Mallya, and Ming-Yu Liu. One-shot free-view neural talking-head synthesis
  for video conferencing. In CVPR, 2021a.
Ziyan Wang, Timur Bagautdinov, Stephen Lombardi, Tomas Simon, Jason Saragih, Jessica Hodgins,
  and Michael Zollhofer. Learning compositional radiance fields of dynamic human heads. In
  CVPR, 2021b.
Sihyun Yu, Jihoon Tack, Sangwoo Mo, Hyunsu Kim, Junho Kim, Jung-Woo Ha, and Jinwoo Shin.
  Generating videos with dynamics-aware implicit generative adversarial networks. In ICLR, 2022.
Yu-Jie Yuan, Yang-Tian Sun, Yu-Kun Lai, Yuewen Ma, Rongfei Jia, and Lin Gao. Nerf-editing:
  geometry editing of neural radiance fields. In CVPR, 2022.
Jianfeng Zhang, Zihang Jiang, Dingdong Yang, Hongyi Xu, Yichun Shi, Guoxian Song, Zhongcong
   Xu, Xinchao Wang, and Jiashi Feng. Avatargen: a 3d generative model for animatable human
   avatars. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.14589, 2022a.
Xuanmeng Zhang, Zhedong Zheng, Daiheng Gao, Bang Zhang, Pan Pan, and Yi Yang. Multi-view
  consistent generative adversarial networks for 3d-aware image synthesis. CVPR, 2022b.
Xiaoming Zhao, Fangchang Ma, David Güera, Zhile Ren, Alexander G Schwing, and Alex Colburn.
  Generative multiplane images: Making a 2d gan 3d-aware. In ECCV, pp. 18–35. Springer, 2022.
Hao Zhu, Wayne Wu, Wentao Zhu, Liming Jiang, Siwei Tang, Li Zhang, Ziwei Liu, and
  Chen Change Loy. CelebV-HQ: A large-scale video facial attributes dataset. In ECCV, 2022.
Peiye Zhuang, Liqian Ma, Oluwasanmi Koyejo, and Alexander G Schwing. Controllable radiance
  fields for dynamic face synthesis. 3DV, 2022.


                                                 12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A     A PPENDIX

A.1   I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS

For each video, we sample two frames within a 16-frame span. Following DiGAN (Yu et al.,
2022), we sample timesteps {ti , tj } from beta distributions. The resolution of the generated video is
512×512. We use a resolution of 64 and a sampling step of 48 for neural rendering during training.
In inference stage, we use a rendering resolution of 128 for geometry visualization only. Each cam-
era pose c has 25 dimensions, with 16 for extrinsics and 9 for intrinsics. Our model is implemented
using PyTorch. We balance the loss terms by weighting factors: 1) λreg =0.6, λvid =0.65, λimg =1.0,
λR1 =2.0 for VoxCeleb; 2) λreg =0.05, λvid =0.65, λimg =1.0, λR1 =4.0 for CelebV-HQ; 3) λreg =0.5,
λvid =0.65, λimg =1.0, λR1 =2.0 for TalkingHead-1KH. Our model is trained for 300k iterations with a
batch size of 16, which takes 58 hours on 8 Nvidia A100 GPUs.


A.2   A NALYSIS OF L ATENT C ODE S PACE

The architecture of synthesis layer in our PV3D largely follows StyleGAN and its following
works (Karras et al., 2019; 2020; 2021). Based on the pre-trained StyleGAN models, prior
works (Shen et al., 2020) also investigate the property of the latent code space. These works show
that the intermediate latent code space has extensive manipulation ability for image synthesis. Al-
though the original design of StyleGAN is sharing one intermediate latent code across all synthesis
layers, follow-up works (Abdal et al., 2019; Richardson et al., 2021; Tov et al., 2021) relax this con-
straint and achieve better reconstruction results for image inversion because using different latent
codes for different synthesis layers can further expand the space for image generation.


             K=0              K=2               K=4                K=6             K=8
              z0                                                                    z1

Figure 7: Results of style mixing in first K synthesis layers in pre-trained EG3D. For each example,
we first sample one latent code and mix it with another latent code in the first K synthesis layers.


Our PV3D can generate temporal tri-plane features by modulating appearance features based on
motion code and timestep. We encode motion code and timestep into intermediate motion codes
and then compute motion features in temporal tri-plane synthesis network. Because our synthesis
network is built on top of EG3D, we also analyze the latent space to find out how the manipula-
tion of appearance features could affect the synthesis results. As shown in Figure 7, we perform
style mixing in the first K synthesis layers of a pre-trained EG3D model. When K increases, the
image contents gradually change. Specifically, manipulating the appearance code in K = 2 layers
can largely preserve the contents. However, only modulating features in the first 2 layers would
potentially harm the capacity for content diversity of our video generator. When K ≥ 6, there exists
a sharp change in the image content. Because one important property for portrait video is the tem-
poral coherence, i.e., consistent identity, we finally select K = 4 in our motion generator to maintain
a good temporal consistency as well as motion diversity.


                                                  13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A.3      DATASET P REPROCESSING

Video sources.
VoxCeleb (Nagrani et al., 2017; Chung et al., 2018) is an audio-visual speaker verification dataset
containing interview videos for more than 7,000 speakers. It provides speaker labels for each video
clip. For each speaker, we sample two video clips that have the highest video resolutions.
CelebV-HQ (Zhu et al., 2022) is a large-scale face video dataset that provides high-quality video
clips involving 15,653 identities. Compared with VoxCeleb, it contains diverse lighting conditions.
TalkingHead-1KH (Wang et al., 2021a) consists of talking head videos extracted from 2,900 long
video conferences.
For all of the datasets, we directly download videos with the highest possible resolution from
YouTube using the provided uid list.
Training data balance. CelebV-HQ and TalkingHead-1KH have unbalanced number of video clips
for each identity. To balance the video clips, we perform face clustering to predict pseudo-identities
and sample video clips for each identity. Specifically, we extract facial features using pre-trained Ar-
cFace (Deng et al., 2019a) and employ agglomerative hierarchical clustering (Day & Edelsbrunner,
1984) to predict pseudo-identities and sample at most two videos for each identity.
Alignment. All datasets are preprocessed using the same alignment pipeline: We first detect land-
marks for each frame using an off-the-shelf face alignment package (Bulat & Tzimiropoulos, 2017).
Such single frame face alignment technique would introduce temporal inconsistency. Following
(Fox et al., 2021), we use a low-pass Gaussian filter to smooth the estimated keypoints before warp-
ing the images. Then, we follow the image warping approach of FFHQ (Karras et al., 2019) to align
each frame. To facilitate the training of unconditional 3D image GAN, EG3D employs an extra
cropping step to process the image. Specifically, they realign the image in depth direction, which
forces all of the keypoint of nose to the same point in the world coordinate defined by the parametric
face model, i.e., 3DMM (Paysan et al., 2009). We follow this step to process the video clips. Fi-
nally, we apply deep face reconstruction (Deng et al., 2019b) to estimate camera pose for each video
frame. Again, this process brings temporal inconsistency and we also apply the low-pass Gaussian
filter to smooth the results.
Verification. Our preprocessing pipeline is automated and purely based on off-the-shelf packages.
However, there exist noise and failure cases in each preprocessing step. Therefore, we apply an extra
verification step to remove the noisy video clips. In particular, we use ArcFace to extract the facial
features again for every 2 frames within a video clip. If the similarity scores between one frame and
others are below a threshold τ = 0.5, this frame will be labeled as noisy. We discard video clips that
contain more than two noisy frames.

A.4      E VALUATION M ETRICS

Frechet Video Distance (FVD). We compute the statistics for ground-truth and generated samples
using the pre-trained I3D (Carreira & Zisserman, 2017) model (the PyTorch version checkpoint
released by VideoGPT1 ). For the training dataset, we randomly sample 5000 videos. Each video
generator synthesizes 5000 uncurated videos randomly for test. All of the videos are encoded in
H264 format. Compared with previous methods that save videos in PNG format (Skorokhodov
et al., 2022), we empirically find that saving videos with H264 and decoding videos into images
during testing does not cause any variation and can largely save space.
Multi-view Identity Consistency (ID). 3D-aware image GAN works compute ID by rendering both
frontal view and side view images to measure the model’s multi-view identity consistency. They
adopt state-of-the-art face recognition model (Deng et al., 2019a) (denoted as F) to extract features
and compute similarity scores between frontal and side view images. We simply extend this process
to multiple frames. In our experiments, we generate random videos and render both frontal face and
side face images Iy , at two randomly sampled timesteps {t0 , t1 }, where y denotes yaw angles. The
ID metric is formulated as:
                                   ID(Iyt00 , Iyt11 ) = F(Iyt00 )T F(Iyt11 ),                     (5)
   1
       https://github.com/wilson1yan/VideoGPT


                                                  14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


where t0 ̸= t1 or y0 ̸= y1 . In this work, we report results with y ∈ {0◦ , 30◦ } on 1000 videos. We
compute ID for each frame pair within each video. The final ID metric is the average value for all
of the image pairs.
Chamfer Distance (CD). StyleSDF (Or-El et al., 2022) proposes to use the Chamfer Distance be-
tween the frontal and side view point clouds to measure the multi-view consistency of 3D geometry.
In this work, we extend this metric to multiple frames by computing CD between depth map pairs in
each video. For each video, we sample two timesteps {t0 , t1 } and render point cloud at two angles
Py , where y denotes yaw angles. The CD is mathematically formulated as:

                  CD Pyt00 , Pyt11 = medt mint ∥x − y∥22 + medt mint ∥x − y∥22 ,                (6)
                                        x∈Py00 y∈Py11               y∈Py11 x∈Py00

where med means median, t0 ̸= t1 or y0 ̸= y1 . Following StyleSDF we normalize the point clouds
based on the volume sampling bin size for each generator before computing CD. We also remove
the non-terminating rays whose opacity is below 0.5 for all of the models whose backbone is EG3D.
To make fair comparisons, for baselines based on StyleNeRF, we render point clouds in foreground
NeRF, i.e., rendering face part only. We interpolate all of the points clouds to 64×64. We also use y
∈ {0◦ , 30◦ } and render 1000 videos. We then average CD for all of the point cloud pairs to get the
final CD result.
Multi-view Image Warping Errors (WE). Inspired by recent 3D image GAN works (Zhang et al.,
2022b;a), we can further compute the warping error by reprojecting each pixel from side view to
the frontal view based on the images (Iyt00 , Iyt11 ) and depth maps (Dyt00 , Dyt11 ) at yaw angle {y0 , y1 } and
timesteps {t0 , t1 }. The camera extrinsics and intrinsics are [R|t] and K, where R is determined by
yaw angle y. We warp a pixel located at (i, j) (denoted as x) in side view image to frontal view by
re-projection. It is formulated as:
                                   x′ = K[R′ |t′ ][R|t]−1 [K−1 x, D(x)]T .                                   (7)
Based on the re-projected coordinates, we compute the warping error as:
                                                       1 X t0
                                  WE(Iyt00 , Iyt11 ) =    |Iy0 − Iwarp |,                         (8)
                                                       L
where Iwarp (x′ ) = Iy1 (x) and y0 ̸= y1 , L is the number of re-projected points that located within
the field-of-view in the frontal view image, and we only compute WE based on these visible pixels.
Both image and point cloud are resized to 256×256. Finally, we use y ∈ {0◦ , 30◦ } and generate
1000 videos. We compute the warping error for each front and side view pair in one video. The WE
reported in this work is the average value of all the pairs.

A.5     A DDITIONAL E XPERIMENT R ESULTS

Ablations. We perform additional ablation study on PV3D by varying the design of discriminator
components and volume rendering resolutions.

Table 3: Ablations on discriminators, resolution for neural rendering, and generator camera pose
conditions.

      Disc.    FVD↓ CD↓ WE↓             Rend. Res. FVD↓ CD↓ WE↓
                                                                             Gen. Cam. FVD↓ CD↓ WE↓
   w/o Vid     145.9 3.89 11.82            32        42.4 3.25 12.98
                                                                               w/o cam     44.3 2.35 13.01
   w/o Img     42.2 3.44 14.40             64        29.1 1.34 9.76
                                                                               w/ cam      29.1 1.34 9.76
 w/ both disc. 29.1 1.34 9.76              128       34.1 0.92 9.62
                                                                        (c) The effect of camera condition-
(a) The effect of discriminator com- (b) The effect of volume rendering
                                                                        ing in generator.
ponents.                             resolution.


Discriminator components. PV3D employs two independent discriminators to regularize the video
content and motions. We ablate the image and video discriminators to study how each one su-
pervises the training of generator. Table 3a illustrates the results of removing each discriminator.
Without video discriminator, the video quality largely deteriorates, suggesting that video discrimi-
nator is able to guarantee motion plausibility. In addition, removing image discriminator also brings


                                                        15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                          500
                                                                                                400



 number of camera pairs
                          400                                                                   350


                                                                             number of videos
                                                                                                300
                          300
                                                                                                250
                                                                                                200
                          200
                                                                                                150

                          100                                                                   100
                                                                                                50
                           0                                                                     0
                                0.2   0.0   0.2    0.4   0.6    0.8   1.0                             0   2     4     6      8   10
                                            cosine similarity                                                 score difference
(a) Statistics for cosine similarities between the em- (b) Statistics for real/fake score differences between
beddings of original and flipped camera pose pairs.    original and flipped camera pose pairs.

Figure 8: The analysis for the alignment ability of our video discriminator. We sample 3000 camera
pose sequences from training dataset and input both original camera pose sequences together with
the reversed ones into our video discriminator to study its ability for encoding ordinal information.



a significant performance drop in FVD, CD, and WE, which proves that our video discriminator can
also supervise the frame content but struggle to guarantee 3D geometry.
Volume rendering resolution. Table 3b summarizes the results of using different resolutions for
neural volume rendering during training. A small resolution (32) restricts model’s capacity, leading
to worse performance on all of the metrics. Although a higher resolution (128) outperforms our
default setting (64) in terms of multi-view consistency and warping error, its video quality is still
worse. The results show that there exists a tradeoff between the video quality and 3D geometry
in our generator because it is trained only on 2D videos. Considering the computation resources,
our default setting uses a resolution of 64. In this work, we also use 64 for testing and reporting
evaluation metrics. Moreover, we only use a resolution of 128 for geometry visualization.
Generator camera conditioning. PV3D takes camera poses to encode 3D priors in generator. Ta-
ble 3c shows that the 3D priors improve performance with a large margin. Without the camera pose
condition in generator, a large decrease can be observed in all of the evaluation metrics.
Video discriminator alignment. To investigate whether our video discriminator can align the cam-
era poses with the input video frames, we conduct two following experiments.
Effects of camera pose order on embedding. We sample 3000 camera pairs from the training dataset
and pass them to our video discriminator. We then exchange the order of the camera poses and
compute the embeddings again. After that, we compute the cosine similarities between the embed-
dings of original and the flipped camera pose sequences. The statistics for similarities are shown in
Figure 8a. It can be observed that most of the camera pose sequences with reversed orders will be
mapped into embeddings that are far apart. Thus, our video discriminator is sensitive to the camera
pose orders.
Effects of camera pose order on discrimination ability. We further input the videos generated by the
sampled camera poses together with both original and flipped camera pose sequences into the video
discriminator. We compute the L1 distances between the real/fake scores and visualize statistics in
Figure 8b. It illustrates that our video discriminator predicts different real/fake scores for most of the
video frame pairs if the camera pose sequences are in reverse order. The results prove that our video
discriminator is order-aware and can align the camera pose sequence with the video frame pair.
Longer-term video synthesis. PV3D is trained on two video frames per clip, this architecture
makes it suitable for long-term video synthesis. To study its ability for long-term video generation,
we further train and test PV3D on video clips of 48 frames. The results are shown on our project
page. As we can see, training data with longer duration contains more diverse motions and PV3D
can learn to generate such motions accordingly.
Qualitative results. We demonstrate more results of PV3D in Figure 9.


                                                                            16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


           Figure 9: Samples generated by PV3D, see our project page for video results.

A.6   L IMITATIONS AND F UTURE W ORK

Our PV3D has several limitations: 1) PV3D is trained and tested on video clips that contain at most
48 frames. The model’s ability for modeling long-term (minutes order) dynamics is unknown. 2)
The 2D video dataset quality is not comparable to image datasets such as FFHQ and CelebA. Our
model has a flexible architecture that may support pre-training or joint training on image datasets, yet
this augmentation strategy has not been explored although it is promising and meaningful. For future
work, we will explore modeling long-term dynamics with novel 3D representations that are more
suitable for 3D video generation, and leverage high-quality image datasets for data augmentation.


                                                  17
