Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


B I -L EVEL DYNAMIC PARAMETER S HARING AMONG
I NDIVIDUALS AND T EAMS FOR P ROMOTING C OL -
LABORATIONS IN M ULTI -AGENT R EINFORCEMENT
L EARNING
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT

         Parameter sharing has greatly contributed to the success of multi-agent reinforce-
         ment learning in recent years. However, most existing parameter sharing mech-
         anisms are static, and parameters are indiscriminately shared among individuals,
         ignoring the dynamic environments and different roles of multiple agents. In addi-
         tion, although a single-level selective parameter sharing mechanism can promote
         the diversity of strategies, it is hard to establish complementary and cooperative
         relationships between agents. To address these issues, we propose a bi-level dy-
         namic parameter sharing mechanism among individuals and teams for promoting
         effective collaborations (BDPS). Specifically, at the individual level, we define
         virtual dynamic roles based on the long-term cumulative advantages of agents and
         share parameters among agents in the same role. At the team level, we combine
         agents of different virtual roles and share parameters of agents in the same group.
         Through the joint efforts of these two levels, we achieve a dynamic balance be-
         tween the individuality and commonality of agents, enabling agents to learn more
         complex and complementary collaborative relationships. We evaluate BDPS on a
         challenging set of StarCraft II micromanagement tasks. The experimental results
         show that our method outperforms the current state-of-the-art baselines, and we
         demonstrate the reliability of our proposed structure through ablation experiments.



1   I NTRODUCTION

In many areas, collaborative Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning (MARL) has broad application
prospects, such as robots cluster control (Buşoniu et al., 2010), multi-vehicle auto-driving (Bhalla
et al., 2020), and shop scheduling (Jiménez, 2012). In a multi-agent environment, an agent should
observe the environment’s dynamics and understand the learning policies of other agents to form
good collaborations. Real-world scenarios usually have a large number of agents with different
identities or capabilities, which puts forward higher requirements for collaborations among agents.
Therefore, how to solve the large-scale MARL problem and promote to form stable and complemen-
tary cooperation among agents with different identities and capabilities are particularly important.
To solve the large-scale agents issue, we can find that many collaborative MARL works adopting
the centralized training paradigm use the full static parameter sharing mechanism (Gupta et al.,
2017), which allows agents to share parameters of agents’ policy networks, thus simplifying the
algorithm structure and improving performance efficiency. This mechanism is effective because
agents generally receive similar observation information in the existing narrow and simple multi-
agent environments. In our Google Research Football (GRF) (Kurach et al., 2020) experiments, we
can find that blindly applying the full parameter sharing mechanism does not improve the perfor-
mance of algorithms because the observation information is very different due to the movement of
different players. At the same time, because the full static parameter sharing mechanism ignores
the identities and abilities of different agents, it constantly limits the diversity of agents’ behavior
policies (Li et al., 2021; Yang et al., 2022), which makes it difficult to promote complementarity and
reliable cooperation between agents in complex scenarios.


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Recently, in order to eliminate the disadvantage of full parameter sharing, a single-layer selective
parameter sharing mechanism has been proposed (Christianos et al., 2021; Wang et al., 2022), that is,
extracting deep features from agents’ observation information by an encoder and clustering them to
achieve the combination of different agents in order to select different agents for parameter sharing.
Although the single-level selective parameter sharing mechanism can promote the diversity of
agents’ policies, it causes the relationship between agents that do not share parameters simulta-
neously fragmented. So that agents cannot establish complementary cooperative relationships in
a broader range. More importantly, designing an effective selector is the key to sharing selective
parameters, especially for the single-level dynamic selective parameter sharing mechanism, which
needs to be done within several rounds of the selection operation. Most methods only use the real-
time observation information of agents, which loses attention to agents’ history and is not conducive
to correctly mining the implicit identity characteristics of the agents. For a football team, special
training for different players, such as shooting training for the forwards and defense training for the
defenders, will be carried out. However, winning a game requires special training and coordination
between players of different roles. That is, not only do we need to share parameters with agents of
the same role, but we also need to combine agents of different identities to ensure that they can form
robust and complementary collaboration on a larger scale.
To address these issues, in this paper, we propose a bi-level dynamic parameter sharing mechanism
among individuals and teams (BDPS). The advantage functions of agents can be expressed as the
advantages of taking action relative to the average in the current state. We consider that the advantage
function can better represent the actual roles of agents in current identity and grouping. In order
to more accurately identify the role of agents, at the individual level, we compute the long-term
advantage information of the agents as the key to virtual role identification and use the variational
autoencoders (VAE) (Kingma & Welling, 2014) to learn the distribution of the role characteristics
of the agents, and obtain more accurate virtual role directly by sampling the distribution of role
features. To alleviate the split of the relationship between different virtual role agents by the single-
layer dynamic parameter sharing mechanism, we further use the graph attention network (GAT)
(Velickovic et al., 2018) to learn the topological relationships between different roles based on the
roles obtained at the individual level, so as to achieve the combination of different identity agents
at a higher level and a broader range. Through the method we designed, we achieve dynamic and
selective parameter sharing for agents at two different levels, individual and team, and achieve the
goal of stabilizing complementary collaboration among agents in a more extensive scope while
achieving the diversity of agents’ policies.
We test BDPS and algorithms using different parameter sharing mechanisms on the StarCraft II mi-
cromanagement environments (SMAC) (Samvelyan et al., 2019) and the Google Research Football
(GRF) (Kurach et al., 2020). The experimental results show that our method not only outperforms
other methods with single-level selective parameter sharing mechanism and full parameter sharing
mechanism in general on all super hard maps and four hard maps of SMAC, but also performs well
in the experimental scenarios in the used GRF. In addition, we carried out ablation experiments
to verify the influence of different parameter sharing settings on the formation of complementary
cooperation between agents, which fully proves the reliability of our proposed method.


2     BACKGROUND

2.1   D ECENTRALIZED PARTIALLY O BSERVABLE M ARKOV P ROCESS

A full cooperative MARL task can usually be modeled as a decentralized partially observ-
able markov process (Dec-POMDP) (Oliehoek & Amato, 2016). We can define a tuple M =
⟨N , S, A, R, P, Ω, O, γ⟩ to represent it, where N is the finite set of n agents, s ∈ S is a finite set of
global state, and γ ∈ [0, 1). At each time step t, each agent i ∈ N receives a local observation oi ∈ Ω
according to the observation function O (s, i), takes an action ai ∈ A to form a joint action a ∈ An ,
and gets a shared global reward r = R (s, a). Due to the limitation of partial observability, each
                                                                                                          ∗
agent conditions its policy πi (ai |τi ) on its own local action-observation history τi ∈ T ≡ (Ω × A) .
Agents together aim to maximize the expected return, that is,P     to find a joint policy π = ⟨π1 , ..., πn ⟩
                                                                     ∞
to maximize a joint action-value function Qπ = Es0:∞ ,a0:∞ [ t=0 γ t rt |s0 = s, a0 = a, π].


                                                     2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


2.2   C ENTRALIZED T RAINING WITH D ECENTRALIZED E XECUTION

In many MARL settings, partial observability problems can be solved by centralized training with
decentralized execution (CTDE) paradigm (Lowe et al., 2017; Foerster et al., 2018; Rashid et al.,
2020; Wang et al., 2021a; Son et al., 2019), which is currently the mainstream of MARL methods.
The centralized mode is adopted in training, and after the training, agents only make decisions
based on their local observation and the trained policy network. Thus, the problems of unstable
environment and large-scale agents can be overcome at the same time to a certain extent.

2.3   VARIATIONAL AUTOENCODER

Variational autoencoder (VAE) (Kingma & Welling, 2014) is a generative network model based on
Variational Bayesian (VB) (Fox & Roberts, 2012) inference. Two probability density distribution
models are established by the inference network qϕ and the generative network pξ . The inference
network is used for the variational inference of the original input data x to generate the variational
probability distribution of hidden variables z. The generative network restores the approximate
probability distribution of the original data according to the generated implicit variable variational
probability distribution. VAE model can be divided into the following two processes: the approx-
imate inference process of posterior distribution of hidden variables: qϕ (z|x) and the generation
process of conditional distribution of generated variables: pξ (z) pξ (x̂|z).
In order to make qϕ (z|x) and the true posterior distribution pξ (z|x) approximately equal, VAE uses
KL-divergence to measure the similarity between them:
          DKL (qϕ (z|x) || pξ (z|x)) = log pξ (x) + Eqϕ (z|x) [log qϕ (z|x) − log pξ (x, z)] ,         (1)
where the term log pξ (x) is called log-evidence and it is constant. Another term is the negative
evidence lower bound (ELBO). The VAE with additional GRU network is widely used in sequence
anomaly detection (Su et al., 2019). In this paper, we use it to identify the identity feature distribution
mapped behind the advantage information sequence of agents for a period of time to better guide
them in choosing appropriate parameter sharing partners.

2.4   G RAPH ATTENTION N ETWORK

Graph attention network (GAT) (Velickovic et al., 2018) is a network architecture based on an at-
tention mechanism, which can learn different weights for different neighbors through the attention
mechanism. For calculating the output characteristics of node i, GAT first trains a shared weight
matrix W for all nodes to obtain the weight of each neighbor node of node i. Then, according to
the weight, the attention coefficients between node i and its neighbor nodes are calculated. Finally,
these attention coefficients are weighted and summed to obtain the output features h′i of node i:
                                                                       
                                                T
                              X       exp  σ 2 a   [Wh i ||hj ]
                 h′i = σ1        P                  T
                                                                   Whj            ,              (2)
                             j∈Ni    k∈Ni exp (σ2 (a [Whi ||hk ]))
                                                                               (1−Head)

where σ1 and σ2 represent nonlinear functions, Ni represents the first-order neighborhood of node
i, aT represents the transpose of the weight vector a and || is the concatenation operation.
In recent years, MARL with communication has widely used GAT to determine the explicit com-
munication goals of agents (Niu et al., 2021; Seraj et al., 2021). In this paper, we use the GAT to
establish the topological relationship between different virtual roles, and further combine the agents
under different virtual role mappings to form complementary and reliable cooperative relationships.

3     O UR M ETHOD
In this section, we introduce the proposed BDPS in detail. BDPS mainly comprises individuals and
teams, as shown in Figure 1. We get inspiration from people: a person may play multiple roles and
can freely switch roles in different scenes, which promotes the stable development of people, and
the same is true for agents. Therefore, we choose to sacrifice some network parameters for agents to
maintain multiple roles and groups at the same time. And according to the role selector U and the
group selector V , choose the most suitable role and group for the agents.


                                                    3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                              Figure 1: The overall BDPS architecture.


First, we explain the relationship between agents and individual virtual roles and groups.

Definition 1 Given n (n≥2) agents, k (2≤k≤n) roles and m (2≤m≤k) groups, we have the following
mapping relationships: fU : N 7→ K and fV : K 7→ M, where K and M represent finite sets of k
roles and m groups, respectively.
From the fV , we can see the agents’ groups depend on agents’ roles, so we give the time relationship
for agents to update the groups and roles: TV = e · TU , where TV represents the update period of
the group, TU represents the identity’s update period and e ∈ Z + .

3.1     I NDIVIDUAL L EVEL D ESIGN

Different from the existing methods of determining the roles of agents based on real-time observa-
tion information, we consider the impact of the long-term cumulative advantages of agents on the
definition of the agents’ roles, because the advantage information can better represent the current
state of agents than the observation information. At the same time, unlike the existing methods that
only use the encoder to learn the role characteristics of agents for clustering, we learn the long-term
advantages of agents through the VAE to obtain the distribution information of role. Because in
many cases, the role of an agent will not change just because it makes a unique action. At the in-
dividual level in Figure 1, we first maintain the role selector U to select appropriate roles uU for
agents, then apply parameter sharing to agents according to the same role.

3.1.1    C HOOSE A PPROPRIATE ROLES FOR AGENTS
Firstly, the role selector U inputs the pre-calculated agents’ advantage information sequence
At−TU :t−1 = {At−TU , At−TU +1 , ..., At−1 } into a GRU network to capture complex temporal
dependence between agents’ advantage information in the virtual roles’ update period. Secondly,
when the time meets the periodic condition of updating virtual roles, we take the implicit output in-
formation ht−1 at this time as the characteristics of the agents and input it into the Encoder Eϕ of the
VAE. Finally, we obtain the virtual roles uU of agents from the k-dimensional Gaussian distribution
output by the Encoder Eϕ .

For agent i, its advantage information at time t can be obtained by Ait = max Qit − Qit , where
Qit represents the agent i’s local Q-function at time t, and unlike the classical calculating advantage
function A = Q − V , ours Ait ≥ 0 is convenient for us to use the Decoder Dξ to reconstruct the
input information. When the virtual role uiU of agent i needs to update at time t, its virtual role can
be obtained from the VAE’s bottleneck:
                                         uiU = argmax{zU
                                                       i
                                                         },                                         (3)
where zU = µU + σU · ϵU , ϵU ∼ N (0, I).


                                                   4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


3.2     T EAM L EVEL D ESIGN

The purpose of introducing grouping is to eliminate the fragmentation of the relationship between
agents caused by the single-layer parameter sharing mechanism, and to establish the cooperative
relationship between agents of different roles in a wider range. As shown in Figure 1, the team
level is mainly composed of the group selector V and grouping cooperative networks. The group
selector V is realized through an additional reinforcement learning task. We introduce a GAT for
this task to find the correlation between different dynamic roles and promote the role composition in
the grouping results to be more comprehensive and complete. In the part of parameter sharing, we
add additional implicit information hU t from the individual role level to give full play to the positive
impact of the individual identities on the team results.

3.2.1    C OMBINE D IFFERENT ROLES TO ACHIEVE G ROUPING
The group selector V takes the virtual roles uU as inputs. This input information is encoded into the
feature vector
             of the agents via a multi-layer perceptron (MLP). Subsequently, these feature vectors
form a set x1t , x2t , ..., xN
                             t to be input into the GAT. We use the self-attention mechanism in the
GAT to calculate the attention coefficient eij between agents and use it as an essential basis for
grouping:                                           h               i
                               eij = LeakyReLU aT Wxit ||Wxjt ,                                   (4)
where i, j ∈ N . In our method, considering the similar observation information and close location
arrangement between agents, and there is no rigid separation restriction between roles of different
agents, we allow the agent’s attention to come from all undead agents (including itself) at the current
moment. Of course, to facilitate the comparison of the attention coefficient between agents, we also
use the softmax function for normalization.
                                                                
                                     ′     K     X
                                  xit = || σ        αijk
                                                          Wk xjt  ,                                (5)
                                         k=1      j∈Ni

where k represents the number of attention heads, which is consistent with the number of virtual
roles we set. We hope to find the influence of different agents’ roles as the dominant factors on the
formation of teams by agents. For other parts in Equation 5, Ni represents the first-order neigh-
borhood of agent i, and αij = softmaxj (eij ) represents the normalized attention coefficient that
indicates the importance of agent j’s features to agent i.
                                    n                    o
                                        ′    ′         ′
A new set of feature vectors x′t = x1t , x2t , ..., xN
                                                     t     is obtained after the GAT, which is input into
the GRU network to get the hidden state affecting the grouping of agents. When the time t increment
is equal to the period for agents to update groups TV , we use the hidden state to output the groups’
value and use the ε−greedy to select groups vV for agents.

3.3     OVERALL O BJECTIVES

3.3.1    G ET THE L OCAL Q-F UNCTIONS R EQUIRED BY AGENTS
In previous sections, we use the role selector U at the individual level and the group selector V at
the team level to map agents from actual individuals to virtual roles uU and groups vV , respectively.
The bi-level parameter sharing mechanism is also established for agents using roles and groups
information obtained. Although contributions from hidden states at the individual level are used in
calculating the local Q-functions of agents at the team level, we still may not completely discard
explicit efforts at the individual level of agents. So we give the local Q-function:
                                Q (τ , a) = QU (τ , a) + QV (τ , a) .                                (6)

3.3.2    T RAIN THE M ODULES I NCLUDED IN O UR M ETHOD
Starting from the individual level, we need to train the role selector U to select appropriate virtual
roles for agents. The training objectives of the Role Selector U include the corrected reconstruction
item and the KL-divergence item, and our goal is to minimize these two items:

               LU (ξ, ϕ; AU ) = Lmse AU , ÂU + λDKL [qϕ (zlU |hlU ) ||pξ (zlU )] ,                (7)


                                                   5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


where Lmse (·) is the mean squared error term for calculate the reconstruction loss of the advan-
tage sequence, lU is the length of the AU , λ is a scaling factor and ÂU is the agents’ advantage
information reconstruction sequence, which is obtained by the Decoder’s output ĥlU .
For the group selector V at the team level, we used the QMIX (Rashid et al., 2018) and RODE
(Wang et al., 2021b) methods because we introduced an additional deep reinforcement learning task
to generate groups for agents:
                                                                                                 !2 
               X        V −1
                       TX
    LV (θν ) =              rt+∆t + γmaxvV′ Q̄Vtot (τ ′ , a′ , u′U , s′ ) − QVtot (τ , a, uU , s)  , (8)
                 b      ∆t=0

where b is the batch size of transitions sampled from the replay buffer.
In order for agents to use global rewards to learn local Q-functions, we input the local Q-value
into the mixing network of QMIX (Rashid et al., 2018) again to estimate the global action value
Qtot (τ , a):
                            Xh                                                         2 i
               LT D (θµ ) =       r + γmaxa′ Q̄tot (τ ′ , a′ , s′ ) − Qtot (τ , a, s)      . (9)
                               b


4     E XPERIMENTS

In this section, we demonstrate and evaluate the advantages of our proposed BDPS using the chal-
lenging tasks in the StarCraft II micromanagement enviroments (SMAC) and Google Research Foot-
ball (GRF). We not only compare our proposed method with QMIX (Rashid et al., 2018) which
adopts full parameter sharing mechanism and no parameter sharing mechanism, but also further
compare with several baseline methods aimed at promoting the diversity of agents’ policies, such as
CDS (Li et al., 2021), EOI (Jiang & Lu, 2021) and RODE(Wang et al., 2021b). Finally, we ablate
our method in SMAC, verifying the true utility of the components in our method.

4.1   P ERFORMANCE ON G OOGLE R ESEARCH F OOTBALL (D EC -POMDP)

In the official multi-agent example, agents are allowed to observe all information on the field, which
is contrary to our research hypothesis. We provide an observation space setting for agents in the
Dec-POMDP version. The observation space of agents can dynamically change with their motion
vectors. See Appendix A.2 for details.
First, we compare our method and baseline methods in the GRF of the Dec-POMDP version we
provide. Compared with the experimental scenario provided by CDS (Li et al., 2021), we use the
algorithm to control all agents in the left team, use the built-in scoring and checkpoints reward
settings of GRF, and set that the agents in the left team cannot be moved by the built-in AI of the
system when they do not touch the ball.
As shown in Figure 2, we select two scenarios academy 3 vs 1 with keeper and
academy pass and shoot with keeper for comparison. We compare the actual reward re-
ceived by the agents with the goal score in both scenarios. In general, our method is able to achieve
better results than other baseline algorithms in both scenarios. Among them, the full parameter
sharing version of QMIX is better than the non-sharing version, and other improved baseline
algorithms based on full parameter sharing QMIX can also achieve goals, but the effect is not
obvious.
As we mentioned in Section 1, the full parameter sharing mechanism ignores the identities and
capabilities of agents, which makes them lose the diversity of behavior policies. As a result, full
parameter sharing cannot improve the effectiveness of the algorithm when agents observe scenes
with large differences in information. For the single-layer dynamic selective parameter sharing, due
to the hard cutting of the relationship between agents that do not participate in parameter sharing,
although better results can be achieved by relying on the selective parameter sharing mechanism, the
agents cannot form a sufficiently stable cooperative relationship, which makes the effect fluctuate
significantly. See Appendix C for the specific results.


                                                    6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


          Figure 2: Performance comparison with baselines on Google Research Football.


Figure 3: Performance comparison with baselines on three super hard maps and three hard maps.
(In Appdendix E, we show results on the whole benchmark.)



In both scenarios, we can see that RODE differentiated the roles of the agents by limiting their
action space, but this limitation also prevented the agents from achieving further training results.
Through the experimental results, we can find that these baseline algorithms drop the ball in these
two academy-scenarios, indicating that the agents do not form a sufficiently complementary collab-
orative relationship.


4.2   P ERFORMANCE ON S TAR C RAFT II

As can be seen from Figure 3, our method is superior to other baseline methods on these maps, es-
pecially in maps with a larger number of agents, where our method is able to maintain its advantage.
Of course, EOI and RODE also show good stability in these maps, and the full parameter sharing
version of QMIX is still better than the no parameter sharing version.
Specifically, our method has more advantages than the CDS, which emphasizes the balance of per-
sonalities and commonalities of agents. As we mentioned, exploring the dynamic balance between
individual personalities and commonalities is essential. Still, this balance is difficult to define, so we
do not give factors in Equation 6 that can adjust the different importance at the individual and team
levels. This balance is dynamic and hides in the process of sharing dynamic parameters we design.
We will describe it in detail in the ablation experiment in Section 4.3.


                                                    7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


4.3   A BLATION S TUDY

In this section, we conduct ablation studies to understand the actual utility of each level in our bi-
level dynamic parameter sharing mechanism. In addition to showing the winning rate of maps in
SMAC, we calculate the entropy difference between individuals and teams to quantify the advan-
tages of different components.


Figure 4: Comparison of different parameter       Figure 5: Comparison of different virtual roles
sharing mechanisms in 5m vs 6m.                   in MMM2 (Only individual level).

We first use the homogeneous agents’ map 5m vs 6m in SMAC to conduct ablation research to
analyze the advantages of dynamic parameter sharing over full and no parameter sharing. As shown
in Figure 4, we can see that the method of applying parameter sharing has apparent advantages
over the method without parameter sharing. Of course, our method is better than QMIX’s full static
parameter sharing. Specifically, the single-level dynamic parameter sharing has a weak advantage
over the full static parameter sharing. Our bi-level dynamic parameter sharing is more advantageous
than the single-level dynamic and full static, which is exactly the goal of our proposed method.
As shown in Figure 5, we also compare the impact of different numbers of virtual roles on the
collaboration of agents in the heterogeneous agents’ map MMM2. From the curve in the figure, we
can find that the winning rate in the MMM2 map increases first and then decreases with the number
of virtual roles, which indicates that blindly increasing the number of virtual roles can adversely
affect the collaboration of agents.
To quantify the difference between our single-level and bi-level dynamic parameter sharing, we
consider analyzing from the perspective of information theory. First, we introduce the evaluation
indicator: Entropy difference.
Entropy describes uncertainty. We describe the capabilities of agents in different layers by compar-
ing the entropy of action value between the two layers.
                                   N
                                                                            !
                               1 X X i               1    X
                                                                i        1
                       ∆H =                  p · log i −       pU · log i ,                     (10)
                               N i=1 a V            pV     ai
                                                                        pU
                                           i

where, piV = softmaxQiV τ i , ait−1 , uiU and piU = softmaxQiU τ i , ait−1 .


      Figure 6: Comparison of the entropy difference of two levels in 5m vs 6m and MMM2.

As shown in Figure 6, we can see that in 5m vs 6m, the information entropy at the team level is
always smaller than that at the individual level, and the difference between the two is increasing.
The change of entropy shows that the agents at the team level are more orderly than strategies


                                                  8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


formed by agents only at the individual level, which also confirms that our team-level design can find
commonalities among agents with different virtual roles to establish correct collaborations between
agents. For MMM2 in Figure 6, our conclusion is still valid. No matter whether k = 3 or k = 5, the
entropy difference between the team level and the individual level is constantly expanding with the
training, and the entropy of the team level is constantly developing in a direction smaller than that
of the individual level. And this phenomenon is consistent with our winning rate in Figure 4 and
Figure 5.


5     R ELATED W ORK

5.1   PARAMETER S HARING

Parameter sharing plays an important role in MARL. Tan (1993) first studied the positive role of
“sharing” in promoting collaborative agents in classical reinforcement learning algorithms. Gupta
et al. (2017) proposed a parameter sharing variant of the single agent DRL algorithms, which intro-
duced the parameter sharing mechanism into homogeneous MARL. Obviously, parameter sharing
has been widely used as the implementation details of homogeneous multi-agent algorithms, such
as QMIX (Rashid et al., 2018), QTRAN (Son et al., 2019), Qatten (Yang et al., 2020), etc. Re-
cently, Terry et al. (2020) applied parameter sharing extensions to heterogeneous agents algorithm
by padding based method, demonstrating again the important use of parameter sharing for multi-
agent algorithms. Of course, recent works have pointed out that full parameter sharing mechanism
tend to make the behavior strategies of agents more same, Christianos et al. (2021) proposed a se-
lective parameter sharing mechanism to eliminate the limitations of full parameter sharing.


5.2   I NDIVIDUALS AND T EAMS

Focusing on the expected development of individuals and teams will not only help agents to maintain
a variety of policies but also help them form a more stable collaboration. At the individual level,
Wang et al. (2020; 2021b) focus on discovering the character traits behind the agents. Jiang & Lu
(2021) studies the identifiability of agent trajectories and fixed identities. Du et al. (2019) proposes
the use of internal rewards to stimulate diverse behaviors among agents. At the team level, Iqbal et al.
(2021) randomly groups agents into related and unrelated groups, allowing agents to explore only
specific entities in their environment. Wang et al. (2022) implements a dynamic grouping method by
extracting the potential intentions of agents as tags. Li et al. (2021) divides agents’ value functions
into shared and unshared parts to focus on the agents’ personality and commonality. In this paper,
we focus on the impact of both individual and team levels on the complementary collaboration of
agents. Of course, our approach is not to overlap the two layers of individuals and teams but to fully
extend and combine the individual identities acquired by the agents.


6     C ONCLUSION AND F UTURE W ORK

In this paper, we proposed BDPS, a novel bi-level dynamic parameter sharing mechanism in MARL.
By maintaining a role selector and a group selector, BDPS provides a new solution for agents to
select the partners for parameter sharing in a timely and dynamic manner at both individual and
team levels. And we integrate the roles and groups of agents into a whole to achieve a dynamic
balance between their personalities and commonalities. Our experiments on SMAC and GRF show
that BDPS can significantly facilitate the formation of complementary and reliable collaboration
between agents.
Additionally, although we defined that agents have the opportunity to be in any role or grouping, they
cannot explicitly utilize past knowledge when they were in other roles or groups. Therefore, how
to make explicit use of the role knowledge they have learned and how to make use of other similar
knowledge are issues that we need to explore further. We will present this paradigm of knowledge
flow across roles, groups, and agents in future work.


                                                   9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


R EFERENCES
Stefano V Albrecht and Subramanian Ramamoorthy. A game-theoretic model and best-response
  learning method for ad hoc coordination in multiagent systems. arXiv preprint arXiv:1506.01170,
  2015.
Stefano V Albrecht and Peter Stone. Reasoning about hypothetical agent behaviours and their pa-
  rameters. arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.11064, 2019.
Sushrut Bhalla, Sriram Ganapathi Subramanian, and Mark Crowley. Deep multi agent reinforcement
  learning for autonomous driving. In Canadian Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume
  12109, pp. 67–78. Springer, 2020.
Lucian Buşoniu, Robert Babuška, and Bart De Schutter. Multi-agent reinforcement learning: An
  overview. Innovations in Multi-Agent Systems and Applications-1, pp. 183–221, 2010.
Filippos Christianos, Georgios Papoudakis, Muhammad A Rahman, and Stefano V Albrecht. Scal-
   ing multi-agent reinforcement learning with selective parameter sharing. In International Confer-
   ence on Machine Learning, volume 139, pp. 1989–1998. PMLR, 2021.
Yali Du, Lei Han, Meng Fang, Ji Liu, Tianhong Dai, and Dacheng Tao. Liir: Learning individ-
  ual intrinsic reward in multi-agent reinforcement learning. In Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, volume 32, pp. 4405–4416, 2019.
Jakob Foerster, Gregory Farquhar, Triantafyllos Afouras, Nantas Nardelli, and Shimon Whiteson.
  Counterfactual multi-agent policy gradients. In Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial
  intelligence, volume 32, 2018.
Charles W Fox and Stephen J Roberts. A tutorial on variational bayesian inference. Artificial
  intelligence review, 38(2):85–95, 2012.
Jayesh K Gupta, Maxim Egorov, and Mykel Kochenderfer. Cooperative multi-agent control using
  deep reinforcement learning. In Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems, volume 10642, pp.
  66–83. Springer, 2017.
Shariq Iqbal, Christian A Schroeder De Witt, Bei Peng, Wendelin Böhmer, Shimon Whiteson, and
  Fei Sha. Randomized entity-wise factorization for multi-agent reinforcement learning. In Pro-
  ceedings of the 38th International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 139, pp. 4596–4606.
  PMLR, 2021.
Jiechuan Jiang and Zongqing Lu. The emergence of individuality. In Proceedings of the 38th
   International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 139, pp. 4992–5001. PMLR, 2021.
Yailen Martı́nez Jiménez. A generic multi-agent reinforcement learning approach for scheduling
  problems. PhD, Vrije Universiteit Brussel, 128, 2012.
Diederik P Kingma and Max Welling. Auto-encoding variational bayes. In 2nd International Con-
  ference on Learning Representations, 2014.
Karol Kurach, Anton Raichuk, Piotr Stańczyk, Michal Zajkac, Olivier Bachem, Lasse Espeholt,
  Carlos Riquelme, Damien Vincent, Marcin Michalski, Olivier Bousquet, et al. Google research
  football: A novel reinforcement learning environment. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference
  on Artificial Intelligence, volume 34, pp. 4501–4510, 2020.
Chenghao Li, Tonghan Wang, Chengjie Wu, Qianchuan Zhao, Jun Yang, and Chongjie Zhang. Cele-
  brating diversity in shared multi-agent reinforcement learning. In Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, pp. 3991–4002, 2021.
Ryan Lowe, Yi I Wu, Aviv Tamar, Jean Harb, OpenAI Pieter Abbeel, and Igor Mordatch. Multi-
  agent actor-critic for mixed cooperative-competitive environments. In Advances in Neural Infor-
  mation Processing Systems, pp. 6379–6390, 2017.
Yaru Niu, Rohan R Paleja, and Matthew C Gombolay. Multi-agent graph-attention communication
  and teaming. In International Conference on Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems, pp.
  964–973, 2021.


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Frans A Oliehoek and Christopher Amato. A Concise Introduction to Decentralized POMDPs.
  Springer, 2016.
Georgios Papoudakis, Filippos Christianos, Lukas Schäfer, and Stefano V Albrecht. Benchmarking
  multi-agent deep reinforcement learning algorithms in cooperative tasks. In Proceedings of the
  Neural Information Processing Systems Track on Datasets and Benchmarks 1, 2021.
Tabish Rashid, Mikayel Samvelyan, Christian Schroeder, Gregory Farquhar, Jakob Foerster, and
  Shimon Whiteson. Qmix: Monotonic value function factorisation for deep multi-agent reinforce-
  ment learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 4295–4304. PMLR, 2018.
Tabish Rashid, Gregory Farquhar, Bei Peng, and Shimon Whiteson. Weighted qmix: Expanding
  monotonic value function factorisation for deep multi-agent reinforcement learning. Advances in
  neural information processing systems, 33:10199–10210, 2020.
Mikayel Samvelyan, Tabish Rashid, Christian Schroeder De Witt, Gregory Farquhar, Nantas
 Nardelli, Tim GJ Rudner, Chia-Man Hung, Philip HS Torr, Jakob Foerster, and Shimon White-
 son. The starcraft multi-agent challenge. In Proceedings of the 18th International Conference on
 Autonomous Agents and MultiAgent Systems, pp. 2186–2188, 2019.
Esmaeil Seraj, Zheyuan Wang, Rohan Paleja, Matthew Sklar, Anirudh Patel, and Matthew Gombo-
  lay. Heterogeneous graph attention networks for learning diverse communication. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2108.09568, 2021.
Kyunghwan Son, Daewoo Kim, Wan Ju Kang, David Earl Hostallero, and Yung Yi. Qtran: Learning
  to factorize with transformation for cooperative multi-agent reinforcement learning. In Interna-
  tional Conference on Machine Learning, volume 97, pp. 5887–5896. PMLR, 2019.
Ya Su, Youjian Zhao, Chenhao Niu, Rong Liu, Wei Sun, and Dan Pei. Robust anomaly detection for
  multivariate time series through stochastic recurrent neural network. In Proceedings of the 25th
  ACM SIGKDD international conference on knowledge discovery & data mining, pp. 2828–2837,
  2019.
Ming Tan. Multi-agent reinforcement learning: Independent vs. cooperative agents. In International
 Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 330–337. PMLR, 1993.
Justin K Terry, Nathaniel Grammel, Ananth Hari, Luis Santos, and Benjamin Black. Revisiting
  parameter sharing in multi-agent deep reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.13625,
  2020.
Petar Velickovic, Guillem Cucurull, Arantxa Casanova, Adriana Romero, Pietro Liò, and Yoshua
  Bengio. Graph attention networks. In 6th International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2018.
Han Wang, Yang Yu, and Yuan Jiang. A cooperative multi-agent reinforcement learning algorithm
  based on dynamic self-selection parameters sharing. Chinese Journal of Intelligent Science and
  Technology, 4(1):75, 2022.
Jianhao Wang, Zhizhou Ren, Terry Liu, Yang Yu, and Chongjie Zhang. QPLEX: duplex dueling
   multi-agent q-learning. In 9th International Conference on Learning Representations, 2021a.
Tonghan Wang, Heng Dong, Victor Lesser, and Chongjie Zhang. Roma: Multi-agent reinforcement
  learning with emergent roles. In Proceedings of the 37th International Conference on Machine
  Learning, volume 119, pp. 9876–9886. PMLR, 2020.
Tonghan Wang, Tarun Gupta, Anuj Mahajan, Bei Peng, Shimon Whiteson, and Chongjie Zhang.
  Rode: Learning roles to decompose multi-agent tasks. In 9th International Conference on Learn-
  ing Representations, 2021b.
Mingyu Yang, Jian Zhao, Xunhan Hu, Wengang Zhou, and Houqiang Li. Ldsa: Learning dy-
 namic subtask assignment in cooperative multi-agent reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2205.02561, 2022.
Yaodong Yang, Jianye Hao, Ben Liao, Kun Shao, Guangyong Chen, Wulong Liu, and Hongyao
  Tang. Qatten: A general framework for cooperative multiagent reinforcement learning. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2002.03939, 2020.


                                               11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A     M ULTI -AGENT E NVIRONMENTS
In this paper, we use three multi-agent environments, Starcraft II Multi-agent Challenge
(SMAC)(Samvelyan et al., 2019), Google Research Football (GRF) (Kurach et al., 2020) and Level-
Based Foraging (LBF) Papoudakis et al. (2021); Albrecht & Ramamoorthy (2015); Albrecht &
Stone (2019), to conduct verification experiments.

A.1    SMAC

The starcraft multi-agent challenge is a fully collaborative, partially observable set of multiagent
tasks. This environment implements various micro-management tasks based on the popular real-
time strategy game StarCraft II. Each mission is a specific battle scenario in which a group of agents,
each of whom controls a single unit, fight against an army controlled by the built-in AI in StarCraft
II.
Compared with the LBF, SMAC provides more abundant battle scenes for agents. We conducted
comparative experiments with baseline methods on hard and super hard maps. The characteristics
of relevant maps are shown in Table 1.

                            Table 1: Maps used in our experiments.
     Map Name      Number of Controlled Agents                    Map Type
    bane vs bane              24                    Hard       Symmetric Heterogeneous
      MMM2                    10                    Hard      Asymmetric Heterogeneous
     5m vs 6m                  5                    Hard      Asymmetric Homogeneous
      3s vs 5z                 3                    Hard      Asymmetric Homogeneous
     2c vs 64zg                2                    Hard      Asymmetric Homogeneous
    27m vs 30m                27                 Super Hard Asymmetric Homogeneous
      6h vs 8z                 6                 Super Hard Asymmetric Homogeneous
      corridor                 6                 Super Hard Asymmetric Homogeneous
    3s5z vs 3s6z               8                 Super Hard Asymmetric Heterogeneous


A.2    GRF

In Google Research Football (GRF) tasks, agents need to cooperate according to the rules of football
matches to win games or related training tasks. The reward settings of GRF can be divided into two
types. One is that only goals can be rewarded (scoring), and the other is that when an agent reaches
a specific coordinate point (checkpoints), it will get a certain reward. Compared with the two types
of reward, the setting of the first type is more sparse. In the official multi-agent example, agents are
allowed to observe all information on the field, which is contrary to our research hypothesis. We
provide an observation space setting for agents in the Dec-POMDP version. The observation space
of agents can dynamically change with their motion vectors, as shown in Figure 7. Considering the
size of the field in the environment, we set the visual distance of the agents to 0.84, and the forward
visual angle to 200◦ . The agents can observe the position and direction of the ball, and within the
range of viewing them, we also allow the agents to observe the position of their teammates and the
position of their opponents.
In our experiment, we control all the players on the left side and set their movement state to be lazy
(when not touching the ball, there is no built-in AI intervention), and the built-in AI in the system
completely controls all the players on the right side.

A.3    LBF

The LBF is a multi-agent collection task built on a grid world where each agent and object is as-
signed a level. The criteria for successful collection by agents is the sum of the levels of the related
agent needs to be equal to or greater than the level of the item. The agent will receive a reward
at the relative item level if the item is successfully collected. LBF provides a more sparse reward
environment and collaboration constraints than SMAC, which puts forward higher requirements for
the effectiveness of multi-agent algorithms.


                                                  12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                    Figure 7: The Observation Space Design of Agents in GRF


The difficulty of the LBF can be adjusted by the number of agents, the size of the grid world, the
type of items, and the hard collaboration constraints. In this paper, we select 15×15-4p-5f as a
supplement to the ablation experiment to verify whether the different components of our method
are still valid in a more challenging collaborative setting. The 15×15-4p-5f scene indicates that 4
agents in a 15×15 grid world are involved in collecting 5 items.


                                  Figure 8: 15×15-4p-5f in LBF.


B    C ASE S TUDY IN LBF
As discussed in Appendix A.3, the constraints from level and the sparse reward environment pose
a greater challenge for agents to establish complementary and reliable collaborations. In order to
verify the effectiveness of our proposed dynamic parameter sharing mechanism for the formation of
complementary relationships between agents, we verify the performance of different parameter shar-
ing mechanisms in 15×15-4p-5f, including single-layer dynamic parameter sharing (ours with only
individual level), bi-layer dynamic parameter sharing (ours), full static parameter sharing (classic
QMIX) and no parameter sharing (QMIX with non-sharing) at all.


                                                13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


        Figure 9: Comparison of different parameter sharing mechanisms in 15×15-4p-5f.



As shown in Figure 9, our method still yields the best return, demonstrating that our approach
promotes more collaboration among agents. Although single-layer dynamic parameter sharing can
promote agent collaboration, it can not always form complementary collaborative relationships. The
result again confirms that forming complementary collaborations among agents requires a dynamic
balance of personality and commonality, which is hidden in dynamic parameter sharing at both the
individual and team levels.


C    A BLATION S TUDY IN GRF

As shown in Figure 8, we additionally verified the performance of the single-layer dynamic param-
eter sharing mechanism (only individual level) in two GRF scenarios.


        Figure 10: Performance comparison with baselines on Google Research Football.


Unlike the experimental results of SMAC and LBF, the algorithm of single-layer dynamic parame-
ter sharing is better than the QMIX algorithm of full static parameter sharing and even can achieve
the result of bi-level parameter sharing in academy 3 vs 1 with keeper. The experimental phe-
nomena is because, in the GRF environment, agents have a more extensive range of actions, which
makes them have a unique observation space than the other two environments, which proves that the
full parameter is more effective because agents have similar observation spaces(Christianos et al.,
2021).
We need to point out that the single-layer dynamic parameter sharing mechanism in the two scenar-
ios is not as stable as our bi-level dynamic parameter sharing mechanism. This is because, on the
one hand, agents are unstable due to changes in shared partners; on the other hand, agents that do
not share parameters cannot establish complementary cooperation relationships, which again proves
that our approach is correct in considering both individual and team levels.


                                                14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


D    T HE E FFECT OF T HE N UMBER OF V IRTUAL ROLES

During the experiment, we found that setting different numbers of virtual roles would affect the per-
formance of the entire algorithm. As shown in Figure 11, we show that in the SMAC environment,
we only consider the impact of different numbers of virtual roles on the experimental results.


    Figure 11: Compare the effects of different numbers of virtual roles (only individual level).

As we analyzed in the text, setting too many virtual roles will not improve the performance of the
algorithm.


E    F ULL E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS IN SMAC


                  Figure 12: Performance comparison with baselines on SMAC.



                                                 15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


F    H YPERPARAMETERS S ETTING
In our method, we design a role selector and a group selector to guide agents in selecting appropriate
partners for dynamic parameter sharing at the individual and team levels. The core of the role
selector is a gated recurrent unit variational autoencoders (GRU-VAE). Besides the GRU unit, the
encoder and decoder parts that makeup VAE are composed of simple linear layers and activation
functions. The design of the group selector can be divided into a graph attention network with a 128-
dimensional output state and other corresponding dimensions of the network layers (a linear layer
and a GRU unit with a 64-dimensional hidden state). To expand, we use the softmax function to get
the roles of agents at the individual level through the bottleneck of the GRU-VAE. For the grouping
of agents at the team level, considering that our grouping task is an extra-designed reinforcement
learning task, we use the same ε − greedy method as agents’ selection of actions.
We need to state that, in addition to the newly designed components of our method, we maintain
as much agreement as possible with the baseline method QMIX on the structure, parameters, and
optimization methods that make up the rest of our method, so as to fully demonstrate in ablation
experiments that the real utility of the different components that make up our method comes entirely
from our design.

G    E XPERIMENTAL D ETAILS
For our method and baseline algorithms used, we tested 2M and 5M steps on all hard maps and all
super hard maps of SMAC using five random seeds, respectively. Due to the use of the ε − greedy
method, we set ε to be linearly annealed from 1.0 to 0.05 in 70K time steps in all hard maps and
three super hard maps and kept constant during the rest of the training period. We set the annealing
time for the remaining super hard map 6h vs 8z to 500K.
In GRF, we respectively tested 10M and 8M steps on academy 3 vs 1 with keeper and
academy pass and shoot with keeper using three random seeds. We set ε to be linearly an-
nealed from 1.0 to 0.05 in 100K time steps in both scenarios. For part of the observable space we
designed, it contains the location information of the agent itself, the position, direction and attribu-
tion information of the football, as well as the player information and opponent information within
the visual range.
To test our method components’ effectiveness in the 15×15-4p-5f scenario of the LBF environment,
we set the experimental test step as 20M and the annealing time of ε as 200K. The setting of ε
remains the same in our method and baseline algorithms.
For the section on the virtual roles and groups setup in our method, in order to ensure that the
collaborative relationship between agents is sufficiently complementary, we set the number of agents
n, the number of virtual roles k, and the number of groups m satisfying the relationship n ≥ k ≥
m ≥ 2. Of course, as we obtained plots of the number of virtual roles and the win rate in our ablation
experiments, the number of virtual roles could not be increased blindly. Blindly increasing the
number of virtual roles not only brings a vast amount of parameters, but also makes complementary
collaborations between agents impossible. In the SMAC and the LBF, the number of virtual roles
we set is shown in Table 2. In response to agents’ virtual roles and groups update periods, we have
TV = e·TU . To guarantee that the virtual roles and groups are updated normally in each episode, we
require that the update periods of the virtual roles and the groups satisfies TU , TV < len(episode).
We set update periods for virtual roles and groups based on the average length of a episode. In
general, we set the update periods of 5, 7, 8, 10 or 14 with e = 1 or 2.
Our experiments are completed at Ubuntu 18.04 with a GPU of NVIDIA GTX 3090, a CPU of Intel
i9-12900k and a memory size of 128G. In addition, the SMAC version is 4.10, the experimental
version of 15×15-4p-5f in LBF is v2 and the version of the GRF is 2.10. We will open source my
algorithm and experimental environments code on time.


                                                  16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


               Table 2: Number of virtual roles and groups in different maps.
  Environment Name            Map Name               Number of Roles Number of Groups
                             bane vs bane                    3                2
                               MMM2                          5                2
                              5m vs 6m                       3                2
                               3s vs 5z                      2                2
        SMAC                  2c vs 64zg                     2                2
                             27m vs 30m                      3                2
                               6h vs 8z                      3                2
                               corridor                      3                2
                             3s5z vs 3s6z                    3                2
         LBF                 15×15-40-5f                     2                2
                          3 vs 1 with keeper                 2                2
         GRF
                      pass and shoot with keeper             2                2


                                             17
