Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


M ULTI -V IEW M ASKED AUTOENCODERS
FOR V ISUAL C ONTROL

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT

         This paper investigates how to leverage data from multiple cameras to learn rep-
         resentations beneficial for visual control. To this end, we present the Multi-View
         Masked Autoencoder (MV-MAE), a simple and scalable framework for multi-
         view representation learning. Our main idea is to mask multiple viewpoints from
         video frames at random and train a video autoencoder to reconstruct pixels of both
         masked and unmasked viewpoints. This allows the model to learn representations
         that capture useful information of the current viewpoint but also the cross-view
         information from different viewpoints. We evaluate MV-MAE on challenging
         RLBench visual manipulation tasks by training a reinforcement learning agent on
         top of frozen representations. Our experiments demonstrate that MV-MAE signifi-
         cantly outperforms other multi-view representation learning approaches. Moreover,
         we show that the number of cameras can differ between the representation learning
         phase and the behavior learning phase. By training a single-view control agent on
         top of multi-view representations from MV-MAE, we achieve 62.3% success rate
         while the single-view representation learning baseline achieves 42.3%.


1   I NTRODUCTION
Recent self-supervised learning approaches have been successful at learning useful representations
from multiple views of the data, including different channels (Zhang et al., 2017) or patches (Oord
et al., 2018) of an image, vision-sound modalities (Owens et al., 2016), vision-language modali-
ties (Radford et al., 2021; Alayrac et al., 2022), and frames of a video (Wang & Gupta, 2015). The
main underlying idea of these approaches is to utilize information about the same data from different
perspectives as supervision for representation learning. Notably, Zhang et al. (2017) trained an au-
toencoder that predicts a subset of the image channels from another subset, and Radford et al. (2021)
trained a vision-language model that matches image-text pairs with contrastive learning. Promising
results from these approaches suggest that data diversity can play a key role in representation learning.
In the context of visual control, the camera is an easily accessible instrument that can increase data
diversity by providing information about the same scene from different viewpoints. For instance,
it has been a widely-used technique for roboticists to utilize multiple cameras for solving complex
manipulation tasks (Akkaya et al., 2019; Akinola et al., 2020; Hsu et al., 2022; James et al., 2022;
Jangir et al., 2022). Yet these works mostly focus on the improved performance from utilizing
multi-view observations as inputs, not investigating the effectiveness of representation learning with
diverse data from multiple cameras. A notable exception is the work from Sermanet et al. (2018),
which learns view-invariant representations via contrastive learning. However, enforcing viewpoint
invariance assumes that all viewpoints share similar information and thus requires careful curation
of positive and negative pairs, similar to other contrastive approaches that often depend on complex
design choices about sampling such pairs (Arora et al., 2019).
We present Multi-View Masked Autoencoders (MV-MAE), a simple and scalable framework for
visual representation learning with diverse data from multiple cameras. Our main idea is to mask
randomly selected viewpoints and train an autoencoder that reconstructs pixels of both masked and
unmasked viewpoints. This allows the model to learn representations of each viewpoint that captures
visual information of the current viewpoint but also cross-view information of other viewpoints. To
further encourage cross-view representation learning, we propose to train a video autoencoder by
masking multiple viewpoints from video frames at random. Because the model can utilize information


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                        CNN     Masking                                                Reconstruction

                                                          ViT          ViT



           Camera
            Front
 Frame 1                                                Encoder       Decoder


           Camera
            Wrist
           Camera
            Front
 Frame 2

           Camera
            Wrist


                           : Masked Features        : Mask Tokens for Each Camera
Figure 1: Illustration of our representation learning scheme. We extract features from each viewpoint
with convolutional networks (CNN) and mask all features from randomly selected viewpoints of
video frames. We also mask randomly selected features from remaining viewpoints to encourage the
autoencoder to learn information of unmasked frames. A vision transformer (ViT; Dosovitskiy et al.
2021) encoder processes visible features to fuse information from multiple views and frames. Then a
ViT decoder concatenates mask tokens for each view and processes inputs to reconstruct frames. We
note that the autoencoder reconstructs all frames at the same time.


from the current frame but also information from unmasked frames of the target view, we find our
approach helps the model to focus on predicting important details, e.g., gripper poses. Then we utilize
learned representations for visual control by training a reinforcement learning agent that learns a
world model on top of frozen representations and utilizes it for behavior learning (Seo et al., 2022a).

Contributions. We highlight the contributions of our paper below:

    • We present MV-MAE, a simple and scalable framework that can leverage diverse data from
      multiple cameras for visual representation learning. The main idea of MV-MAE is training a
      video masked autoencoder (Tong et al., 2022; Feichtenhofer et al., 2022) with a view-masking
      strategy that encourages the model to learn spatial dependency between viewpoints.
    • We provide empirical evaluation of MV-MAE on challenging visual manipulation tasks from
      RLBench (James et al., 2020). Unlike other multi-view representation learning baselines that
      enforce invariance between multiple viewpoints (Sermanet et al., 2018; Assran et al., 2022), MV-
      MAE consistently outperforms a single-view representation learning baseline under a challenging
      experimental setup with multiple cameras of diverse types.
    • We demonstrate that data diversity from multiple viewpoints can play a crucial role in representa-
      tion learning for visual control. In particular, by training a single-view control agent on top of
      multi-view representations from MV-MAE, we find that our approach significantly outperforms a
      single-view representation learning baseline, e.g., we achieve 62.3% success rate on six visual
      manipulation tasks while the baseline achieves 42.3%.


2          R ELATED W ORK
Unsupervised visual representation learning. Self-supervised learning on large-scale unlabeled
datasets has been actively studied in the domain of computer vision (Noroozi & Favaro, 2016;
Chen et al., 2020; Grill et al., 2020; He et al., 2021). A line of research that has been successful is
contrastive learning, which learns representations by maximizing the mutual information between


                                                    2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 2: Masked view reconstruction on Take Lid Off Saucepan (left) and Put Rubbish in Bin (right)
tasks from RLBench (James et al., 2020). We visualize ground-truth frames with masked viewpoints
(upper two rows) and ground-truth frames with reconstructed frames (lower two rows). We find that
the model can successfully reconstruct masked viewpoints.


different views of images (Chen et al., 2020; He et al., 2020; Tian et al., 2020a;b). The work closest
to ours is Sermanet et al. (2018), which proposed to learn view-invariant representations with videos
collected with multiple cameras. But contrastive approaches often require complex design choices
with regard to sampling positive-negative pairs (Arora et al., 2019) and can fail when the assumption
for induced invariance does not hold for downstream tasks (Xiao et al., 2021). We instead take a
simple approach that learns representations via masked reconstruction.
Our work is closely related to denoising autoencoding approaches (Vincent et al., 2010; Pathak et al.,
2016) that train an autoencoder to reconstruct masked inputs. Notably, He et al. (2021) proposed a
scalable masked autoencoder architecture that masks a large portion of an image and only uses visible
patches as inputs for solving reconstruction tasks. Our model is built on top of its spatiotemporal
extension that introduces a video autoencoder (Tong et al., 2022; Feichtenhofer et al., 2022). This
work follows this line of research by introducing the autoencoder that reconstructs masked viewpoints.
Recently, Geng et al. (2022) trained a unified autoencoder for vision-language modalities with masked
token prediction and found that data diversity allows for learning transferable representations. We
support this finding with our investigation that shows data diversity from multiple cameras can be
helpful for representation learning in the context of visual control.

Unsupervised representation learning for visual control. Representation learning from visual
observations has also been actively studied for learning to solve control tasks from easily accessible
cameras (Watter et al., 2015; Oord et al., 2018; Gelada et al., 2019; Hafner et al., 2019; Yarats et al.,
2021b; Srinivas et al., 2020; Castro, 2020; Schwarzer et al., 2021a; Yarats et al., 2021a; Seo et al.,
2022b). Recent works have demonstrated that self-supervised learning can enable agents to solve
visual control tasks with frozen representations (Stooke et al., 2021; Schwarzer et al., 2021b; Nair
et al., 2022; Parisi et al., 2022; Xiao et al., 2022; Seo et al., 2022a; Radosavovic et al., 2022). Our
work further demonstrates that frozen representations learned with diverse data from multiple camera
viewpoints can be effective for solving challenging visual manipulation tasks.

Visual control with multiple cameras. Leveraging multiple cameras has long been considered a
practical and feasible technique in robotics, as the camera is usually an affordable and ubiquitous
device (Sola et al., 2008; Carrera et al., 2011; Yang et al., 2021). Based on recent advances in
computer vision and robot learning, there have been several approaches that utilize multi-view data
from multiple cameras for visual control (Sermanet et al., 2018; Akinola et al., 2020; Zhan et al.,
2020; Chen et al., 2021a; Hsu et al., 2022; Jangir et al., 2022; Shridhar et al., 2022; Guhur et al.,
2022). While most approaches utilize multi-view data directly as inputs for robots, recent works
have demonstrated that self-supervised learning that learns view-invariant representations (Sermanet
et al., 2018) or 3D keypoints (Chen et al., 2021a) can be useful for downstream tasks. This work also
demonstrates that multi-view representation learning can be beneficial for visual control.

3    M ULTI -V IEW M ASKED AUTOENCODERS FOR V ISUAL C ONTROL
To fully exploit the multi-view data for representation learning, it is important to encourage the repre-
sentations to learn cross-view information between viewpoints. In this section, we first introduce the


                                                   3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                             Representation Learning               Multi-view Control              Single-view Control


                  Sample
                 Minibatch


 Replay Buffer                                                                           Freeze

         Store
                                                                                        RL Agent


                                                                                    Environment
                                                                                     Interaction


Figure 3: Overall pipeline of our framework. In the representation learning phase, we learn visual
representation from multi-view data sampled from a replay buffer, as we have illustrated in Figure 1.
In the control phase, we train an RL agent upon the frozen representations and store the samples
collected from online interaction to the buffer. Thanks to our architecture design that can take inputs
of varying lengths, MV-MAE can take inputs of either single-view or multi-view. This allows us to
utilize a different number of cameras for the representation learning and behavior learning phases.
We provide a pseudocode of our framework in Appendix B.


Multi-View Masked Autoencoder (MV-MAE) that reconstructs missing pixels of masked viewpoints
for multi-view representation learning (see Section 3.1). We then describe how we utilize the visual
representations for training a reinforcement learning (RL) agent (see Section 3.2).

3.1    M ULTI - VIEW REPRESENTATION LEARNING

Our main idea for multi-view representation learning is to learn cross-view information from multiple
viewpoints by reconstructing missing pixels of randomly masked viewpoints. However, such masked
view reconstruction might be too challenging for the autoencoder without any access to information
from missing viewpoints. For instance, reconstructing all details of a front camera observation, which
contains a broader view of a robot workspace, with only having access to a wrist camera could be
extremely challenging (see Figure 4 for examples of front and wrist cameras).
To address this issue, we propose to train a video masked autoencoder (Feichtenhofer et al., 2022;
Tong et al., 2022) with view-masking that reconstructs missing pixels of randomly masked viewpoints
from video frames. Because the autoencoder attends to unmasked neighbor frames from the same
view, the model can focus on modeling important information such as target object positions and the
movement of robot arms, while ignoring redundant information such as background for reconstructing
masked viewpoints. We provide the overview of our representation learning scheme in Figure 1.

Convolutional feature embedding. Unlike prior work that masks random pixel patches (He
et al., 2021; Feichtenhofer et al., 2022; Tong et al., 2022; Geng et al., 2022), we embed camera
observations into convolutional feature maps following the design of Seo et al. (2022a).1 Specifically,
we downsample 96×96×3 input images to convolutional feature maps with the spatial size of 6×6 by
introducing 4 convolutional layers. Note that we separately process observations from each viewpoint
with convolutional layers that share parameters. For each viewpoint, we add fixed 2D sin-cos position
embeddings (Chen et al., 2021b) to the features. Then we add learnable 1D parameters representing
   1
     Seo et al. (2022a) observed that masked image modeling with pixel patch masking (He et al., 2021) can
make it difficult for the model to learn fine-grained details within patches, e.g., object positions and boundaries,
which could be crucial for tasks that require precise control such as visual manipulation tasks.


                                                         4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


each camera and timestep to features of each video frame from different viewpoints. This is based on
the idea of Geng et al. (2022) that introduces learnable parameters for vision and language inputs.
Then we flatten the features and concatenate them into a single sequence.

View masking. We introduce a new view-masking scheme that masks all the features from a
randomly selected camera viewpoint to encourage the model to learn cross-view information. Specifi-
cally, we mask randomly selected viewpoints from video frames by randomly sampling one viewpoint
for each frame. We also mask randomly selected features from remaining viewpoints (see Figure 1)
because we want the autoencoder to learn not only cross-view information but also the information
within each viewpoint by reconstructing raw visual observations with masked features. We empirically
find that the proposed view-masking can be more effective than uniform-masking scheme by explicitly
encouraging multi-view representation learning (see Figure 7(a) for supporting experiments).

Video autoencoding. For autoencoder architecture, we largely follow the design of masked autoen-
coders (MAE; He et al. 2021; Feichtenhofer et al. 2022; Tong et al. 2022) that utilize the encoder and
decoder consisting of vision transformers (ViT; Dosovitskiy et al. 2021). Specifically, the encoder
processes a sequence of unmasked features from all viewpoints and video frames through a series
of ViT layers. Then we concatenate a set of mask tokens with encoded features and add learnable
parameters for each viewpoint and each time to corresponding features and mask tokens. The decoder
processes them through ViT layers and linearly projects them into pixel patch predictions (see Fig-
ure 2 for examples of masked view reconstruction). The training loss for the autoencoder is the mean
squared error between patch predictions and ground-truth pixel patches with a spatial size of 16×16.

3.2     V ISUAL CONTROL

Once we learn multi-view representations, we train an RL agent on top of the representations for
visual control. Because MV-MAE consists of ViTs based on a transformer architecture that can
take inputs of variable lengths (Vaswani et al., 2017), the encoder can extract both single-view and
multi-view representations though we utilize multi-view data for representation learning. This can be
beneficial in practical scenarios where we can utilize additional third-person cameras during training,
but the robot should operate on a fewer number of cameras at deployment time for faster inference.

Reinforcement learning. We consider masked world models (MWM; Seo et al. 2022a) as our
base RL algorithm, which learns a world model on top of frozen MAE representations and utilizes
it for behavior learning (Hafner et al., 2021). Because MWM decouples visual representation and
dynamics learning, it naturally aligns with our approach of separately training the autoencoder to
learn visual information from multiple cameras. We provide more details in Appendix C.

Training. Throughout the training, we iterate the processes of (i) updating MV-MAE with multi-
view data, (ii) training the MWM agent with single-view or multi-view data, and (iii) collecting
samples with environment interaction. As inputs to MWM agent, we concatenate the convolutional
features with proprioceptive states and process them through the MV-MAE encoder. Because MWM
is a model-based approach with a recurrent architecture, we extract representations from a single
video frame for behavior learning. This is based on the observation of Feichtenhofer et al. (2022),
where image representations from the video autoencoder are found to be useful for image recognition.


4     E XPERIMENTS

We design our experiments to investigate the following questions:

    • Can MV-MAE effectively leverage multi-view data for representation learning?
    • Can multi-view representation learning be useful for single-view visual control?
    • Can MV-MAE work with more than two cameras?
    • What is the effect of each component in MV-MAE?


                                                   5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


         (a) Pick Up Cup                  (b) Pick and Lift                (c) Phone On Base

Figure 4: Examples of multi-view data consisting front and wrist camera observations used in our
RLBench (James et al., 2020) experiments. Front camera observations provide a broad look at a robot
workspace, and wrist camera observations provide a closer look at target objects. We provide the
examples of multi-view data from all six tasks in Appendix D.


4.1   S ETUP

Environments. We investigate the effectiveness of representation learning with data from multiple
viewpoints on challenging visual manipulation tasks from RLBench (James et al., 2020) — a standard
benchmark for vision-based robotics which has been shown to serve as a proxy for real-robot
experiments (James & Davison, 2022). While RLBench is originally designed to evaluate the
performance in a sparse reward setup, we design dense rewards for six manipulation tasks. Moreover,
to ease the difficulty of exploration in large action space, we enforce a robot gripper to be in an
upright position without rotation. Following James & Davison (2022), we also fill a replay buffer
with 100 expert demonstrations. We find these schemes allow us to focus on investigating the
effect of visual representation learning while avoiding the challenge from sparse rewards and hard
exploration. Unlike prior approaches that utilize path planner with the policy to output next best
gripper pose (James & Davison, 2022; James et al., 2022), our RL agent outputs relative change in
gripper position. We provide further details and source code for the environments in Appendix C.

Implementation. For all experiments, we use only 96×96 RGB observations from each camera.
We downsample images by 16× to obtain convolutional feature maps with a spatial size of 6×6.
Unlike prior approaches that train video masked autoencoders (Feichtenhofer et al., 2022; Tong et al.,
2022), we do not utilize temporal downsampling because the agent operates on each image. For
view-masking, we apply random view-masking independently to each frame in a video consisting
of 4 frames. We compute the masking ratio in our experiments by including the number of features
from masked viewpoints; hence 50% masking ratio means no features are masked from remaining
viewpoints in a two-camera setup. Our autoencoder consists of the 8-layer ViT encoder and the
6-layer ViT decoder, where the embedding dimension is set to 256. We do not utilize a learning
rate schedule as a replay buffer keeps receiving new samples. Following the design of Seo et al.
(2022a), we also introduce a reward prediction objective for the autoencoder to encode task-relevant
information into visual representations. We provide more details and source codes for reproducing
our results in Appendix C.

Baselines and our framework. We consider following baselines for our experiments. For a fair
comparison, we ensure that all methods use the same amount of data for representation learning.
Specifically, for a single-view representation learning baseline, we train a single-view encoder on
camera observations from both viewpoints. We also use the same architecture for all methods. More
details on baselines are available in Appendix A.

 • Masked world models (MWM; Seo et al. 2022a): MWM learns visual representations of a
   single viewpoint by training an image autoencoder and trains a world model on top of frozen
   representations. Because MWM does not encode cross-view information into representations,
   comparison with MWM evaluates the benefit of multi-view representation learning.
 • MWM + Masked Siamese Network (MSN; Assran et al. 2022): MSN learns visual representations
   by matching the representations of masked images and the augmented images. We modify MSN
   to learn cross-view information by making it match the representation of the masked viewpoint
   with the unmasked viewpoint. We apply MSN to MWM and use it as a baseline. Comparison
   with MWM + MSN evaluates the benefit of our approach against representation learning that
   enforces view-invariance via positive pair matching (Grill et al., 2020; Assran et al., 2022).


                                                  6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                    80                                            MWM + MV-MAE            MWM + MSN
                                                                  MWM                     TCN
                    70
Success Rate (\%)   60
                    50
                    40
                    30
                    20
                    10
                     0
                             Multi-View Control (Front + Wrist)     Single-View Control (Front)       Single-View Control (Wrist)

Figure 5: Aggregate success rate of multi-view visual control and single-view visual control agents on
six visual manipulation tasks from RLBench (James et al., 2020). We find that MV-MAE consistently
outperforms both single-view and multi-view baselines across all setups. Importantly, single-view
control agents trained upon multi-view representations from MV-MAE achieve superior performance
to other approaches, demonstrating the importance of data diversity. The result shows the mean and
standard deviation averaged over 24 runs. We provide the learning curve for all tasks in Appendix F.


       • Time Contrastive Network (TCN; Sermanet et al. 2018): TCN learns visual representations
         through contrastive learning that utilizes observations from simultaneous viewpoints as positive
         and frames from the same view but taken from different times as negative. We consider TCN
         as a baseline to evaluate our approach against the approach that enforces view-invariance via
         contrastive loss requiring a complex scheme for sampling positive-negative pairs.
       • MWM + MV-MAE (Ours): We build our approach upon MWM by learning a world model on
         top of frozen representations from MV-MAE. This differs from MWM in that we train the video
         autoencoder with view-masking to learn cross-view information from multi-view data.


4.2                      Q UANTITATIVE RESULTS

Multi-view control with front and wrist cameras. We first evaluate the effectiveness of our
multi-view representation learning scheme in a multi-view visual control setup, where the agent
operates on both front and wrist cameras. For all baselines, we extract features from each viewpoint
and use concatenated features as inputs to the agent. For our approach, we use generic representations
from a single multi-view encoder as inputs. In Figure 5, we first observe that MWM + MV-MAE
and MWM + MSN outperform MWM, which shows the importance of multi-view representation
learning. However, we find that TCN significantly fails to solve most of the tasks. This shows the
critical drawback of TCN, which suffers from mode collapse when negative samples are too similar
(e.g., wrist camera observations look similar after grasping the objects in our case). We also find
that MWM + MV-MAE outperforms both multi-view baselines, demonstrating that masked view
reconstruction can effectively leverage multi-view data for representation learning compared to other
approaches that enforce view-invariance despite its simplicity.

Single-view control. We also report the performance of single-view visual control agents in Figure 5.
For single-view control experiments, we learn visual representations using multi-view data consisting
of front and wrist camera observations and train the RL agent that operates on either front or wrist
camera. Interestingly, we find MWM + MV-MAE significantly outperforms MWM in both setups,
which shows that multi-view representation learning can also be effective when we only have access
to single-view data for behavior learning. This result suggests that our approach can be useful for
practical scenarios where we can utilize additional third-person cameras during training, but the robot
should operate on a single wrist camera at deployment time.

Three camera experiments. One limitation of multi-view baselines is that it is difficult to scale up
them into a setup with more than two cameras because they learn representations by matching the
representation of two views. Meanwhile, our approach is naturally applicable to a setup with more
than two cameras because our approach simply reconstructs multi-view data from all cameras. To


                                                                             7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                          Take Lid Off Saucepan                                                           Pick Up Cup                                                     Take Umbrella Out of Stand
                   100                                                                             80                                                                      90
                                                                                                                                                                                    MWM
                                                                                                   70                                                                      80       + MV-MAE (Front + Wrist)
                       80                                                                                                                                                  70       + MV-MAE (Front + Left + Right)
                                                                                                   60
Success Rate (%)


                                                                                Success Rate (%)


                                                                                                                                                        Success Rate (%)
                                                                                                                                                                           60
                       60                                                                          50
                                                                                                                                                                           50
                                                                                                   40
                                                                                                                                                                           40
                       40                                                                          30
                                                                                                                                                                           30
                                             MWM                                                   20                 MWM                                                  20
                       20
                                             + MV-MAE (Front + Wrist)                              10                 + MV-MAE (Front + Wrist)                             10
                                             + MV-MAE (Front + Left + Right)                                          + MV-MAE (Front + Left + Right)
                       0                                                                           0                                                                        0
                            0     20000     40000 60000 80000 100000                                    0   25000 50000 75000 100000 125000 150000                              0   25000 50000 75000 100000 125000 150000
                                          Environment Steps                                                         Environment Steps                                                        Environment Steps
                                              Pick and Lift                                                             Phone On Base                                                        Put Rubbish in Bin
                       25                                                                          60                                                                      40
                                              MWM                                                           MWM                                                                     MWM
                                              + MV-MAE (Front + Wrist)                                      + MV-MAE (Front + Wrist)                                       35       + MV-MAE (Front + Wrist)
                       20                     + MV-MAE (Front + Left + Right)                      50       + MV-MAE (Front + Left + Right)                                         + MV-MAE (Front + Left + Right)
                                                                                                                                                                           30
    Success Rate (%)


                                                                                Success Rate (%)


                                                                                                                                                        Success Rate (%)
                                                                                                   40
                       15                                                                                                                                                  25
                                                                                                   30                                                                      20
                       10                                                                                                                                                  15
                                                                                                   20
                                                                                                                                                                           10
                       5                                                                           10
                                                                                                                                                                           5
                       0                                                                           0                                                                       0
                            0    20000 40000 60000 80000 100000 120000                                  0   25000 50000 75000 100000 125000 150000                              0    20000     40000      60000       80000   100000
                                          Environment Steps                                                         Environment Steps                                                        Environment Steps


Figure 6: Learning curves of single-view visual control agents that operate on the front camera for
solving six visual manipulation tasks from RLBench (James et al., 2020) as measured on the success
rate. Front + Wrist and Front + Left + Right in legends denote the combination of cameras used
for multi-view representation learning. The solid line and shaded regions represent the mean and
standard deviations, respectively, across four runs.


empirically demonstrate this, we report the performance of MV-MAE with three cameras, i.e., front
camera, left shoulder camera, and right shoulder camera (see Appendix E for examples of camera
observations). We consider this setup motivated by the usage of multiple third-person cameras in prior
works (Akkaya et al., 2019; Akinola et al., 2020). Figure 6 shows the performance of representation
learning with the three cameras, where we find that MV-MAE with the three cameras outperforms
MV-MAE with front and wrist cameras. This shows that the model can capture fine-grained details
from three third-person cameras without using the wrist camera, which provides a closer look at
the objects. However, we find that several RLBench tasks are still very challenging to solve only
using the front camera for behavior learning, e.g., success rates of single-view control agents on
Pick and Lift are very low, which necessitates follow-up works on representation learning for visual
control. Given these results, a large-scale investigation into the effect of camera configurations on
representation learning for visual control could be an interesting future direction.

4.3                             A BLATION STUDY AND ANALYSIS

Effect of view-masking. To investigate the effect of the proposed view-masking scheme, we
report the performance with and without view-masking in Figure 7(a). We find that utilizing the
view-masking strategy for training the video autoencoder achieves significantly better performance
than uniform-masking, which supports that view-masking encourages the autoencoder to learn
representations capturing useful cross-view information. On the other hand, we observe that view-
masking can be harmful when training the image autoencoder unlike training the video autoencoder.
This is because masked view reconstruction could be a challenging task for the image autoencoder
and thus prevent the model from learning useful representations, as we mentioned in Section 3.1.

Effect of video autoencoding. In Figure 7(a), we also investigate the effect of video autoencoding
by reporting the performance of MV-MAE with and without video autoencoding. We find that
performance significantly degrades without video autoencoding, which demonstrates that enabling
the model to have access to unmasked frames of the same view is indeed crucial for representation
learning with masked view reconstruction. However, we find that training the video autoencoder
is not effective without the view-masking scheme, achieving even worse performance than training
the image autoencoder. This shows that the model can learn to exploit additional information from
multiple frames for solving reconstruction tasks, making it difficult to learn useful representations.


                                                                                                                            8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                    70                                                                     70                                                                   30
                                                                                                                                                                         MV-MAE (Uniform Masking)
                    60                                                                     60                                                                            MV-MAE (1 of 4 View Masking)
                                                                                                                                                                25       MV-MAE (2 of 4 View Masking)
                                                                                                                                                                         MV-MAE (3 of 4 View Masking)
 Success Rate (%)


                                                                        Success Rate (%)


                                                                                                                                             Success Rate (%)
                    50                                                                     50
                                                                                                                                                                20
                    40                                                                     40
                                                                                                                                                                15
                    30                                                                     30
                                MWM                                                                                                                             10
                    20          + MV-MAE (Video: O / View Masking: O)                      20                         MWM
                                + MV-MAE (Video: O / View Masking: X)                                                 + MV-MAE (Mask: 95%)
                    10          + MV-MAE (Video: X / View Masking: O)                      10                         + MV-MAE (Mask: 75%)                      5
                                + MV-MAE (Video: X / View Masking: X)                                                 + MV-MAE (Mask: 50%)
                    0                                                                      0                                                                    0
                         0   20000 40000 60000 80000 100000                                     0   20000     40000    60000 80000 100000                            0    10000     20000    30000      40000   50000
                                  Environment Steps                                                         Environment Steps                                                     Environment Steps

                             (a) Ablation study                                                     (b) Masking ratio                                           (c) Number of masked views

Figure 7: Learning curves of single-view visual control agents operating on the front camera for
solving three manipulation tasks from RLBench (James et al., 2020), investigating the effect of (a)
view masking and video autoencoding and (b) masking ratio. (c) We report the performance of
MV-MAE trained with four cameras (i.e., front, wrist, left shoulder, and right shoulder) and varying
number of masked views (i.e., 0, 1, 2, and 3). The solid line and shaded regions represent the mean
and stratified bootstrap confidence interval across 12 runs.


Masking ratio. In Figure 7(b), we find that performance of MV-MAE keeps increasing with a
higher masking ratio, achieving the best performance with an extremely high masking ratio of 95%.
We hypothesize this is because spatial information redundancy (He et al., 2021) is more significant in
camera observations from visual manipulation tasks than natural images. This also aligns with the
observation of prior works (Feichtenhofer et al., 2022; Tong et al., 2022) where the high masking
ratio of 90% has shown to be effective for videos with more information redundancy.

Number of masked views. In Figure 7(c), we further investigate how the proposed view-masking
scheme works with the different number of masked views. Specifically, we report the performance of
MV-MAE with four cameras (i.e., front, wrist, left shoulder, right shoulder) and varying number of
masked views. We observe that masking more views leads to better performance, outperforming a
uniform-masking baseline. This shows that the proposed view-masking can prevent the model from
exploiting information redundancy and effectively encourage multi-view representation learning.


5                        D ISCUSSION

We have presented Multi-View Masked Autoencoder (MV-MAE), a simple and scalable framework
for multi-view representation learning with multiple cameras. Our experimental results demonstrate
that multi-view representation learning can significantly outperform both single-view and multi-view
representation learning baselines by a large margin on challenging visual manipulation tasks from
RLBench (James et al., 2020). These results suggest that data diversity from multiple viewpoints can
play a key role in representation learning for visual control. We believe that our work can be useful
for various robot learning scenarios with multiple cameras, by providing a framework that can work
with different number of cameras for representation learning and behavior learning phases. We hope
our work facilitates future research on leveraging multiple cameras for representation learning.

Limitation and future directions. One limitation of our approach is that the compute cost of
MV-MAE increases quadratically as the number of viewpoints increases. While we find it possible
to train a relatively large model thanks to the extremely high masking ratio, it would be interesting
to incorporate a more scalable architecture (Jaegle et al., 2021). As we mentioned in Section 4.2,
it would also be interesting to consider a large-scale investigation into the effect of diverse camera
configurations on representation learning, by conducting pre-training on large-scale robotics datasets
consisting of multi-view data (Dasari et al., 2019). Moreover, by combining the idea of MV-MAE
and multimodal MAE (Geng et al., 2022), training an RL agent that can operate on any modality or
viewpoints is a direction we would like to pursue in future works. Finally, we are keen to evaluate the
effectiveness of multi-view representation learning with MV-MAE on real robots.


                                                                                                                  9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


R EPRODUCIBILITY STATEMENT

We provide the implementation details of our approach and baselines in Section 4, Appendix A,
and Appendix C. We also provide our source code to reproduce main results in Appendix C.

E THICS STATEMENT

Learning visual control agents operating on easily accessible cameras can be helpful for various
applications, such as factory automation, autonomous driving, and training collaborative robots.
However, there could be a scenario where the robot is misused by malicious users, e.g., attackers
might inject rewards that teach undesirable behaviors which could be harmful to society. To prevent
such abuses, it is important to develop algorithms with an eye towards safety as well as performance.

R EFERENCES
Iretiayo Akinola, Jacob Varley, and Dmitry Kalashnikov. Learning precise 3d manipulation from
   multiple uncalibrated cameras. In 2020 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation
   (ICRA), 2020.
Ilge Akkaya, Marcin Andrychowicz, Maciek Chociej, Mateusz Litwin, Bob McGrew, Arthur Petron,
   Alex Paino, Matthias Plappert, Glenn Powell, Raphael Ribas, et al. Solving rubik’s cube with a
   robot hand. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.07113, 2019.
Jean-Baptiste Alayrac, Jeff Donahue, Pauline Luc, Antoine Miech, Iain Barr, Yana Hasson, Karel
  Lenc, Arthur Mensch, Katie Millican, Malcolm Reynolds, et al. Flamingo: a visual language
  model for few-shot learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.14198, 2022.
Sanjeev Arora, Hrishikesh Khandeparkar, Mikhail Khodak, Orestis Plevrakis, and Nikunj Saun-
  shi. A theoretical analysis of contrastive unsupervised representation learning. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1902.09229, 2019.
Mahmoud Assran, Mathilde Caron, Ishan Misra, Piotr Bojanowski, Florian Bordes, Pascal Vincent,
 Armand Joulin, Michael Rabbat, and Nicolas Ballas. Masked siamese networks for label-efficient
 learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.07141, 2022.
Gerardo Carrera, Adrien Angeli, and Andrew J Davison. Slam-based automatic extrinsic calibration
  of a multi-camera rig. In 2011 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA),
  2011.
Pablo Samuel Castro. Scalable methods for computing state similarity in deterministic markov
  decision processes. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 2020.
Boyuan Chen, Pieter Abbeel, and Deepak Pathak. Unsupervised learning of visual 3d keypoints for
  control. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2021a.
Mark Chen, Alec Radford, Rewon Child, Jeffrey Wu, Heewoo Jun, David Luan, and Ilya Sutskever.
 Generative pretraining from pixels. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2020.
Xinlei Chen, Saining Xie, and Kaiming He. An empirical study of training self-supervised vision
  transformers. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision,
  2021b.
Sudeep Dasari, Frederik Ebert, Stephen Tian, Suraj Nair, Bernadette Bucher, Karl Schmeckpeper,
  Siddharth Singh, Sergey Levine, and Chelsea Finn. Robonet: Large-scale multi-robot learning. In
  Conference on Robot Learning, 2019.
Alexey Dosovitskiy, Lucas Beyer, Alexander Kolesnikov, Dirk Weissenborn, Xiaohua Zhai, Thomas
  Unterthiner, Mostafa Dehghani, Matthias Minderer, Georg Heigold, Sylvain Gelly, et al. An image
  is worth 16x16 words: Transformers for image recognition at scale. In International Conference
  on Learning Representaitons, 2021.


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Christoph Feichtenhofer, Haoqi Fan, Yanghao Li, and Kaiming He. Masked autoencoders as
  spatiotemporal learners. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.09113, 2022.
Carles Gelada, Saurabh Kumar, Jacob Buckman, Ofir Nachum, and Marc G Bellemare. Deepmdp:
  Learning continuous latent space models for representation learning. In International Conference
  on Machine Learning, 2019.
Xinyang Geng, Hao Liu, Lisa Lee, Dale Schuurams, Sergey Levine, and Pieter Abbeel. Multimodal
  masked autoencoders learn transferable representations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.14204, 2022.
Jean-Bastien Grill, Florian Strub, Florent Altché, Corentin Tallec, Pierre H Richemond, Elena
  Buchatskaya, Carl Doersch, Bernardo Avila Pires, Zhaohan Daniel Guo, Mohammad Gheshlaghi
  Azar, et al. Bootstrap your own latent: A new approach to self-supervised learning. In Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 2020.
Pierre-Louis Guhur, Shizhe Chen, Ricardo Garcia, Makarand Tapaswi, Ivan Laptev, and Cordelia
  Schmid. Instruction-driven history-aware policies for robotic manipulations. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2209.04899, 2022.
Danijar Hafner, Timothy Lillicrap, Ian Fischer, Ruben Villegas, David Ha, Honglak Lee, and James
  Davidson. Learning latent dynamics for planning from pixels. In International Conference on
  Machine Learning, 2019.
Danijar Hafner, Timothy Lillicrap, Mohammad Norouzi, and Jimmy Ba. Mastering atari with discrete
  world models. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2021.
Kaiming He, Haoqi Fan, Yuxin Wu, Saining Xie, and Ross Girshick. Momentum contrast for
  unsupervised visual representation learning. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
  Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2020.
Kaiming He, Xinlei Chen, Saining Xie, Yanghao Li, Piotr Dollár, and Ross Girshick. Masked
  autoencoders are scalable vision learners. arXiv preprint arXiv:2111.06377, 2021.
Kyle Hsu, Moo Jin Kim, Rafael Rafailov, Jiajun Wu, and Chelsea Finn. Vision-based manipulators
  need to also see from their hands. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.12677, 2022.
Andrew Jaegle, Felix Gimeno, Andy Brock, Oriol Vinyals, Andrew Zisserman, and Joao Carreira.
  Perceiver: General perception with iterative attention. In International Conference on Machine
 Learning, 2021.
Stephen James and Pieter Abbeel. Coarse-to-Fine Q-attention with Learned Path Ranking. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2204.01571, 2022a.
Stephen James and Pieter Abbeel. Coarse-to-Fine Q-attention with Tree Expansion. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2204.12471, 2022b.
Stephen James and Andrew J Davison. Q-attention: Enabling efficient learning for vision-based
  robotic manipulation. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters, 2022.
Stephen James, Zicong Ma, David Rovick Arrojo, and Andrew J Davison. RLBench: The robot
  learning benchmark & learning environment. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters, 2020.
Stephen James, Kentaro Wada, Tristan Laidlow, and Andrew J Davison. Coarse-to-Fine Q-attention:
  Efficient learning for visual robotic manipulation via discretisation. Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
  Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2022.
Rishabh Jangir, Nicklas Hansen, Sambaran Ghosal, Mohit Jain, and Xiaolong Wang. Look closer:
  Bridging egocentric and third-person views with transformers for robotic manipulation. IEEE
  Robotics and Automation Letters, 2022.
Diederik P Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. In International
  Conference on Learning Representations, 2015.
Diederik P Kingma and Max Welling. Auto-encoding variational bayes. In International Conference
  on Learning Representations, 2014.


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Suraj Nair, Aravind Rajeswaran, Vikash Kumar, Chelsea Finn, and Abhinav Gupta. R3m: A universal
  visual representation for robot manipulation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.12601, 2022.
Mehdi Noroozi and Paolo Favaro. Unsupervised learning of visual representations by solving jigsaw
 puzzles. In European conference on computer vision, 2016.
Aaron van den Oord, Yazhe Li, and Oriol Vinyals. Representation learning with contrastive predictive
  coding. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2018.
Andrew Owens, Phillip Isola, Josh McDermott, Antonio Torralba, Edward H Adelson, and William T
  Freeman. Visually indicated sounds. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision
  and pattern recognition, 2016.
Simone Parisi, Aravind Rajeswaran, Senthil Purushwalkam, and Abhinav Gupta. The unsurprising
  effectiveness of pre-trained vision models for control. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.03580, 2022.
Deepak Pathak, Philipp Krahenbuhl, Jeff Donahue, Trevor Darrell, and Alexei A Efros. Context
  encoders: Feature learning by inpainting. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer
  vision and pattern recognition, 2016.
Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal,
  Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al. Learning transferable visual
  models from natural language supervision. In International Conference on Machine Learning,
  2021.
Ilija Radosavovic, Tete Xiao, Stephen James, Pieter Abbeel, Jitendra Malik, and Trevor Darrell. Real
   world robot learning with masked visual pre-training. In Conference on Robot Learning, 2022.
Florian Schroff, Dmitry Kalenichenko, and James Philbin. Facenet: A unified embedding for face
  recognition and clustering. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern
  recognition, 2015.
Max Schwarzer, Ankesh Anand, Rishab Goel, R Devon Hjelm, Aaron Courville, and Philip Bach-
 man. Data-efficient reinforcement learning with self-predictive representations. In International
 Conference on Learning Representations, 2021a.
Max Schwarzer, Nitarshan Rajkumar, Michael Noukhovitch, Ankesh Anand, Laurent Charlin, Devon
 Hjelm, Philip Bachman, and Aaron Courville. Pretraining representations for data-efficient
 reinforcement learning. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2021b.
Younggyo Seo, Danijar Hafner, Hao Liu, Fangchen Liu, Stephen James, Kimin Lee, and Pieter
  Abbeel. Masked world models for visual control. In Conference on Robot Learning, 2022a.
Younggyo Seo, Kimin Lee, Stephen James, and Pieter Abbeel. Reinforcement learning with action-
  free pre-training from videos. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2022b.
Pierre Sermanet, Corey Lynch, Yevgen Chebotar, Jasmine Hsu, Eric Jang, Stefan Schaal, and
  Sergey Levine. Time-contrastive networks: Self-supervised learning from video. In 2018 IEEE
  international conference on robotics and automation (ICRA), 2018.
Mohit Shridhar, Lucas Manuelli, and Dieter Fox. Perceiver-actor: A multi-task transformer for
 robotic manipulation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.05451, 2022.
Joan Sola, André Monin, Michel Devy, and Teresa Vidal-Calleja. Fusing monocular information in
  multicamera slam. IEEE transactions on robotics, 2008.
Aravind Srinivas, Michael Laskin, and Pieter Abbeel. Curl: Contrastive unsupervised representations
  for reinforcement learning. In Internatial Conference on Machine Learning, 2020.
Adam Stooke, Kimin Lee, Pieter Abbeel, and Michael Laskin. Decoupling representation learning
  from reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2021.
Richard S Sutton and Andrew G Barto. Reinforcement learning: An introduction. MIT Press, 2018.


                                                12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Yonglong Tian, Dilip Krishnan, and Phillip Isola. Contrastive multiview coding. In European
  conference on computer vision, 2020a.
Yonglong Tian, Chen Sun, Ben Poole, Dilip Krishnan, Cordelia Schmid, and Phillip Isola. What
  makes for good views for contrastive learning? Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 2020b.
Zhan Tong, Yibing Song, Jue Wang, and Limin Wang. Videomae: Masked autoencoders are
  data-efficient learners for self-supervised video pre-training. In Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 2022.
Laurens Van der Maaten and Geoffrey Hinton. Visualizing data using t-sne. Journal of machine
  learning research, 2008.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez, Łukasz
  Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. In Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 2017.
Pascal Vincent, Hugo Larochelle, Isabelle Lajoie, Yoshua Bengio, Pierre-Antoine Manzagol, and
  Léon Bottou. Stacked denoising autoencoders: Learning useful representations in a deep network
  with a local denoising criterion. Journal of machine learning research, 2010.
Xiaolong Wang and Abhinav Gupta. Unsupervised learning of visual representations using videos.
  In Proceedings of the IEEE international conference on computer vision, 2015.
Manuel Watter, Jost Springenberg, Joschka Boedecker, and Martin Riedmiller. Embed to control:
 A locally linear latent dynamics model for control from raw images. In Advances in neural
 information processing systems, 2015.
Tete Xiao, Xiaolong Wang, Alexei A Efros, and Trevor Darrell. What should not be contrastive in
  contrastive learning. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2021.
Tete Xiao, Ilija Radosavovic, Trevor Darrell, and Jitendra Malik. Masked visual pre-training for
  motor control. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.06173, 2022.
Anqi Joyce Yang, Can Cui, Ioan Andrei Bârsan, Raquel Urtasun, and Shenlong Wang. Asynchronous
  multi-view slam. In 2021 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA),
  2021.
Denis Yarats, Rob Fergus, Alessandro Lazaric, and Lerrel Pinto. Reinforcement learning with
  prototypical representations. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2021a.
Denis Yarats, Amy Zhang, Ilya Kostrikov, Brandon Amos, Joelle Pineau, and Rob Fergus. Improving
  sample efficiency in model-free reinforcement learning from images. In Proceedings of the AAAI
  Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 2021b.
Tianhe Yu, Deirdre Quillen, Zhanpeng He, Ryan Julian, Karol Hausman, Chelsea Finn, and Sergey
  Levine. Meta-world: A benchmark and evaluation for multi-task and meta reinforcement learning.
  In Conference on Robot Learning, 2020.
Albert Zhan, Philip Zhao, Lerrel Pinto, Pieter Abbeel, and Michael Laskin. A framework for efficient
  robotic manipulation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2012.07975, 2020.
Richard Zhang, Phillip Isola, and Alexei A Efros. Split-brain autoencoders: Unsupervised learning by
  cross-channel prediction. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern
  recognition, 2017.


                                                13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A     BASELINES

A.1   M ASKED WORLD MODELS

Masked world models (MWM; Seo et al. 2022a) is a visual model-based RL method that iterates the
representation learning phase and the behavior learning phase. In the representation learning phase,
MWM learns visual representation by reconstructing pixels given masked convolutional features.
In the behavior learning phase, policy, along with the world model, is learned on top of frozen
representation. We explain the details of each phase as follows.

Representation learning. For representation learning, MWM trains an autoencoder by (i) recon-
structing an image with masked convolutional features and (ii) predicting a reward. MWM processes
raw input image using a convolution stem, which is convolutional layers followed by a flatten layer.
Then, MWM randomly masks convolutional features, and feeds visible features into the ViT encoder.
The outputs from the ViT encoder, along with (learnable) mask tokens, are fed into the ViT decoder,
which reconstructs the raw image. For the auxiliary reward prediction, one additional learnable mask
token is concatenated into the inputs of the ViT decoder, and the corresponding output representation
followed by a linear output head is used to predict the reward.

Behavior learning. Once visual representation is learned, MWM trains an RL agent by actor-critic
learning scheme using the imaginary latent states from the world model. For the world model, MWM
uses a variant of Recurrent State Space Model (RSSM; Hafner et al. 2019). Formally, for a visual
task formulated as a partially observable Markov decision process (Sutton & Barto, 2018), which is
defined as a tuple (O, A, p, r, γ), O is the observation space, A is the action space, p(ot |o<t , a<t )
is the transition dynamics, r is the reward function that maps previous observations and actions to
a reward rt = r(o≤t , a≤t ) and γ ∈ [0, 1) is the discount factor. Let zt be an output from the ViT
encoder for a current observation ot . The RSSM consists of the following learnable components:

                   Representation model:                 st ∼ qθ (st |st−1 , at−1 , zt )
                   Transition model:                     ŝt ∼ pθ (ŝt |st−1 , at−1 )
                                                                                                    (1)
                   Visual representation decoder:        ẑt ∼ pθ (ẑt |st )
                   Reward predictor:                     r̂t ∼ pθ (r̂t |st ),

The representation model extracts model state st from previous model state st−1 , previous action at−1 ,
and zt . The transition model predicts future state ŝt without access to zt . The visual representation
model reconstructs zt to provide learning signal. All model parameters θ are jointly trained to
minimize the negative variational lower bound (Kingma & Welling, 2014). For behavior learning,
MWM predicts latent future states and train a stochastic actor and a deterministic critic to maximize
the imagined returns (Hafner et al., 2021). We refer to Seo et al. (2022a) for more details.

A.2   MWM + M ASKED SIAMESE NETWORK

MWM + masked siamese network (MSN; Assran et al. 2022) is a baseline that learns visual informa-
tion via reconstruction with masked convolutional features, but also cross-view information from
different viewpoints. Specifically, we extract the representations of one viewpoint from the encoder,
and also the representations of another viewpoint from the target momentum encoder. We first use
the representations of the encoder as inputs to the ViT decoder that reconstructs raw pixels. And then
compute the representation matching loss that minimizes the distance between two representations.
We maintain a target encoder that is updated via an exponential moving average of the (anchor)
encoder parameters with a target decay rate of 0.999. For a given (anchor) frame, we regard the
corresponding frame from another viewpoint as a target frame. For obtaining representations from
each viewpoint, we conduct average pooling on token embeddings from the last layer of the encoder.
While original MSN utilizes learnable prototypes for obtaining representations, we find it extremely
unstable in our setup. So we adopt the simple approach of Grill et al. (2020) that minimizes the
distance between L2 normalized representations. We note that this is still called MSN because
the main idea of matching the representation of masked viewpoint representations with unmasked
viewpoint target representations.


                                                  14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A.3    T IME CONTRASTIVE NETWORK

Time contrastive network (TCN; Sermanet et al. 2018) is a contrastive approach that learns view-
invariant representations by attracting the representations of simultaneous viewpoints but making the
representations from the same viewpoints be far located. For a given (anchor) frame in one viewpoint,
we sample a positive and negative frame as follows. For the positive frame, we use the frame that
has the same timestep as the given anchor frame but from another viewpoint. For the negative frame,
we choose a frame that is a temporally faraway frame from the same viewpoint. Specifically, we
sample a random frame among frames that are at least 30 timesteps away from the anchor frame.
After building a triplet of anchor, positive, and negative frame, we train the encoder model with triplet
loss (Schroff et al., 2015), which is formulated as follows:
                   LTCN = max(∥f (oa ) − f (op )∥22 − ∥f (oa ) − f (on )∥22 + α, 0),                 (2)
        a   p       n
where o , o , and o are anchor, positive, and negative frames, respectively, f (·) refers class embed-
dings from the last layer of ViT encoder and α is margin, which is set to 2. In the control phase, we
freeze the encoder and use average pooled token embeddings as an input for the RL agent.

B     P SEUDOCODE FOR M ULTI -V IEW M ASKED AUTOENCODER
We consider a camera observation ovt where t ∈ {1, ..., T } denotes a video timestep and v ∈
{1, ..., V } denotes a camera viewpoint. For clarity, we let T = {1, ..., T } and V = {1, ..., V }. We
let Lactor and Lcritic be the actor and critic loss of MWM (Seo et al., 2022a).

Algorithm 1 Multi-View Masked Autoencoders for Visual Control
 1: Initialize replay buffer B ← ∅ and parameters of autoencoder ϕ, actor ψ, critic ξ
 2: for each environment step i do
 3:    // M ULTI - VIEW REPRESENTATION LEARNING
 4:    Sample minibatch {ovt } ∼ B
 5:    for each video timestep t do
 6:       Get convolutional features ztv,conv = fϕconv (ovt ) for v ∈ V
 7:       Sample {ztv,conv }v∈Ωt ∼ ViewMask({ztv,conv }v∈V ), where Ωt is a set of unmasked views
 8:    end for                              ST
 9:    Collect unmasked viewpoints Ω = t=1 Ωt
10:    Get reconstructions {ôvt }v∈V = fϕdecoder (fϕencoder ({ztv,conv }v∈Ω )) for t ∈ T
                                   PT      PV     v    v
11:    Update ϕ by minimizing        t=1    v=1 ∥ot − ot ∥2

12:    // ACTOR CRITIC LEARNING
13:    Sample minibatch {(o11 , ..., oV1 , a, r)} ∼ B
14:    Get convolutional features {z1v,conv }v∈V
15:    if single-view control with vs then
16:       Get single-view representation h = fθencoder ({z1vs ,conv })
17:    else
18:       Get multi-view representation h = fθencoder ({z1v,conv }v∈V )
19:    end if
20:    Update ψ and ξ by minimizing Lactor and Lcritic with {(h, a, r)}
21:   // C OLLECT TRANSITIONS
                                    v,conv
22:   Get convolutional features {z1,i     }v∈V from a current observation {ov1,i }v∈V
23:   if single-view control with vs then
                                                            vs ,conv
24:      Get single-view representation hi = fθencoder ({z1,i          })
25:   else
                                                           v,conv
26:      Get multi-view representation hi = fθencoder ({z1,i        }v∈V )
27:   end if
28:   Sample action ai ∼ fψactor (hi ) and collect reward ri from environment
29:   Store sample to replay buffer B ← B ∪ {(o11,i , ..., oV1,i , ai , ri )}
30: end for



                                                  15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


C       I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS
Source code.    Source code for reproducing our experimental results is available at:
               https://anonymous.4open.science/r/iclr2023_mvmae

RLBench details. For RLBench experiments, we designed dense rewards for six manipulation
tasks used in our experiments. For simple tasks (i.e., Take Lid Off Saucepan, Pick Up Cup, Take
Umbrella Out of Umbrella Stand), we design the reward to be the sum of the distance between a
gripper and a target object. For more complex tasks that require more long-term behavior (i.e., Pick
and Lift, Phone On Base, Put Rubbish in Bin), we first construct some checkpoints where the robot
should reach. Then we define the reward to be the sum of the distance between the gripper and the
nearest next checkpoint. For disabling rotation, we use a path planner with identity quaternion to
force the robot to be in an upright position. Unlike prior approaches that use the path planner (James
& Davison, 2022; James et al., 2022; James & Abbeel, 2022a;b) to specify absolute (x, y, z) position,
we train the RL agent to output relative change in (x, y, z) position. This is available by using the
action mode EndEffectorPoseViaPlanning(absolute mode=False) in the RLBench.
For more details, we refer readers to the source code we have attached.

Architecture and optimization details. Our architecture is based on the publicly available source
code of Seo et al. (2022a), which is implemented with tfimm2 library. For our method and all
baselines, we use the same architecture consisting of 8-layer ViT encoder and 6-layer ViT decoder.
For each view and time step, we introduce additional 1D learnable parameters that have the same
embedding size as transformer blocks. We add these parameters to 2D fixed sin-cos embeddings and
add them to features. We note that these parameters are shared across the same times and the same
views. For optimization, we use Adam optimizer (Kingma & Ba, 2015) with the learning rate of
3e − 4, the weight decay of 1e − 6, and the batch size of 1024. For training MV-MAE, we apply
warm-up learning rate scheduling over initial 2500 gradient steps from learning rate of 0. We take 1
gradient step per every 2 environment steps. We follow the training schemes and details of Seo et al.
(2022a) regarding the architecture, unless otherwise specified.

Computation. We use 8 CPU cores (Intel Xeon Gold 6226R @ 3.9GHZ) and 1 GPU (NVIDIA
GeForce RTX 3090) for our experiments. We find that there is no significant difference between
all methods with regard to wall time for experiments because there is a severe bottleneck from the
rendering speed of the RLBench simulator. Running experiments over 150k environment steps takes
approximately 18 hours for all methods.


    2
        https://github.com/martinsbruveris/tensorflow-image-models


                                                 16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Hyperparameters. We report the hyperparameters used in our experiments in Table 1.

Table 1: Hyperparameters used in our experiments. Unless otherwise specified, we use the same
hyperparameters used in MWM (Seo et al., 2022a).


   Hyperparameter                     Value
   Representation learning
   Image observation                  96 × 96 × 3
   Image normalization                Mean: (0.485, 0.456, 0.406), Std: (0.229, 0.224, 0.225)
   Autoencoder batch size             1024
   Autoencoder initialization steps   10000
   Autoencoder warm-up steps          2500
   Autoencoder learning rate          3 · 10−4
   Autoencoder masking ratio          0.95 (multi-view), 0.9 (single-view)
   Autoencoder ViT encoder size       8 layers, 4 heads, 256 units
   Autoencoder ViT decoder size       6 layers, 4 heads, 256 units
   Behavior learning (MWM)
   Action repeat                      1
   Max episode length                 150
   Early episode termination          True (when path planner fails)
   Reward normalization               True
   World model batch size             50
   World model sequence length        50
   World model tradeoff (β)           1.0
   World model tradeoff free-bits     0.1
   World model ViT encoder size       2 layers, 4 heads, 128 units
   World model ViT decoder size       2 layers, 4 heads, 128 units


                                               17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


D    T WO -C AMERA E XAMPLES


    (a) Take Lid Off Saucepan               (b) Pick Up Cup           (c) Take Umbrella Out of Stand


        (d) Pick and Lift                  (e) Phone On Base              (f) Put Rubbish in Bin

Figure 8: Examples of multi-view data consisting front and wrist camera observations used in our
RLBench (James et al., 2020) experiments. Front camera observations provide a broad look at a robot
workspace, and wrist camera observations provide a closer look at target objects.


E    T HREE -C AMERA E XAMPLES


             (a) Take Lid Off Saucepan                               (b) Pick Up Cup


          (c) Take Umbrella Out of Stand                            (d) Pick and Lift


                (e) Phone on Base                                (f) Put Rubbish in Bin

Figure 9: Examples of multi-view data consisting left shoulder, front, and right shoulder observations
used in our RLBench (James et al., 2020) experiments.


                                                  18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


F                       F ULL M ULTI -V IEW E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS
F.1                             S INGLE - VIEW VISUAL CONTROL WITH FRONT CAMERA

                                          Take Lid Off Saucepan                                                         Pick Up Cup                                                          Take Umbrella Out of Stand
                   100                                                                               80                                                                        80
                                                                                                              MWM                                                                        MWM
                                                                                                     70       MWM + MSN                                                        70        MWM + MSN
                       80                                                                                     MWM + MV-MAE                                                               MWM + MV-MAE
                                                                                                     60                                                                        60
Success Rate (%)


                                                                                 Success Rate (%)
                                                                                                              TCN


                                                                                                                                                            Success Rate (%)
                                                                                                                                                                                         TCN
                       60                                                                            50                                                                        50
                                                                                                     40                                                                        40
                       40                                                                            30                                                                        30
                                                            MWM
                                                                                                     20                                                                        20
                       20                                   MWM + MSN
                                                            MWM + MV-MAE                             10                                                                        10
                                                            TCN
                       0                                                                             0                                                                          0
                            0     20000     40000      60000 80000 100000                                 0   25000 50000 75000 100000 125000 150000                                0    25000 50000 75000 100000 125000 150000
                                          Environment Steps                                                            Environment Steps                                                        Environment Steps
                                               Pick and Lift                                                             Phone On Base                                                             Put Rubbish in Bin
                       25                                                                            60                                                                        40
                                                               MWM                                            MWM                                                                                                   MWM
                                                               MWM + MSN                                      MWM + MSN                                                        35                                   MWM + MSN
                       20                                      MWM + MV-MAE                          50       MWM + MV-MAE                                                                                          MWM + MV-MAE
                                                                                                                                                                               30
    Success Rate (%)


                                                               TCN
                                                                                 Success Rate (%)

                                                                                                              TCN


                                                                                                                                                            Success Rate (%)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    TCN
                                                                                                     40
                       15                                                                                                                                                      25
                                                                                                     30                                                                        20
                       10                                                                                                                                                      15
                                                                                                     20
                                                                                                                                                                               10
                       5                                                                             10
                                                                                                                                                                                5
                       0                                                                             0                                                                          0
                            0    25000 50000 75000 100000 125000 150000                                   0   25000 50000 75000 100000 125000 150000                                0    25000 50000 75000 100000 125000 150000
                                          Environment Steps                                                            Environment Steps                                                        Environment Steps


Figure 10: Learning curves of RL agents that operate on front camera observations for solving six
visual manipulation tasks from RLBench as measured on the success rate. The solid line and shaded
regions represent the mean and standard deviations, respectively, across four runs.


F.2                             S INGLE - VIEW VISUAL CONTROL WITH WRIST CAMERA

                                          Take Lid Off Saucepan                                                         Pick Up Cup                                                            Take Umbrella Out of Stand
                   100                                                                           100                                                                           100
                                                                                                              MWM
                                                                                                              MWM + MSN
                       80                                                                            80       MWM + MV-MAE                                                     80
Success Rate (%)


                                                                              Success Rate (%)


                                                                                                              TCN
                                                                                                                                                           Success Rate (%)


                       60                                                                            60                                                                        60

                       40                                                                            40                                                                        40
                                                            MWM                                                                                                                                              MWM
                       20                                   MWM + MSN                                20                                                                        20                            MWM + MSN
                                                            MWM + MV-MAE                                                                                                                                     MWM + MV-MAE
                                                            TCN                                                                                                                                              TCN
                       0                                                                              0                                                                         0
                            0     10000     20000      30000 40000 50000                                  0    10000     20000   30000     40000   50000                             0   25000 50000 75000 100000 125000 150000
                                          Environment Steps                                                            Environment Steps                                                         Environment Steps
                                              Pick and Lift                                                              Phone On Base                                                           Put Rubbish in Bin
                       90                                                                            70                                                                        100
                                 MWM                                                                          MWM                                                                        MWM
                       80        MWM + MSN                                                           60       MWM + MSN                                                                  MWM + MSN
                       70        MWM + MV-MAE                                                                 MWM + MV-MAE                                                     80        MWM + MV-MAE
    Success Rate (%)


                                 TCN
                                                                                  Success Rate (%)


                                                                                                              TCN
                                                                                                                                                           Success Rate (%)


                                                                                                     50                                                                                  TCN
                       60
                                                                                                     40                                                                        60
                       50
                       40                                                                            30                                                                        40
                       30
                                                                                                     20
                       20                                                                                                                                                      20
                       10                                                                            10
                        0                                                                             0                                                                         0
                            0    25000 50000 75000 100000 125000 150000                                   0   25000 50000 75000 100000 125000 150000                                 0   25000 50000 75000 100000 125000 150000
                                          Environment Steps                                                            Environment Steps                                                         Environment Steps


Figure 11: Learning curves of RL agents that operate on wrist camera observations for solving six
visual manipulation tasks from RLBench as measured on the success rate. The solid line and shaded
regions represent the mean and standard deviations, respectively, across four runs.


                                                                                                                           19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


F.3                               M ULTI - VIEW VISUAL CONTROL WITH FRONT AND WRIST CAMERA

                                          Take Lid Off Saucepan                                                                           Pick Up Cup                                                                   Take Umbrella Out of Stand
                    100                                                                                          100                                                                                     100
                                   MWM w/ Concat                                                                               MWM w/ Concat
                                   MWM + MSN                                                                                   MWM + MSN
                         80        MWM + MV-MAE                                                                       80       MWM + MV-MAE                                                              80
 Success Rate (%)


                                                                                              Success Rate (%)


                                                                                                                                                                                      Success Rate (%)
                                   TCN                                                                                         TCN
                         60                                                                                           60                                                                                 60

                         40                                                                                           40                                                                                 40
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       MWM w/ Concat
                         20                                                                                           20                                                                                 20                            MWM + MSN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       MWM + MV-MAE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       TCN
                         0                                                                                            0                                                                                   0
                              0     5000 10000 15000 20000 25000 30000                                                     0   5000 10000 15000 20000 25000 30000                                              0   25000 50000 75000 100000 125000 150000
                                          Environment Steps                                                                           Environment Steps                                                                   Environment Steps
                                              Pick and Lift                                                                             Phone On Base                                                                      Put Rubbish in Bin
                         90                                                                                           90                                                                                 100
                                   MWM w/ Concat                                                                               MWM w/ Concat                                                                       MWM w/ Concat
                         80        MWM + MSN                                                                          80       MWM + MSN                                                                           MWM + MSN
                         70        MWM + MV-MAE                                                                       70       MWM + MV-MAE                                                              80        MWM + MV-MAE
      Success Rate (%)


                                                                                                   Success Rate (%)


                                                                                                                                                                                      Success Rate (%)
                                   TCN                                                                                         TCN                                                                                 TCN
                         60                                                                                           60
                                                                                                                                                                                                         60
                         50                                                                                           50
                         40                                                                                           40
                                                                                                                                                                                                         40
                         30                                                                                           30
                         20                                                                                           20                                                                                 20
                         10                                                                                           10
                          0                                                                                            0                                                                                  0
                              0    25000 50000 75000 100000 125000 150000                                                  0   25000 50000 75000 100000 125000 150000                                          0   25000 50000 75000 100000 125000 150000
                                          Environment Steps                                                                           Environment Steps                                                                   Environment Steps


Figure 12: Learning curves of RL agents that operate on front and wrist camera observations for
solving six visual manipulation tasks from RLBench as measured on the success rate. The solid line
and shaded regions represent the mean and standard deviations, respectively, across four runs.


G                             A DDITIONAL E XPERIMENTS

                                                                70                                                                                                 100
                                                                                                                                                                             MWM
                                                                60                                                                                                           MWM + MSN
                                                                                                                                                                   80        MWM + MV-MAE
                                             Success Rate (%)


                                                                                                                                                Success Rate (%)


                                                                50                                                                                                           TCN
                                                                40                                                                                                 60

                                                                30                                                                                                 40
                                                                20
                                                                                                                                                                   20
                                                                10                          Encoder: 8 / Decoder: 6
                                                                                            Encoder: 4 / Decoder: 3
                                                                0                                                                                                   0
                                                                     0    20000     40000   60000 80000 100000                                                           0   100000 200000 300000 400000 500000
                                                                                  Environment Steps                                                                               Environment Steps

                                                                         (a) Model size analysis                                                                         (b) Meta-world experiments

Figure 13: (a) Learning curves of single-view visual control agents that operate on the front camera
for solving visual manipulation tasks from RLBench (James et al., 2020), investigating the effect of
model size. (b) Learning curves of single-view visual control agents that operate on the wrist camera
for solving visual manipulation tasks from Meta-world (Yu et al., 2020). The solid line and shaded
regions represent the mean and stratified bootstrap confidence interval across (a) 12 and (b) 20 runs.


Model size. In Figure 13(a), we investigate the effect of scaling up MV-MAE and find that training
larger model for visual representation learning with multi-view data improves sample-efficiency.
Further scaling up the model and pre-training MV-MAE on large real-world robotics dataset (Dasari
et al., 2019) containing multi-view data would be an interesting future work.

Meta-world experiments. In order to verify that our approach can also work for different bench-
mark tasks other than RLBench, we provide additional experimental results on five visual manipu-
lation tasks3 from Meta-world (Yu et al., 2020) benchmark. Specifically, we train the single-view
                    3
                         We report the experimental results on Basketball, Shelf Place, Pick Out Of Hole, Pick Place, and Soccer.


                                                                                                                                           20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


control agent operating on the wrist camera with multi-view representations learned using the front
and wrist cameras. For the front camera, we use the third-person camera viewpoint used in Seo
et al. (2022a). For the wrist camera, we use the wrist camera introduced in Hsu et al. (2022). For
training the MWM agent, we use the same hyperparameters used in Seo et al. (2022a), e.g., mask
ratio of 75%, image resolution of 64×64, and taking one gradient step per every five environment
steps. For training MV-MAE, we use 95% masking ratio which is the same ratio as used in RLBench
experiments. In Figure 13(b), we find that MWM + MV-MAE exhibits better sample-efficiency than
MWM, which again shows the benefit of multi-view representation learning. Moreover, we find that
baselines struggle to outperform the single-view baseline MWM, and TCN completely fails with
the wrist camera similar to the observation in RLBench experiments (see Figure 11). This again
demonstrates the wide applicability of our approach to diverse tasks with diverse type of cameras.

Embedding analysis. We also visually demonstrate how representations are learned differently for
MV-MAE and TCN that enforces view-invariance in Figure 14. Specifically, we train multi-view
agents using MV-MAE and TCN for solving Pick Up Cup task and extract the representations from
the front and wrist camera using the visual encoders. Then we visualize the representations using
t-SNE (Van der Maaten & Hinton, 2008). We observe that MV-MAE representations of the front
and wrist cameras are disentangled from each other, but one can see that representations from both
cameras have similar representation structure. This is because we encourage the model to learn
cross-view information while also learn the information within each viewpoint simultaneously. On
the other hand, front and wrist camera representations from TCN are entangled, which shows how
qualitatively MV-MAE and TCN learn different representations.

                                           Front        Front
                                           Wrist        Wrist


                 (a) MV-MAE representations               (b) TCN representations

Figure 14: t-SNE (Van der Maaten & Hinton, 2008) visualization of representations extracted from
front and wrist camera observations from (a) MV-MAE and (b) TCN.


                                                   21
