Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


P OLARITY IS ALL YOU NEED
TO LEARN AND TRANSFER FASTER

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                             A BSTRACT
         Natural intelligences (NIs) thrive in a dynamic world – they learn quickly, some-
         times with only a few samples. In contrast, Artificial intelligence (AI) has achieved
         supra (-human) level performance in certain AI settings, typically dependent on a
         prohibitive amount of training samples and computational power. What design prin-
         ciple difference between NI and AI could contribute to such a discrepancy? Here,
         we propose an angle based on a simple observation from NIs: post-development,
         neuronal connections in the brain rarely see polarity switch. We demonstrate with
         simulations that if weight polarities are adequately set a priori, then networks learn
         with less time and data. We extend such findings onto image classification tasks
         and demonstrate that fixed polarity, not weight, is a more effective medium for
         knowledge transfer between networks. We also explicitly illustrate situations in
         which a priori setting the weight polarities is disadvantageous for networks. Our
         work illustrates the value of weight polarities from the perspective of statistical and
         computational efficiency during learning.


1    I NTRODUCTION
Natural intelligences (NIs), including animals and humans, thrive in a dynamic world. Often, NIs
learn quickly with just a few samples. Artificial intelligences (AIs), specifically deep neural networks
(DNNs), can now compete with or even surpass humans in certain tasks, e.g., GO playing (Silver
et al., 2017), object recognition (Russakovsky et al., 2015), protein folding analysis (Jumper et al.,
2021), etc. However, DNN is only capable of achieving such when a prohibitive amount of data
and training resources are available. Such a gap on learning speed and data efficiency between NI
and AI has baffled and motivated many AI researchers. A subfield of AI is dedicated to achieving
few-shot learning using DNNs (Hoffer & Ailon, 2015; van der Spoel et al., 2015; Vinyals et al., 2016;
Snell et al., 2017; Finn et al., 2017). Many research teams have achieved amazing performances
on benchmark datasets (Lazarou et al., 2022; Bendou et al., 2022). However, the products of such
engineering efforts greatly deviate from the brain. What are the design principle differences between
NIs and AIs that contribute to such a learning efficiency gap? In this paper, we propose one possiblility
of such a design difference - we could move AI one step closer to NI-level learning efficiency by
applying just one simple design principle from NI.
NIs are blessed with hundreds of millions of years of optimization through evolution. Through trial
and error, the most survival-advantageous circuit configurations emerge, refine, and slowly come
into the form that can thrive in an ever-changing world. Such circuit configurations get embedded
into our genetic code, establishing a blueprint to be carried out by development. Among the many
configurations, circuit rules, and principles that formed through evolution, one theme stands out,
one that neuroscientists celebrate and yet is overlooked by the machine learning community: post-
development, neuronal connections in the brain rarely see polarity switch (Spitzer, 2017). After
development, NIs learn and adapt through synaptic plasticity – a connection between a pair of neurons
can change its strength but rarely its excitatory or inhibitory nature; on the contrary, a connection
(weight) between a pair of units in a DNN can freely change its sign (polarity). In fact, polarity change
in the adult brain is hypothesized to be associated with depression, schizophrenia, and other illnesses
(Spitzer, 2017). For the rare times such phenomenon have been observed, they never appeared in
sensory and motor cortices (Spitzer, 2017) where visual, auditory and motor processing take place.
It seems a rather rigid design choice to fix a network’s connection polarity. We wonder why the
biological networks settled into such a learning strategy: Is it a mere outcome of an implementation-


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


level constraint? It could be just hard for synapses to switch polarities. Or could it be that NIs found
out polarity pattern is an effective medium for transferring knowledge across generations?
This paper provides some thoughts and evidence relevant to these questions. We first investigate
why brains pre-set neuronal connection polarities by assessing what we gain through setting weight
polarity a priori (Sec 2-4). We discuss in theory the trade-off between representation capacity
and learning speed when weight polarity is fixed for networks. We then propose an SGD-based
polarity-fixed learning algorithm: Freeze-SGD. We experimentally show that if the weight polarities
are adequately set a priori, then networks can learn with less time and data (simulated task (Sec 2) +
two image classification tasks (Sec 3)). We call a network with fixed polarity Frozen-Net, and we
discuss how the quality of the polarity configuration affects a DNN’s learning efficiency (Sufficient-
Polarity vs. RAND-Polarity). We further find transferring and fixing polarities is even superior to
transferring weights (Sec 4). Our results point to an unexplored direction in the machine learning
community: polarity, not weight, may be the more effective and compressed medium for transferring
knowledge between networks. To complete our discussion, we further discuss what we lose when
weight polarities are set a priori (Sec 5). Frozen-Nets have reduced representation capacity; therefore,
a randomly configured network may not even have the capacity to represent a simple problem such
as XOR (Def 2.2). We theoretically prove and experimentally show that if the polarities are set
randomly, the probability of a single-hidden-layer network learning XOR increases exponentially as
a function of its size (i.e., number of hidden units). We also experimentally show that a sufficiently
sized network, even when its polarities are randomly picked, can learn with less time and data than
an equally sized network without fixed polarities.
By discussing both the advantages and disadvantages of fixing weight polarity, we provide some
insights on how to make AI more statistically and computationally efficient; we also show polarity
pattern is an effective medium for transferring knowledge.

2    W HAT DO WE GAIN BY SETTING WEIGHT POLARITY a priori?
Networks need both positive and negative weights to funcion (Wang et al., 2022) - a DNN with
all non-negative weights is not a universal approximator. Constraining a network’s weight polarity
pattern limits its representation capacity: when only half of the range is available to each connection,
the reduction in total possible network patterns grows exponentially with more edges in the network.
It seems counter-intuitive for any network to have willingly chosen to give up on a vast portion of its
representation capacity. Are they gaining elsewhere? Our thought is: maybe they learn faster. Below
we provide theoretical discussions and experimental evidence.
Definition 2.1 (DNN). Let W (l) ∈ Rnl ×nl−1 be the input weights of layer l, nl be the number of
units in layer l, b(l) ∈ Rnl be the bias terms of layer l, for l ∈ {1, . . . , L}. l = 0 is the input layer,
n0 = dim(x). Let layer l be σ (l) (x) = σ(W (l) x + b(l) ).
                         P (x) = σ (L) ◦ σ (L−1) ◦ ... ◦ σ (1) (x), P (x) ∈ RnL ;
                         F (x) = softmax(P (x))
DNN is F (x). For the non-linearity σ, we define it to be ReLU throughout the paper.

                              0 xj < 0
                   σ(xj ) =                     σ(x) = (σ(x1 ), . . . , σ(xnl ))
                              xj xj ⩾ 0

Lemma 2.1 (capacity-speed trade-off). If the weight polarities are set a priori, such that the function
is still representable, then the network can learn faster.
We prove Lemma 2.1 for single-hidden-layer networks, with the following assumptions:
         Assumption 1: The weights take on discrete values. This is essentially true for all DNNs
         implemented on silicon chips where all continuous variables are discretized;
         Assumption 2: Exhaustive search as the learning algorithm.
See proof on page 20.
The theory, albeit proved under constrained settings, argues for a trade-off between network rep-
resentation capacity and learning speed. Next, we test with simulation to show that networks


                                                     2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


learn more quickly when polarities are set a priori in such a way that the function is still repre-
sentable (Figure 1 panel B). With input space X , a function f is representable by a DNN F when
∀x ∈ X , ϵ > 0, |f (x) − F (x)| < ϵ.
We design our freeze training procedure to be exactly the same as SGD (Adam optimizer) except
for one single step: after each batch, all weights are compared to the preset polarity template, and if
any of the weight has switched polarity in the last batch, it is reverted back to the desired sign (see
algorithm 1). As our goal is to see the pure effect of fixing weight polarity, we did not adopt any
bio-plausible learning algorithms as they may introduce confounding factors.
We compared four training procedures in general:

      1. Frozen-Net sufficient-Polarity: Weight polarities were set a priori. The polarity pattern
         was chosen based on a rule that ensures the configuration is adequate for learning the task,
         i.e., the polarity pattern carries expert knowledge about the data.
      2. Frozen-Net RAND-Polarity: Weight polarities were set a priori randomly Bernoulli(0.5).
         The polarity pattern does not carry any information about the data.
      3. Fluid-Net RAND-Polarity: Weights (containing polarities) were initialized randomly;
         weight polarities were free to change throughout the training procedure.
      4. Fluid-Net sufficient-Polarity Weight polarities (not magnitudes) were initialized with prior
         knowledge; weight polarities were free to change throughout the training procedure. This
         scenario will only be discussed in the next section 3 on image classification tasks.

We used 5-dimensional XOR (XOR-5D) as our simulation binary classification task; only the first
two dimensions are relevant to the task, and the remaining three dimensions are noise following
a normal distribution N (1, 1) (Figure 1 panel A). For Frozen-Net sufficient-Polarity, the polarity
template is pre-set in this way: for each hidden unit, the polarity of the output edge is the sign product
of the first two dimensions’ input weights.
Definition 2.2 (XOR). Let x ∈ R2 and t1 , t2 ∈ R,

                        0   [x1 ≥ t1 and x2 ≥ t2 ] or [x1 < t1 and x2 < t2 ]
              f (x) =                                                                                 (1)
                        1   [x1 ≥ t1 and x2 < t2 ] or [x1 < t1 and x2 ≥ t2 ].

To have the best controlled experiments, we fixed the magnitude distribution, architecture, training
samples (n varies, see figure), batch sequence of the training data, and the validation samples (n=1000)
across all scenarios. More details about the experiments can be found in the appendix Sec C. We first
tried four different weight reset methods (details in Algo 1) and found they give us similar results and
thus did not matter for our primary questions (supplementary figure B.1). For the rest of this paper,
we chose the posRand method whereby we set weights to a small random number of the correct sign.
When the polarities are fixed in such a way that it is sufficient to learn the task (red), networks always
learn faster than networks without polarity constrains (blue) (Fig 1 panel B). This advantage is true
across all data scarcity levels and is particularly valuable when data is scarce. When only 60 or 72
training samples were available, Frozen-Net sufficient-polarity on average take 58% and 48% of
the standard Fluid-Net training time respectively to reach the same level of accuracy. When weight
polarities are randomly chosen (green), networks learn as fast as their Fluid-Net counterparts (blue),
and sometimes faster (e.g., training samples = 80 and 92).
Frozen-Net sufficient-Polarity not only saves time, but also saves data (Fig 1 panel C). At convergence,
Frozen-Net sufficient-Polarity (red) takes fewer samples to reach the same level of accuracy when
compared to the standard Fluid-Net (blue). Randomly configured Frozen-Net (green) uses similar and
oftentimes less data than Fluid-Net (blue) (e.g., to reach 80% accuracy, Frozen-Net RAND-polarity
uses less data than Fluid-Net).
We showed that setting weight polarity a priori makes networks learn in less time, with less data,
provided the function is still representable. Even randomly configured Frozen-Nets show comparable
and sometimes better performance than Fluid-Nets. Such a result is striking from an optimization
perspective: Frozen-Net is at a disadvantage by design because the weight resetting step in Freeze-
SGD 1 fights against the gradient update - part of the error update information is lost in this process.
Regardless of this disadvantage during optimization, our Frozen-Net sufficient-polarity consistently


                                                    3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


outperforms Fluid-Net; even Frozen-Net RAND-Polarity is never worse than Fluid-Net. Combined,
these results show we may help AIs to learn quickly and with fewer samples by doing two things: 1)
fix weight polarities, and 2) choose polarity pattern wisely. We will tease apart the effect of these two
factors in the next section.


Figure 1: Adequately setting weight polarity a priori makes networks learn more quickly (fewer
epochs) and with less data (fewer training samples). Single hidden layer networks with 64 hidden
units are trained to learn XOR-5D. In all scenarios, networks were trained for 100 epochs. A)
XOR-5D, a binary classification problem where only the first two dimensions are relevant to the
task (XOR), and the other three dimensions are noise following a normal distribution N (1, 1). B)
Computational efficiency: Setting weight polarity in a data-informed way (red) makes networks learn
more quickly – this is true across all data-scarcity levels; when weight polarities are randomly fixed
(green), networks learn as fast as their fluid counterparts (blue), and sometimes faster (e.g., training
sample sizes = 80 and 92). C) Statistical efficiency: At convergence, adequately configured freeze
networks (red) achieve the same level of performance (% error) with less data; randomly configured
freeze networks (green) use similar and oftentimes less data than fluid (blue), e.g., to reach 80%
accuracy (20% error). For all experiments, n=50 trials. All curves correspond to medians with shaded
regions 25th -75th percentiles.


3    E FFECTIVENESS OF F ROZEN -N ET IN IMAGE CLASSIFICATION TASKS

To prove the effectiveness of our Frozen-Net strategy for more complex tasks, we extended the
experiments in Fig 1 to image classification tasks (Fig 2). Such complex learning tasks do not have
simple and explicit polarity configuration rules as in XOR-5D. We exploited an alternative strategy by
using ImageNet trained polarities (IN-Polarity). A Frozen-Net IN-Polarity has its weight magnitudes
initialized randomly, its weight polarities initialized and fixed to match the IN-polarity pattern. We
also tested Fluid IN-Polarity where networks were initialized to the exact same pattern as Frozen-Net
IN-Polarity, except polarities are free to switch in this scenario. This pair of comparison help us to
understand which of the two factors contributed more to the performance gain: fixing polarities or
knowledge transfer through polarity pattern. We trained and tested networks on the Fashion-MNIST
(grayscale) and CIFAR-10 (RGB-color) datasets, using AlexNet network architecture (Krizhevsky
et al., 2017). For both datasets, we trained for 100 epochs, with lr=0.001. The AlexNet IN-weights
were obtained here. Worth emphasizing, we controlled all conditions to follow the same weight
magnitude distribution at initialization (supp Fig B.6) Specifically, we randomly initialized the
networks following normal procedures: Glorot Normal for conv layers, Glorot Uniform for fc layers;
then either fixed the polarities as is (RAND-Polarity) or flipped the polarities according to IN template
(IN-Polarity), introducing no change to the magnitude distributions.
Across the board, Frozen-Nets IN-polarity (red) always learn with fewer samples than Fluid-Net
(blue) (Fig 2 first column). When only 100 training images were available (across the 10 classes),
Frozen-Net IN-Polarity (red) yields 7% less validation error at convergence compared to Fluid-Net
(blue) in the Fashion-MNIST task and 9.4% less error for CIFAR-10. Such a gain is mostly brought
by knowledge transferred through polarity pattern (pink vs. blue, 6% gain for Fashion-MNIST; 8.4%
gain for CIFAR-10). Fixing the polarities can further bring performance gain: for CIFAR-10, 1% gain
at 100 training samples, and up to 3% at 50000 training samples. The gain from Fluid IN-Polarity to


                                                   4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Freeze-Net IN-Polarity can be statistically significant (Fig 3, pink line). When the polarities are fixed
randomly (RAND-polarity, green), networks never perform worse than Fluid-Net (blue).


Figure 2: DNNs with frozen IN-Polarity learn more quickly and with less data in image classifi-
cation tasks. A) Experiments on Fashion-MNIST image classification dataset. From left to right:
1) Statistical efficiency: Frozen-Nets with IN-polarity (red) always learn with fewer samples than
Fluid-Net (blue); the majority of the gain is contributed by the knowledge transferred from initial
polarity configuration (pink vs. blue); Frozen-Nets RAND-Polarity (green) never perform worse
than Fluid-Net (blue). 2) Frozen-Net IN-Polarity always have a higher chance of reaching 80%
validation accuracy than Fluid-Net; Frozen-Net RAND-Polarity have comparable and sometimes
a higher chance of reaching 80% validation accuracy than Fluid-Net. 3) Computational efficiency:
Frozen-Net IN-Polarity always take less time than Fluid-Net to reach 80% validation accuracy; again,
effective knowledge transfer from preset polarity pattern is the major contributing factor (pink vs.
blue);Frozen-Net RAND-Polarity takes a similar number of computational iterations as Fluid-Net.
B) Same as A except experiments were on CIFAR-10 dataset and the validation accuracy threshold
is at 50%. Gray lines in the first column correspond to the validation accuracy thresholds used to
plot the next two columns. For a comprehensive view of performances at different thresholds, see
Supp Fig B.2. For statistical significance of the difference, see Fig 3. Both datasets: n=20 trials, 100
epochs, lr=0.001. No data augmentation was performed.


Across the board, Frozen-Net IN-Polarity always learns with less time than Fluid-Net (Fig 2 third
column). Majority of such a gain is brought by polarity pattern knowledge transfer. Frozen-Net
RAND-Polarity takes a comparable number of computational iterations as Fluid-Net. Furthermore,
not every network is able to reach the specified accuracy threshold (Fashion-MNIST: 80%, CIFAR-
10: 50%; Fig 2 second column). Across the board, Frozen-Net IN-Polarity has a higher chance of
passing the specified accuracy threshold than Fluid-Net; Frozen-Net RAND-Polarity has an equal
and sometimes higher chance than Fluid-Net (Fashion-MNIST 1000 & 2000 samples; CIFAR-10
10000 & 25000 samples). These observations are true across different validation accuracy thresholds
(Supp Fig B.2).
Worth noting, IN-Polarity initialized networks in general shows more consistent performance across
trials, compared to the Fluid setting, for both Frozen-Net and Fluid-Net. This is especially obvious
for the statistical efficiency plots: across the board, IN-Polarity always shows less variation in its
performance on validation error (shaded area marks 25th -75th percentiles).
To provide a lens into the dynamic of polarity switch throughout learning, we analyzed the ratio
of weight parameters (excluding bias terms) that had polarity switch between two epochs for Fluid
RAND-Polarity for the first 50 epochs - indeed, there are more polarity switch early on in training


                                                   5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


and the ratio decays throughout training. Such a trend is true across layers and across training sample
sizes. These suggest polarities are mostly learnt early on during training but also remain dynamic
throughout the learning process.
In sum, we are able to extend our simulation results in Sec 2 to more complex image classification
tasks: Frozen-Net IN-polarity consistently learns with less data and time and does so with a higher
probability of success compared to Fluid-Net; the majority of the performance gain is brought by
knowledge embedded in the initialized polarity pattern, with further gain possible by fixing weight
polarities; Frozen-Net RAND-polarity perform as well as Fluid-Net, sometimes better.


4    T RANSFERRING AND FIXING POLARITY IS SUPERIOR TO TRANSFERRING
    WEIGHTS

From a transfer learning perspective, our Frozen-Net strategy essentially transfers weight polarities
instead of weights per se. How does polarity transfer compare to the traditional finetune (weight
transfer) strategy? This time, instead of randomly initializing the weight magnitudes, we initialized
the weight magnitudes based on the ImageNet-trained weights (IN-Weight). We compared them with
Frozen-Net IN-Polarity by plotting their differences (∆={LEGEND} - {Freeze IN-Polarity}) in Fig 3
(the original curves before taking the differences can be found in Supp Fig B.3).
The orange curves compare weight transfer (Fluid-Net IN-Weight) with our polarity transfer strategy
(Frozen-Net IN-Polarity). Across almost all data scarcity levels, our polarity transfer strategy achieves
higher accuracy than finetune (first column, orange⩾ 0). Such a superiority is statistically significant


Figure 3: Across all sample sizes, Frozen-Net with ImageNet-polarities (IN-polarities) learns
more quickly than Fluid-Net with ImageNet-weight (IN-weight) initialization. In first and third
columns, curves are the median difference ∆={LEGEND} - {Freeze IN-Polarity} (the second term
is the red curve in Fig 2). Asterisks (*) indicate statistical significance with Mann-Whitney U two-tail
test (α=0.05). 1) First column: Transferring and fixing polarity is more effective than transferring
weights in terms of data efficiency. This is indicated by orange curve above zero across most sample
sizes, and it is statistically significant for small sample sizes. Note the zero line here means LEGEND
= Freeze IN-Polarity. 2) Second column: Frozen-Net IN-Polarity has a higher chance of reaching
80% (Fashion-MNIST) / 50% (CIFAR-10) validation accuracy compared to weight transfer (orange
curve); 3) Third column: Frozen-Net IN-Polarity always takes less epochs to reach high validation
accuracy than weight transfer (orange curve). Both datasets: n=20 trials, 100 epochs, lr=0.001. For
the right two columns, the validation accuracy thresholds are the same as in Fig 2


                                                   6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


(Mann-Whitney U two-tail) when training data is limited (Fashion-MNIST: ⩽ 2000 samples except
750, CIFAR-10: ⩽ 1000 samples). Polarity transfer also allows the networks to learn with higher
probability (second column) and fewer epochs (third column, curve⩾ 0). Such faster learning is true
regardless of the performance threshold value (Supp Fig B.4). In sum, transferring and fixing polarity
is almost always superior to weight transfer both in terms of statistical efficiency and computational
efficiency. Such an observation suggests polarity configuration is an effective medium, if not superior
to weight pattern, for transferring knowledge between networks.
When networks were transferred with polarities but not frozen (Fluid IN-Polarity pink), they almost
always perform better than Fluid IN-Weight (orange, Fig 3 & Supp Fig B.3 to see variance), this is
true except rare cases (e.g. CIFAR-10 2500&5000 samples) where the difference is not significant
due to the wide performance variation of Fluid IN-Weight.
Surprisingly, when we initialized the Frozen-Net with IN-weight (cyan), there is some gain in
performance, but to a limited extent; in fact, it can sometimes be worse. When training data is limited
(Fashion-MNIST⩽ 1000, CIFAR-10⩽ 1000), Frozen-Net IN-weight gained little performance
(cyan≈0) and could be detrimental at times (CIFAR-10 500&1000 samples). When training data is
more abundant, there is a more consistent accuracy gain by initializing Frozen-Net with IN-weight
(Fashion-MNIST gain ∼ 1%, CIFAR-10 gain ∼ 4%). Such a gain is discounted by more training
iterations (third column), and sometimes less likelihood of reaching a high level of performance
(second column).
Furthermore, similar to random initialization, weight transfer tend to have wider performance
variations compared to polarity transfer, for both Frozen and Fluid networks (Fig B.3). The exact
reason behind this observation remains to be explored, our current hypothesis is the stochasticity
of sample batching: by only transferring polarity while initializing the magnitudes randomly, the
learning process is more robust against such stochasticity. The difference in initialized magnitude
distribution between polarity transfer vs. weight transfer could also be a potential contributing factor
(supp Fig B.6).
In sum, polarity transfer is superior to weight transfer in most of the scenarios we tested and such a
superiority is further secured by fixing the polarities throughout training. To a large extent, weight
polarity alone, not weight per se, is enough to transfer knowledge between networks. Giving the
additional magnitude information to Frozen-Net can give some performance gain, but only when data
and time is abundant; in all other scenarios (i.e., data-limited or time-limited), initializing Frozen-Net
with stereotypical weight magnitudes could be detrimental to the learning performance.


5    W HAT DO WE LOSE BY SETTING WEIGHT POLARITY a priori?

Intelligent agents have limited resources in 1) data, 2) time, 3) space (number of hidden units or
other network size parameters), and 4) power (∝time×space, number of flops). In Sec 2,3,4, we
showed that fixing weight polarity helps to save on two of these resources, time and data, but with a
condition – the polarity configuration must be adequately set such that the network can still represent
the function. With fixed polarity, certain configurations will result in networks never being able to
learn the task. What is the probability of such unfortunate events happening? We investigate this
direction with our simulated task XOR-5D.
Assuming unlimited resources (i.e., perfect learning algorithm, unlimited data and time), we deduced
the theoretical probability limit for a single-hidden-layer network to be able to represent XOR (and
its high-dimensional variants with task-irrelevant higher dimensions) as a function of the number
of hidden units (Supp Theorem D.1). The theoretical results are plotted in Fig 4 panel A (top). In
theory, it takes at least 3 units for Fluid-Net and Frozen-Net sufficient-Polarity to be able to learn
XOR-5D on every single trial. Such a probability will never be 100% for Frozen-Net RAND-Polarity,
no matter how large the networks are. Luckily, the probability grows exponentially with the network
size: having 15 hidden units is already sufficient for a randomly configured Frozen-Net to learn XOR
with > 99% probability.
This is exactly what we see in our simulation results (Fig 4 panel A bottom). For a generous amount
of data (500 training samples) and learning time (100 epochs), the Frozen-Net RAND-Polarity curve
nicely matches the theoretical curve - networks with more than 15 hidden units learn XOR-5D with
very high probability, even though their polarities are fixed randomly.


                                                    7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 4: A network has to be sufficiently large for it to learn more quickly, with less data, if
its weight polarity is configured randomly. A) For a randomly configured Frozen-Net to learn
XOR-5D, it has to be sufficiently large. In both the theoretical limit and simulation results, it takes at
least 15 hidden units for a Frozen-Net RAND-Polarity (green) to have > 99% chance of learning
XOR-5D; it takes three hidden units, in theory, for an adequately configured Frozen-Net (red) and
Fluid-Net (blue) to learn XOR-5D. B) When Frozen-Net RAND-Polarity is not large enough, it has
a much lower chance of learning XOR-5D, and when it does learn, it uses more time and data. C)
When Frozen-Net RAND-Polarity is sufficiently large, it at least shows the same level of performance
as standard Fluid-Nets. D) Frozen-Net sufficient-Polarity shows an advantage over Fluid-Net (red +
yellow) in almost all training sample sizes (especially when data is limited) and across all network
sizes. Randomly configured Frozen-Nets have an advantage over Fluid-Nets (green + yellow), mostly
when the network is sufficiently sized (> 15 hidden units). We ran 50 trials for all experiments. All
curves represent medians with shaded regions denoting 25th -75th percentiles.


Both theory and simulation results show that we will lose all advantages if weight polarities are fixed
but not configured adequately; an example of such is a small, randomly configured Frozen-Net (e.g.,
10 hidden units, Fig 4 panel B). Notice that for the same network size, if we ensure the configuration
is adequately set (red), then the network learns quickly and is data-efficient. By allowing more space
(network size), Frozen-Net RAND-Polarity starts to pick up the advantages in time and data efficiency
(Fig 4 panel C). In summary, we gain from setting weight polarity a priori only if the polarity is
configured adequately (Fig 4 panel D); the adequacy can either be made more probable by having a
larger network or can be guaranteed by an explicit configuration rule (e.g., through development for
NIs, or explicit rules in our simulations, or transferred polarities from previously trained networks).

6    D ISCUSSION

We showed in this paper that 1) if the weight polarities are adequately set a priori, then networks
can learn with less data, time, space, and power; 2) polarity may be a more effective and compressed
medium of network knowledge transfer; and 3) while we lose all advantages when the polarities are


                                                    8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


fixed but not set adequately, we can regain these advantages by increasing the size of the networks.
Below we discuss the novelty of our work and some future directions.
In the literature of bio-plausible artificial neural networks (ANNs), the most related work is on Dale’s
principle: a single unit’s output weights are exclusively excitatory or inhibitory. An exciting attempt
of applying such a principle to ANNs achieved performance comparable to multi-layer perceptrons
(gray-scale image classification tasks) and VGG16 (CIFAR-10) (Cornford et al., 2021). Our approach
differs in several ways; the most fundamental one is ours does not require exclusivity of a unit’s
weight polarity, we only ask the polarity configuration to stay fixed throughout training. Because
we made fewer assumptions on the architecture and network properties, we were able to reveal
the true power of weight polarities - polarity-fixed networks can not only perform as well as the
traditional approaches when the polarities are set adequately, but they can also learn more quickly
with less samples. Additionally, we revealed that polarities, not weights, may be a more effective and
compressed form of knowledge transfer medium. Furthermore, our Freeze-SGD algorithm 1 is easily
applicable to any existing network architecture and any learning mode, be it transfer learning or de
novo learning, thus enjoy a wider application range.
Our hypothesis is also novel in the machine learning literature. In a statistical learning framework,
it is counter-intuitive to disassemble a single parameter into magnitude and sign. To the best of
our knowledge, we are the first to think in this way and prove that connection polarities themselves
serve as an effective form of inductive bias. Previous work that vaguely took on a connectionist’s
view mostly focused on the existence or range of connections (e.g., adding skip connections (He
et al., 2016)), but the polarity of such connections were essentially left out of the discussion. Our
work broke the stereotypical view and brought weight polarity into the playing field. A lesson we
learned from this research is that when designing network architectures, we should not only focus on
the existence of connections, but also pay attention to the polarities of connections. In the transfer
learning literature, to the best of our knowledge, there has been no indication that transferring polarity
alone is sufficient for knowledge transfer – ours is the first demonstration on the importance of
polarity.
Our work is in sync with the framework of learning theory. Our way of explicitly setting the weight
polarities provides a strong prior for the networks. This is in line with the bias-variance trade-off
theorem (Geman et al., 1992; Tibshirani & Friedman, 2001). Frozen-Net sufficient-Polarity has a
high inductive bias – by trading representation capacity, they gain in time and data efficiency through
discounting parameter variances. Indeed, the performance gain we observe from fixing polarities
might be explained by preventing over-fitting thus better generalization to the validation data.
Our work is also in sync with the lottery ticket hypothesis (Frankle & Carbin, 2019). Our observations
on larger networks enjoying a high probability of learning XOR-5D even when their polarities are
randomly configured is a realization of the lottery ticket hypothesis.
We engineered our Freeze-SGD algorithm entirely based on SGD because we are interested in the
pure effect of fixing polarity during learning. As discussed in Sec 2, such an approach intrinsically
put Frozen-Net in a disadvantageous position as while resetting weights to the correct polarity after
each learning iteration, this procedure effectively fights against the gradient update direction. It is an
interesting next step to adopt a more polarity-freeze compatible learning algorithm, possibly allowing
us to further improve learning performance. One possibility is adapting the primal-dual interior-point
method (Vogelstein et al., 2010) or Hebbian learning (Amit, 2019), as well as a host of bio-plausible
learning algorithms (Miconi, 2017; Boopathy & Fiete, 2022; Dellaferrera & Kreiman, 2022).
From this work, we have strong experimental evidence (simulation and image classification) and
some theoretical discussion suggesting that if the weight polarities are adequately set a priori, then
networks can learn with less data, time, space, and power. We look forward to applying our Frozen-
Net approach to more tasks to see if we can empirically extend our results to more diverse scenarios.
We also look forward to extending our results theoretically (e.g., including SGD assumption in our
Lemma 2.1).


R EFERENCES
Yali Amit. Deep learning with asymmetric connections and hebbian updates. Frontiers in Computa-
  tional Neuroscience, 13:18, 2 2019. ISSN 16625188. doi: 10.3389/FNCOM.2019.00018/BIBTEX.


                                                    9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Yassir Bendou, Yuqing Hu, Raphael Lafargue, Giulia Lioi, Bastien Pasdeloup, Stéphane Pateux, and
  Vincent Gripon. Easy: Ensemble augmented-shot y-shaped learning: State-of-the-art few-shot
  classification with simple ingredients. arXiv, 1 2022. doi: 10.48550/arxiv.2201.09699. URL
  http://arxiv.org/abs/2201.09699.
Akhilan Boopathy and Ila Fiete. How to train your wide neural network without backprop: An
  input-weight alignment perspective. In Kamalika Chaudhuri, Stefanie Jegelka, Le Song, Csaba
  Szepesvari, Gang Niu, and Sivan Sabato (eds.), Proceedings of the 39th International Confer-
  ence on Machine Learning, volume 162 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp.
  2178–2205. PMLR, 17–23 Jul 2022. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v162/
  boopathy22a.html.
Jonathan Cornford, Damjan Kalajdzievski, Marco Leite, Amélie Lamarquette, Dimitri Michael
  Kullmann, and Blake Aaron Richards. Learning to live with dale’s principle: {ANN}s with
  separate excitatory and inhibitory units. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2021. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=eU776ZYxEpz.
Giorgia Dellaferrera and Gabriel Kreiman. Error-driven input modulation: Solving the credit
  assignment problem without a backward pass. In Kamalika Chaudhuri, Stefanie Jegelka, Le Song,
  Csaba Szepesvari, Gang Niu, and Sivan Sabato (eds.), Proceedings of the 39th International
  Conference on Machine Learning, volume 162 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp.
  4937–4955. PMLR, 17–23 Jul 2022. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v162/
  dellaferrera22a.html.
Chelsea Finn, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. Model-agnostic meta-learning for fast adaptation of
  deep networks. In Doina Precup and Yee Whye Teh (eds.), Proceedings of the 34th International
  Conference on Machine Learning, volume 70 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp.
  1126–1135. PMLR, 06–11 Aug 2017. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v70/
  finn17a.html.
Jonathan Frankle and Michael Carbin. The lottery ticket hypothesis: Finding sparse, trainable neural
  networks. 7th International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2019, 2019. URL
  https://openreview.net/forum?id=rJl-b3RcF7.
Stuart Geman, Elie Bienenstock, and René Doursat. Neural networks and the bias/variance dilemma.
  Neural Computation, 4:1–58, 1 1992. ISSN 0899-7667. doi: 10.1162/neco.1992.4.1.1. URL
  https://doi.org/10.1162/neco.1992.4.1.1.
Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image
  recognition. In 2016 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp.
  770–778, 2016. doi: 10.1109/CVPR.2016.90.
Elad Hoffer and Nir Ailon. Deep metric learning using triplet network. In Aasa Feragen, Marcello
  Pelillo, and Marco Loog (eds.), Similarity-Based Pattern Recognition, pp. 84–92, Cham, 2015.
  Springer International Publishing. ISBN 978-3-319-24261-3.
John Jumper, Richard Evans, Alexander Pritzel, Tim Green, Michael Figurnov, Olaf Ronneberger,
  Kathryn Tunyasuvunakool, Russ Bates, Augustin Žídek, Anna Potapenko, Alex Bridgland,
  Clemens Meyer, Simon A.A. Kohl, Andrew J. Ballard, Andrew Cowie, Bernardino Romera-
  Paredes, Stanislav Nikolov, Rishub Jain, Jonas Adler, Trevor Back, Stig Petersen, David Reiman,
  Ellen Clancy, Michal Zielinski, Martin Steinegger, Michalina Pacholska, Tamas Berghammer,
  Sebastian Bodenstein, David Silver, Oriol Vinyals, Andrew W. Senior, Koray Kavukcuoglu,
  Pushmeet Kohli, and Demis Hassabis. Highly accurate protein structure prediction with al-
  phafold. Nature, 596:583–589, 2021. ISSN 14764687. doi: 10.1038/s41586-021-03819-2. URL
  http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/s41586-021-03819-2.
Alex Krizhevsky, Ilya Sutskever, and Geoffrey E. Hinton. Imagenet classification with deep con-
  volutional neural networks. Communications of the ACM, 60, 2017. ISSN 15577317. doi:
  10.1145/3065386.
Michalis Lazarou, Tania Stathaki, and Yannis Avrithis. Iterative label cleaning for transductive
 and semi-supervised few-shot learning. ICCV, pp. 8731–8740, 2022. ISSN 15505499. doi:
 10.1109/iccv48922.2021.00863.


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Thomas Miconi. Biologically plausible learning in recurrent neural networks reproduces neural
  dynamics observed during cognitive tasks. eLife, 6, 2017. ISSN 2050084X. doi: 10.7554/eLife.
  20899.
Olga Russakovsky, Jia Deng, Hao Su, Jonathan Krause, Sanjeev Satheesh, Sean Ma, Zhiheng Huang,
  Andrej Karpathy, Aditya Khosla, Michael Bernstein, Alexander C. Berg, and Li Fei-Fei. Imagenet
  large scale visual recognition challenge. International Journal of Computer Vision, 115:211–252,
  2015. ISSN 15731405. doi: 10.1007/s11263-015-0816-y.
David Silver, Julian Schrittwieser, Karen Simonyan, Ioannis Antonoglou, Aja Huang, Arthur Guez,
  Thomas Hubert, Lucas Baker, Matthew Lai, Adrian Bolton, Yutian Chen, Timothy Lillicrap, Fan
  Hui, Laurent Sifre, George Van Den Driessche, Thore Graepel, and Demis Hassabis. Mastering
  the game of go without human knowledge. Nature, 550:354–359, 2017. ISSN 14764687. doi:
 10.1038/nature24270. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/nature24270.
Jake Snell, Kevin Swersky, and Richard Zemel. Prototypical networks for few-shot learning. In
  I. Guyon, U. Von Luxburg, S. Bengio, H. Wallach, R. Fergus, S. Vishwanathan, and R. Gar-
  nett (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 30. Curran Asso-
  ciates, Inc., 2017. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2017/file/
  cb8da6767461f2812ae4290eac7cbc42-Paper.pdf.
Nicholas C. Spitzer. Neurotransmitter switching in the developing and adult brain. Annual Review of
  Neuroscience, 40, 2017. ISSN 15454126. doi: 10.1146/annurev-neuro-072116-031204.
Robert Tibshirani and Jerome H Friedman. The elements of statistical learning [electronic resource]:
  data mining, inference, and prediction: with 200 full-color illustrations. Springer, 2001.
Evie van der Spoel, Maarten P. Rozing, Jeanine J. Houwing-Duistermaat, P. Eline Slagboom, Marian
  Beekman, Anton J M de Craen, Rudi G J Westendorp, and Diana van Heemst. Siamese neural
  networks for one-shot image recognition. ICML - Deep Learning Workshop, 7, 2015. ISSN
  19454589.
Oriol Vinyals, Charles Blundell, Timothy Lillicrap, koray kavukcuoglu, and Daan Wierstra. Match-
  ing networks for one shot learning. In D. Lee, M. Sugiyama, U. Luxburg, I. Guyon, and
  R. Garnett (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 29. Curran As-
  sociates, Inc., 2016. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2016/file/
  90e1357833654983612fb05e3ec9148c-Paper.pdf.
Joshua T. Vogelstein, Adam M. Packer, Timothy A. Machado, Tanya Sippy, Baktash Babadi, Rafael
  Yuste, and Liam Paninski. Fast nonnegative deconvolution for spike train inference from population
  calcium imaging. Journal of Neurophysiology, 104:3691–3704, 12 2010. ISSN 00223077. doi:
  10.1152/JN.01073.2009/ASSET/IMAGES/LARGE/Z9K0081002840010.JPEG. URL https:
  //journals.physiology.org/doi/full/10.1152/jn.01073.2009.
Qingyang Wang, Michael A. Powell, Ali Geisa, Eric Bridgeford, and Joshua T. Vogelstein. Why do
  networks have inhibitory/negative connections?, 2022.


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A     F REEZE -SGD ALGORITHM

Algorithm 1 Freeze-SGD
  for l = 1, 2, . . . , L do
      Get weight polarity template T (l) based on the configuration rules. Match W (l) to T (l)
  end for

    for epoch = 1, 2, . . . do
        for batch = 1, 2, . . . do
            SGD updates all weights.
            for l = 1, 2, . . . , L do
                Compare signs of the weights W (l) to the template T (l) ,
                get checker = T (l) ∗ sign(W (l) ).
                for (i, j) where T (l) (i, j) < 0 do
                    Make Wl (i, j) in compliance with T (l) (i, j) by one of the following four ways:
                    Case posCon W (l) (i, j) = T (l) (i, j) ∗ ϵ where ϵ > 0
                    Case posRand W (l) (i, j) = T (l) (i, j) ∗ rand([0, ϵ]) where ϵ > 0
                    Case zero W (l) (i, j) = 0
                    Case flip W (l) (i, j) = −W (l) (i, j)
                end for
            end for
        end for
    end for


                                                   12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


B    S UPPLEMENTARY F IGURES


Figure B.1: Different reset methods in the Freeze-SGD algorithm yields similar results. The
meaning of different reset methods is described in algorithm 1. A) Freeze-informed consistently
reaches higher validation accuracy after the same amount of training time. This is especially evident
when training sample is scarce. B) Same curves as in Fig 4, panels B & C first column, plotted for
different reset methods. C) & D) Same curves as in Fig 1, panels B & C, plotted for different reset
methods. We run 20 trials for all experiments in this figure. All curves correspond to medians with
shaded regions representing the 25th and 75th percentiles.


                                                 13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure B.2: Related to Fig 2. Regardless of validation accuracy threshold, Frozen-Net IN-
Polarity always learn more quickly. Same curves as in Fig 2 right two columns, plotted for different
validation accuracy thresholds.


                                                14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure B.3: Related to Fig 3. All scenarios plotted separately instead of plotting only for the
differences.


                                              15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure B.4: Related to Fig 3. Regardless of validation accuracy threshold, transferring and
fixing polarities help networks learn faster than traditional weight transfer strategy. Same
curves as in Fig 3 right two columns, plotted for different validation accuracy thresholds.


                                             16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure B.5: Tracking number of polarity flips. Weight polarity flips were analyzed for Fluid
RAND-Polarity (SGD with random initialization) and measured by the ratio of weight parameters
(excluding bias terms) flipped sign between two consecutive epochs. The first 50 epochs were
analyzed and plotted, separately across layers and training data size. Curves are median with shaded
area representating the 25th and 75th percentiles out of the 20 trials.


                                                17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure B.6: Weight magnitude distribution at initialization across all experimental conditions for
image classification tasks. All scenarios follow the exact same magnitude initialization magnitude
except IN-weight transfer.


C    M ETHODS
XOR-5D Data were prepared by sampling from the XOR-5D distribution as described in the main
text, the training data size varied, validation set is always 1000 samples across all scenarios. A single
hidden layer network (64 hidden units for Fig 1, various for Fig 4) was trained for 100 epochs; in total
50 randomly seeded initializations (trials) were ran. To have the best controlled experiments, we fixed
the magnitude distribution, architecture, training samples (n varies), learning rate, batch sequence of
the training data, and the validation samples across all tested scenarios. Statistical efficiency was
quantified by plotting validation error rate at convergence across different training data scarcity levels.
Computational efficiency was quantified by plotting the number of epochs to reach certain level of
validation accuracy. We note not all trails could reach the same level of validation accuracy cut-off, to
present the whole picture, we 1) plotted the percentage of trials that reached the validation accuracy
cut-off (success rate); 2) showed results across a range of cut-off selections (supp Fig B.2, B.3, B.4).

Image classification Experiments were done essentially the same as XOR-5D in a tightly controlled
fashion, same magnitude distribution, batch sequence (batch size = 1000), learning rate, and training
data across all scenarios. lr=0.001 was chosen from [0.03, 0.01, 0.005] based on the most accuracy
gain after 50 epochs across all scenarios. Networks were trained for 100 epochs, 20 trials in total. We
did not do any image augmentation. All performance quantification follow the above description.
All experiments were run on 2 RTX-8000 GPUs.


                                                   18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


D    XOR T HEOREMS RELATED TO S EC 5
Lemma D.1 (minimum XOR solution, 2D). For any single-hidden-layer network to be able to solve
XOR, it is sufficient to have 3 different XOR-compatible hidden units. The weight pattern for each
                                    (1)  (1)   (2)
unit can be given by a triplet (w1,j , w2,j , wj,1 ), where j is the unit index, j ∈ {1, . . . , n}, n is the
number of hidden units. An XOR compatible hidden unit is one where the weight pattern triplet have
                                (2)             (1)             (1)
their polarities satisfy sign(wj,1 ) = sign(w1,j ) × sign(w2,j ).

See proof on page 20.
Lemma D.2 (can learn XOR probability, 2D). For a single hidden layer network with n hidden units
(n ∈ Z+ ), randomly initialize each weight with its polarity following P (polarity) ∼ Bernoulli(0.5),
then the probability that this randomly initialized network can learn XOR without changing any of
the weight polarity is lower bounded by
                                       P2
                                              Q(k, 4, 4, n)
                      Ω(P (n)) = 1 − k=0 n                    , n ∈ Z+
                                                 8
                                                        k−1
                                                    n
                                                        X                     m
                      Q(k, m, M, n) = [(M + k) −              Q(p, k, M, n)]
                                                        p=0
                                                                              k


Q here is a helper function for counting, it is defined in more detail in the proof.

See proof on page 21.
Theorem D.1 (can learn XOR probability, high dimensional). For a single hidden layer network
with n hidden units, randomly initialize each weight with its polarity following P (polarity) ∼
Bernoulli(0.5), then the probability that this randomly initialized network can learn high-
dimensional XOR (first two dimensions are relevant, the rest (d − 2) dimensions are irrelevant)
without changing any of the weight polarities is lower bounded by
                                     P2
                                            Q(k, 2d , 2d , n)
                 Ω(P (n, d)) = 1 − k=0 d+1 n                  , n, d ∈ Z+ , d ≥ 2
                                            (2 )
                                                   k−1
                                               n
                                                   X                   m
                 Q(k, m, M, n) = [(M + k) −            Q(p, k, M, n)]
                                                   p=0
                                                                        k


Q here is a helper function for counting, it is defined in more detail in the proof.

See proof on page 22.


                                                     19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


E    P ROOFS
Lemma 2.1 (capacity-speed trade-off). If the weight polarities are set a priori, such that the function
is still representable, then the network can learn faster.

Proof of Lemma 2.1. A feedforward DNN can be described by as a graph

                                            G = (V, E), w : E → D.
                                                                                                   (l)
Nodes of the graph correspond to neurons (units), where each neuron is a function σj (x) =
       (l)
σ(Wj x + b(l) ), j ∈ [nl ]. All the weights for the network take on values from the set D =
{−d, . . . , 0, . . . , d} for some d ∈ N. The network is organized in layers. That is, the set of nodes
                                                                            L
can be decomposed into a union of (nonempty) disjoint subsets, V = ∪˙ l=0 Vl , such that every edge
in E connects some node in Vl−1 to some node in Vl , for some l ∈ [L]. Assume we have fully
connected layers. Then the number of incoming edges per node is |Vl−1 |. Let |V0 | be the input space
dimensionality. All nodes in V0 (input layer) and VL (output layer) are distinct.
Let |G| denote the total number of distinct weight patterns of the graph G. Then for a single hidden
layer network where L = 2, we have:
                                 |G| = |D||E| = |D|(|V0 |∗|V1 |+|V1 |∗|V2 |)                             (2)
Then
                                      |G|        2d + 1 (|V0 |∗|V1 |+|V1 |∗|V2 |)
                                                 =(      )                                            (3)
                          |GpolarityF rozen |     d+1
Assume a different weight pattern represents a different function (trivially holds in linear + full rank
weight case), then for every single representable function, there always exists a set of weight polarity
configurations Gcorrect such that Gcorrect ⊆ GpolarityF rozen , therefore
                                          |Gcorrect |        |Gcorrect |
                                                           ≪                                             (4)
                                        |GpolarityFrozen |      |G|
This means setting weight polarity a priori in an adequate way constraints the combinatorial search
space to have much higher proportion of correct solutions, hence easier to learn under exhaustive
search algorithm (Lemma 2.1).
Lemma D.1 (minimum XOR solution, 2D). For any single-hidden-layer network to be able to solve
XOR, it is sufficient to have 3 different XOR-compatible hidden units. The weight pattern for each
                                    (1)  (1)   (2)
unit can be given by a triplet (w1,j , w2,j , wj,1 ), where j is the unit index, j ∈ {1, . . . , n}, n is the
number of hidden units. An XOR compatible hidden unit is one where the weight pattern triplet have
                                (2)             (1)             (1)
their polarities satisfy sign(wj,1 ) = sign(w1,j ) × sign(w2,j ).

Proof of Lemma D.1. For each hidden unit, we can enumerate all of its 8 possible weight polarity
configurations, with the index set AP olarities = {1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8}:

                                                 (1)         (1)       (2)
                                  #            w1,j         w2,j     wj,1
                                  1            +            +        +
                                  2            +            +        -
                                  3            +            -        +
                                  4            +            -        -
                                  5            -            +        +
                                  6            -            +        -
                                  7            -            -        +
                                  8            -            -        -

The set BXOR−P olarities = {2, 3, 5, 8} ⊂ AP olarities contains indexes of polarity patterns that
follow XOR. To prove Lemma D.1, we first consider the case of 3 hidden unit single layer network.
To prove a network of certain polarity pattern is capable of solving XOR, it suffices to give a working
solution. Below, we exhaust all possible 3-unit network that satisfy the statement of Lemma D.1, i.e.
having 3 different XOR-compatible units; and list out their corresponding working network solutions.


                                                       20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                          (1)     (1)    (1)      (2)
       {}          #   w1,j     w2,j    bj      wj,1         working network F (x, y)=
                   2   +1       +1      0       -1
       {2,3,5}     3   1        0       0       1            sigmoid(−σ(x + y) + σ(x) + σ(y))
                   5   0        1       0       1
                   2   +1       0       0       -1
       {2,3,8}     3   +1       -1      0       +1           sigmoid(−σ(x) + σ(x − y) − σ(−y))
                   8   0        -1      0       -1
                   2   0        +1      0       -1
       {2,5,8}     5   -1       +1      0       +1           sigmoid(−σ(y) + σ(y − x) − σ(−x))
                   8   -1       0       0       -1
                   3   0        -1      0       +1
       {3,5,8}     5   -1       0       0       +1           sigmoid(σ(−y) + σ(−x) − σ(−x − y))
                   8   -1       -1      0       -1

For the case that single-hidden-layer network has more than 3 hidden units, if it satisfies the rule in
Lemma D.1, we can always construct a XOR-solvable network solution by setting all other weights
to zero except for 3 different XOR-compatible units, then we arrive at one of the four situations in
the above table and we just proved they are XOR solutions.
Therefore, for any single hidden layer network to solve XOR, it is sufficient to have at least 3 of the 4
XOR polarity patterned units.

Lemma D.2 (can learn XOR probability, 2D). For a single hidden layer network with n hidden units
(n ∈ Z+ ), randomly initialize each weight with its polarity following P (polarity) ∼ Bernoulli(0.5),
then the probability that this randomly initialized network can learn XOR without changing any of
the weight polarity is lower bounded by
                                       P2
                                              Q(k, 4, 4, n)
                      Ω(P (n)) = 1 − k=0 n                    , n ∈ Z+
                                                 8
                                                        k−1
                                                        X                     m
                      Q(k, m, M, n) = [(M + k)n −             Q(p, k, M, n)]
                                                        p=0
                                                                              k


Q here is a helper function for counting, it is defined in more detail in the proof.

Proof of Lemma D.2. For any network randomly initialized, its weight polarity pattern is a set of
n draws with replacement from the polarities indexed by the set AP olarities , |AP olarities | = 8.
Define H = (h1 , . . . , hm , . . . , hn ), hm ∈ AP olarities , |H| = n, to be the tuple of the indices of the
observed weight patterns for the hidden layer. hm is the index of the weight polarity pattern for unit
m. For any network to be able to solve XOR, it needs to have at least 3 units whose weight patterns
are distinct members of set BXOR−P olarities (Lemma D.1). That is, let J = {hm : hm ∈ H, hm ∈
BXOR−P olarities }. Then we need that |J| ≥ 3. We can define the probability of having exactly k
of the 4 XOR compatible weight patterns present within the hidden layer as following (for brevity,
A = AP olarities , B = BXOR−P olarities ):
None of the members in set B appears is given by:
                                                  |B|n    4      1
                                  P (|J| = 0) =        = ( )n = ( )n
                                                  |A|n    8      2
Only one of the member in set B appeared in H, and that member can appear more than once in H is
given by:
                                    |B|                         4
                                                 n       n
                                                                   n      n
                                     1 ((|B| + 1) − |B| )       1 (5 − 4 )
                     P (|J| = 1) =                           =
                                            |A|n                    8n
This is explained by choosing one of 4 members of B |B|

                                                        1 , then multiply by the chosen member
appears at least once ((|B| + 1)n − |B|n )



                                                        21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Only two of the members in set B appeared in H, and both can appear more than once in
H:
                               |B|                   2
                                              n
                                                                  n        n        n
                                2 ((|B| + 2) − 1 ((|B| + 1) − |B| ) − |B| )
               P (|J| = 2) =
                                                        |A|n
                               4         2
                                  n         n
                                 (6 − 1 (5 − 4 ) − 4n )
                                                    n
                            = 2
                                            8n
To count two members appear at least once in H, we have |B|

                                                                2   ways of choosing the 2 members
from set B, and there are (|B| + 2)n ways of choosing with replacement to populate the tuple H,
where each hidden unit can choose from in total  (|B| + 2) possible patterns, and subtract the situation
where only one of the two members appeared 21 ((|B| + 1)n − |B|n ) and the situation where neither
appeared |B|n
The above equations can be put into a compact form
                                                    Q(k, |B|, |A| − |B|, n)
                                 P (|J| = k) =
                                                              |A|n
                                                     Pk−1                    m

where Q(k, m, M, n) = [(M + k)n −                      p=0 Q(p, k, M, n)] k , k ∈ {0, . . . , m}, m ∈
1, . . . , |B|, M ∈ 1, . . . , |A| − |B|, n ∈ Z+ is a helper function that gives exactly k of the m different
XOR-compatible polarity patterns appeared in n units, and in total m + M options are considered
for each unit.
Then, P (n) is counting at least 3 of the 4 set B patterns appear:
      Ω(P (n)) = P (|J| ≥ 3) = 1 − P (|J| = 0) − P (|J| = 1) − P (|J| = 2)
                                   P2
                                          Q(k, 4, 4, n)
                             = 1 − k=0 n
                                           8
                                            4                4         2
                                                n      n
                                                                 n         n n    n
                                    1 n     1 (5 − 4 )       2 (6 − 1 (5 − 4 ) − 4 )
                             =1−( ) −                    −                           .
                                    2           8n                        8n


Theorem D.1 (can learn XOR probability, high dimensional). For a single hidden layer network
with n hidden units, randomly initialize each weight with its polarity following P (polarity) ∼
Bernoulli(0.5), then the probability that this randomly initialized network can learn high-
dimensional XOR (first two dimensions are relevant, the rest (d − 2) dimensions are irrelevant)
without changing any of the weight polarities is lower bounded by
                                     P2
                                            Q(k, 2d , 2d , n)
                 Ω(P (n, d)) = 1 − k=0 d+1 n                  , n, d ∈ Z+ , d ≥ 2
                                            (2 )
                                                   k−1
                                               n
                                                   X                   m
                 Q(k, m, M, n) = [(M + k) −            Q(p, k, M, n)]
                                                   p=0
                                                                        k


Q here is a helper function for counting, it is defined in more detail in the proof.

Proof of Theorem D.1. We solve Theorem D.1 with the exact same counting algorithm as in
Lemma D.2, the only difference is now |AP olarities | = 2d+1 and |BXOR−P olarities | = 2d . We
prove these two equalities below.
|AP olarities | = 2d+1 because we have d input weights and 1 output weight for each unit.
                                                                                   (1)        (1)   (2)
The weight pattern of a single hidden unit in this case is given by a tuple (w1,j , . . . , wd,j , wj,1 ), j ∈
{1, . . . , n} and n is the number of hidden units. Our conclusion in Lemma D.1 trivially extends to
the high dimensional case. This is because high-dimensional-XOR-solvable network solutions can be
trivially constructed from Lemma D.1 by setting the irrelevant input dimension weights to 0. We can
restate Lemma D.1 for high-dimensional XOR as following:


                                                     22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


For any single-hidden-layer network to be able to solve high dimensional XOR (only first two
dimensions are relevant), it is sufficient to have 3 different XOR-compatible hidden units. A
                                                                          (2)           (1)
high dimensional XOR compatible unit polarity pattern is ruled by sign(wj,1 ) = sign(w1,j ) ×
       (1)
sign(w2,j ).
Therefore the irrelevant dimension input weights can be of either polarities and there are 2d−2
different combinations of them. Therefore |BXOR−P olarities | = 4 × 2d−2 = 2d .
Follow the steps in Lemma D.2, we have (for brevity, A = AP olarities , B = BXOR−P olarities )
                             |B|n        2d n
               P (|J| = 0) =        = (      )
                             |A|n       2d+1
                              |B|                           2d
                                              n      n
                                                                 d      n      d n
                               1 ((|B| + 1) − |B| )          1 ((2 + 1) − (2 ) )
               P (|J| = 1) =                            =
                                         |A|n                      (2d+1 )n
                              |B|                 2

                                   ((|B| + 2) − 1 ((|B| + 1) − |B|n ) − |B|n )
                                              n                 n
               P (|J| = 2) = 2
                                                      |A|n
                               d
                              2
                                  ((2d + 2)n − 21 ((2d + 1)n − (2d )n ) − (2d )n )

                           = 2
                                                   (2d+1 )n
Therefore, we have
                  P2
                         Q(k, 2d , 2d , n)
Ω(P (n, d)) =1 − k=0 d+1 n
                         (2 )
                           2d                           2d
                                                                 ((2d + 2)n − 21 ((2d + 1)n − (2d )n ) − (2d )n )
                                d
                   1           ((2 + 1)n − (2d )n )
            =1 − ( )n − 1                           −    2
                                                                                                                  ,
                   2                (2d+1 )n                                      (2d+1 )n
             n, d ∈ Z+ , d ≥ 2


                                               23
