Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A SYMPTOTIC I NSTANCE -O PTIMAL A LGORITHMS FOR
I NTERACTIVE D ECISION M AKING
 Kefan Dong                                            Tengyu Ma
 Stanford University                                   Stanford University
 kefandong@stanford.edu                                tengyuma@stanford.edu



                                            A BSTRACT

         Past research on interactive decision making problems (bandits, reinforcement
         learning, etc.) mostly focuses on the minimax regret that measures the algorithm’s
         performance on the hardest instance. However, an ideal algorithm should adapt to
         the complexity of a particular problem instance and incur smaller regrets on easy
         instances than worst-case instances. In this paper, we design the first asymptotic
         instance-optimal algorithm for general interactive decision making problems with
         finite number of decisions under mild conditions. On every instance f , our algo-
         rithm outperforms all consistent algorithms (those achieving non-trivial regrets on
         all instances), and has asymptotic regret C(f ) ln n, where C(f ) is an exact charac-
         terization of the complexity of f . The key step of the algorithm involves hypothe-
         sis testing with active data collection. It computes the most economical decisions
         with which the algorithm collects observations to test whether an estimated in-
         stance is indeed correct; thus, the complexity C(f ) is the minimum cost to test the
         instance f against other instances. Our results, instantiated on concrete problems,
         recover the classical gap-dependent bounds for multi-armed bandits (Lai et al.,
         1985) and prior works on linear bandits (Lattimore & Szepesvari, 2017), and im-
         prove upon the previous best instance-dependent upper bound (Xu et al., 2021)
         for reinforcement learning.


1   I NTRODUCTION
Bandit and reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms demonstrated a wide range of successful real-
life applications (Silver et al., 2016; 2017; Mnih et al., 2013; Berner et al., 2019; Vinyals et al.,
2019; Mnih et al., 2015; Degrave et al., 2022). Past works have theoretically studied the regret
or sample complexity of various interactive decision making problems, such as contextual bandits,
reinforcement learning (RL), partially observable Markov decision process (see Azar et al. (2017);
Jin et al. (2018); Dong et al. (2021); Li et al. (2019); Agarwal et al. (2014); Foster & Rakhlin (2020);
Jin et al. (2020), and references therein). Recently, Foster et al. (2021) present a unified algorithmic
principle for achieving the minimax regret—the optimal regret for the worst-case problem instances.
However, minimax regret bounds do not necessarily always present a full picture of the statistical
complexity of the problem. They characterize the complexity of the most difficult instances, but
potentially many other instances are much easier. An ideal algorithm should adapt to the complexity
of a particular instance and incur smaller regrets on easy instances than the worst-case instances.
Thus, an ideal regret bound should be instance-dependent, that is, depending on some properties
of each instance. Prior works designed algorithms with instance-dependent regret bounds that are
stronger than minimax regret bounds, but they are often not directly comparable because they depend
on different properties of the instances, such as the gap conditions and the variance of the value
function (Zanette & Brunskill, 2019; Xu et al., 2021; Foster et al., 2020; Tirinzoni et al., 2021).
A more ambitious and challenging goal is to design instance-optimal algorithms that outperform, on
every instance, all consistent algorithms (those achieving non-trivial regrets on all instances). Past
works designed instance-optimal algorithms for multi-armed bandit (Lai et al., 1985), linear bandits
(Kirschner et al., 2021; Hao et al., 2020), Lipschitz bandits (Magureanu et al., 2014), and ergodic
MDPs (Ok et al., 2018). However, instance-optimal regret bounds for tabular reinforcement learning
remain an open question, despite recent progress (Tirinzoni et al., 2021; 2022). The challenge partly


                                                   1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


stems from the fact that the existence of such an instance-optimal algorithm is even a priori unclear
for general interactive decision making problems. Conceivably, each algorithm can have its own
specialty on a subset of instances, and no algorithm can dominate all others on all instances.
Somewhat surprisingly, we prove that there exists a simple algorithm (T2C, stated in Alg. 1) that is
asymptotic instance-optimal for general interactive decision making problems with finite number of
decisions.We determine the exact leading term of the optimal asymptotic regret for instance f to be
C(f ) ln n. Here, n is the number of interactions and C(f ) is a complexity measure for the instance
f that intuitively captures the difficulty of distinguishing f from other instances (that have different
optimal decisions) using observations. Concretely, under mild conditions on the interactive decision
problem, our algorithm achieves an asymptotic regret C(f ) ln n (Theorem 5.2) for every instance f ,
while every consistent algorithm must have an asymptotic regret at least C(f ) ln n (Theorem 3.2).
Our algorithm consists of three simple steps. First, it explores uniformly for o(1)-fraction of the
steps and computes the MLE estimate of the instance with relatively low confidence. Then, it tests
whether the estimate instance (or, precisely, its associated optimal decision) is indeed correct using
the most economical set of queries/decisions. Concretely, it computes a set of decisions with mini-
mal regret, such that, using a log-likelihood ratio test, it can either distinguish the estimated instance
from all other instances (with different optimal decisions) with high confidence, or determine that
our estimation was incorrect. Finally, with the high-confidence estimate, it commits to the optimal
decision of the estimated instance in the rest of the steps. The algorithmic framework essentially
reduces the problem to the key second step — optimal hypothesis testing with active data collection.
Our results recover the classical gap-dependent regret bounds for multi-armed bandits (Lai et al.,
1985) and prior works on linear bandits (Lattimore & Szepesvari, 2017; Hao et al., 2020). As an
instantiation of the general algorithm, we present the first asymptotic instance-optimal algorithm for
tabular RL, improving upon prior instance-dependent algorithms (Xu et al., 2021; Simchowitz &
Jamieson, 2019; Tirinzoni et al., 2021; 2022).



1.1   A DDITIONAL R ELATED W ORKS

Some algorithms are proved instance-optimal for specific interactive decision making problems.
Variants of UCB algorithms are instance-optimal for bandits with various assumptions (Lattimore
& Szepesvári, 2020; Gupta et al., 2021; Tirinzoni et al., 2020; Degenne et al., 2020; Magureanu
et al., 2014), but are suboptimal for linear bandits (Lattimore & Szepesvari, 2017). These algo-
rithms rely on the optimism-in-face-of-uncertainty principle to deal with exploration-exploitation
tradeoff, whereas our algorithm explicitly computes the best tradeoff. Kirschner et al. (2021); Lat-
timore & Szepesvari (2017); Hao et al. (2020) design non-optimistic instance-optimal algorithms
for linear bandits. There are also instance-optimal algorithms for ergodic MDPs where the regret is
less sensitive to the exploration policy (Ok et al., 2018; Burnetas & Katehakis, 1997; Graves & Lai,
1997), interactive decision making with finite hypothesis class, finite state-action space, and known
rewards (Rajeev et al., 1989), and interactive decision making with finite observations (Komiyama
et al., 2015).
The most related problem setup is structured bandits (Combes et al., 2017; Van Parys & Golrezaei,
2020; Jun & Zhang, 2020), where the instances also belong to an abstract and arbitrary family F.
The structured bandits problem is a very special case of general decision making problems and does
not contain RL because the observation is a scalar. In contrast, the observation in general decision
making problems could be high-dimensional (e.g., a trajectory with multiple states, actions, and
rewards for episodic RL), which makes our results technically challenging.
Many algorithms’ regret bounds depend on some properties of instances such as the gap condition.
Foster et al. (2020) prove a gap-dependent regret bound for contextual bandits. For reinforcement
learning, the regret bound may depend on the variance of the optimal value function (Zanette &
Brunskill, 2019) or the gap of the Q-function (Xu et al., 2021; Simchowitz & Jamieson, 2019;
Yang et al., 2021). Xu et al. (2021); Foster et al. (2020) also prove that the gap-dependent bounds
cannot be improve on some instances. To some extent, these instance-dependent lower bounds can
be viewed as minimax bounds for a fine-grained instance family (e.g., all instances with the same
Q-function gap), and therefore are different from ours.


                                                    2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


2    S ETUP AND N OTATIONS

Interactive decision making problems. We focus on interactive decision making problem with
structured observations (Foster et al., 2021), which includes bandits and reinforcement learning
as special cases. An interactive decision making problem is defined by a space of decisions Π,
observations O, a reward function R : O → R, and a function f (also called an instance) that maps
a decision π ∈ Π to a distribution over observations f [π]. We use f [π](·) : O → R+ to denote the
density function of the distribution f [π]. We assume that the reward R is a deterministic and known.
An environment picks an ground-truth instance f ? from a instance family F, and then an agent
(which knows the instance family F but not the ground-truth f ? ) interacts with the environment for
n total rounds. In round t ≤ n,
 (a) the learner selects a decision πt from the decision class Π, and
 (b) the environment generates an observation ot following the ground-truth distribution f ? [πt ] and
     reveals the observation. Then the agent receives a reward R(ot ).
For example, multi-armed bandits, linear bandits, and episodic reinforcement learning all belong to
interactive decision making problems. For bandits, a decision π corresponds to an action and an
observation o corresponds to a reward. For reinforcement learning, a decision π is a deterministic
policy that maps from states to actions, and an observation o is a trajectory (including the reward
at each step). In other words, one round of interactions in the interactive decision making problem
corresponds to one episode of the RL problem. We will formally discuss the RL setup in Section 5.
Let Rf (π) = Eo∼f [π] [R(o)] be the expected reward for decision π under instance f , and π ? (f ) ,
argmaxπ Rf (π) the optimal decision of instance f . The expected regret measures how much worse
the agent’s decision is than the optimal decision:
                                        Pn
                         Regf,n = Ef      t=1 maxπ∈Π Rf (π) − Rf (πt ) .                          (1)
We consider the case where the decision family Π is finite, and every instance f ∈ F has a unique
optimal decision, denoted by π ? (f ). We also assume that for every f ∈ F and π ∈ Π, 0 ≤ R(o) ≤
Rmax almost surely when o is drawn from the distribution f [π], and supo f [π](o) < ∞.
Consistent algorithms and asymptotic instance-optimality. We first note that it’s unreasonable to
ask for an algorithm that can outperform or match any arbitrary algorithm on every instance. This
is because, for any instance f ∈ F, a bespoke algorithm that always outputs π ? (f ) can achieve zero
regret on instance f (though it has terrible regrets for other instances). Therefore, if an algorithm
can outperform or match any algorithm on any instance, it must have zero regret on every instance,
which is generally impossible. Instead, we are interested in finding an algorithm that is as good as
any other reasonable algorithms that are not completely customized to a single instance.
We say an algorithm is consistent if its expected regret satisfies Regf,n = o(np ) for every p > 0
and f ∈ F (Lai et al., 1985). Most of the reasonable algorithms are consistent, such as the UCB
algorithm for multi-armed bandits (Lattimore & Szepesvári, 2020), UCBVI, and UCB-Q algorithm
for tabular reinforcement learning (Simchowitz & Jamieson, 2019; Yang et al., 2021), because all of
them achieve asymptotically O(ln n) regrets on any instance, where O hides constants that depend
on the property of the particular instance.1 However, consistent algorithms exclude the algorithm
mentioned in the previous paragraph which is purely customized to a particular instance.
We say an algorithm is asymptotically instance-optimal if on every instance f ∈ F,
lim supn→∞ Regf,n / ln n is the smallest among all consistent algorithms (Lai et al., 1985). We
note that even though an instance-optimal algorithm only needs to perform as well as every consis-
tent algorithm, a priori, it’s still unclear if such an algorithm exists.
Some prior works have also used a slightly weaker definition in place of consistent algorithms, e.g.,
α-uniformly good algorithms in Tirinzoni et al. (2021), which allows a sublinear regret bound O(nα )
for some constant α < 1. The alternative definition, though apparently includes more algorithms,
does not change the essence. Our algorithm is still instance-optimal up to a constant factor—
simple modification of the lower bound part of the proof shows that its asymptotic regret is at most
   1
     Here the regret scales in log n because we are in the asymptotic setting where the instance is fixed and
n tends to infinity. If the instance can
                                      √ depend on n (which is not the setting we are interested in), then the
minimax regret typically scales in O( n).


                                                     3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


(1 − α)−1 factor bigger than any α-uniformly good algorithms on any instance. This paper thus
primarily compares with consistent algorithms for simplicity.

3     M AIN R ESULTS
In this section, we present an intrinsic complexity measure C(f ) of an instance f (Section 3.1), and
an instance-optimal algorithm that achieves an asymptotic regret C(f ) ln n (Section 3.2).

3.1   C OMPLEXITY M EASURE AND R EGRET L OWER B OUNDS

In this section, our goal is to understand the minimum regret of consistent algorithms, which is an
intrinsic complexity measure of an instance. We define an instance-dependent complexity measure
C(f ) and prove that any consistent algorithm must have asymptotic regret at least C(f ) ln n.
The key observation is that any consistent algorithm has to collect enough information from the
observations to tell apart the ground-truth instance from other instances with different optimal de-
cisions. Consider the situation when a sequence of n decisions is insufficient to distinguish two
instances, denoted by f and g, with different optimal decisions. If an algorithm achieves a sublinear
regret on f , the sequence must contain π ? (f ) (the optimal decision for f ) at least n − o(n) times.
As a result, if the true instance were g, the algorithm suffers a linear regret (due to the linear number
of π ? (f )), and therefore cannot be consistent.
An ideal algorithm should find out decisions that can most efficiently identify the ground-truth in-
stance (or precisely the family of instances with the same optimal decision as the ground-truth).
However, decisions collect information but also incur regrets. So the algorithm should pick a list
of decisions with the best tradeoff between these two effects—minimizing the decisions’ regret and
collecting sufficient information to identify the true instance. Concretely, supposePa sequence of de-
cisions includes wπ occurrences of decision π. The regret of these decisions is π∈Π wπ ∆(f, π),
where ∆(f, π) , Rf (π ? (f )) − Rf (π) is the sub-optimality gap of decision π. We use KL diver-
gence between the observations of π under two instances f and g (denoted by DKL (f [π]kg[π])) to
measure π’s power to distinguish them. The following optimization problem defines the optimal
mixture of the decisions (in terms of the regret) that has sufficient power to distinguish f from all
other instances with different optimal decision.
                                 P
          C(f, n) , minw∈R|Π| π∈Π wπ ∆(f, π)                                                       (2)
                               +
                                                                               ?        ?
                                 P
                            s.t.    π∈Π wπ DKL (f [π]kg[π]) ≥ 1, ∀g ∈ F, π (g) 6= π (f ),          (3)
                                 kwk∞ ≤ n.                                                           (4)
The last constraint makes sure that wπ < ∞ even if the decision has no regret (i.e., ∃π, ∆(f, π) = 0).
We only care about the case when n approaches infinity. The asymptotic complexity of f is
                                       C(f ) , limn→∞ C(f, n).                                       (5)
In Eq. (3), we only require separation between instances f, g when they have different optimal
decisions. As there are only finite decisions, there are finite equivalent classes, so f and g are in
principle separable with sufficient number of observations. Thus, the complexity measure C(f, n) is
well defined as stated in the following lemma.
Lemma 3.1. For any f ∈ F, C(f, n) is non-increasing in n, and there exists n0 > 0 such that for
all n > n0 , C(f, n) < ∞. As a corollary, C(f ) < ∞ and is well defined.

Proof of Lemma 3.1 is deferred to Appendix B.1. In Section 3.1, we formalize the intuition above
and prove that C(f ) is a lower bound of the asymptotic regret, as stated in the following theorem.
Theorem 3.2. For every instance f ∈ F, the expected regret of any consistent algorithm satisfies
             Reg
lim supn→∞ ln f,nn ≥ C(f ).

We prove Theorem 3.2 in Appendix B.2. Theorem 3.2 is inspired by previous works (Lattimore &
Szepesvari, 2017; Tirinzoni et al., 2021). When applied to tabular RL problems, our lower bound is
very similar to that in Tirinzoni et al. (2021) with the only difference that their optimization problems
omit the second constraint (Eq. (4)), which can make it slightly less tight (see Section B.5).


                                                   4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


TheP complexity measure C(f ) reduces to the well-known inverse action gap bound
O( a∈A,∆(a)>0 1/∆(a)) for multi-armed bandits (Proposition B.2), and recovers the result of
Lattimore & Szepesvari (2017) for linear bandits (Proposition B.3). For reinforcement learning,
Tirinzoni et
          Pal. (2021) prove that the instance-optimal bound can be smaller than the gap-dependent
bound O( s,a:∆(s,a)>0 1/∆(s, a)) in Xu et al. (2021) and Simchowitz & Jamieson (2019).

3.2    I NSTANCE -O PTIMAL A LGORITHMS

Algorithm 1 Test-to-Commit (T2C)
 1: Parameters: the number of rounds of interactions n.
 Step 1: Initialization.
 2: Play each decision d lnlnlnnn e times. We denote these decisions by {π̂i }m
                                                                              i=1 , where minit =
                                                                                init


    |Π|d lnlnlnnn e, and the corresponding observations by {ôi }m init
                                                                 i=1 .
 3: Compute the max likelihood estimation (MLE) with arbitrary tie-breaking
                                                      Pminit
                                    fˆ = argmaxf ∈F      i=1 ln f [π̂i ](ôi ).                    (6)
 Step 2: Identification.
 4: Let η = (ln ln n)1/4 for shorthand, and ŵ be the solution of the program defining C(fˆ, η).
      Compute w̄π = (1 + 1/η)ŵπ + 1/η for all π ∈ Π.
                                                                               m
         P decision π for dw̄π ln ne times. Denote these decisions by w = {πi }i=1 where
 5: Play each
    m = π dw̄π ln(n)e, and the corresponding observations by {oi }m      i=1 .
 6: Run the log-likelihood ratio test on instance fˆ, the sequence of decision {πi }m
                                                                                    i=1 and its corre-
                                   m                                 fˆ
    sponding observations {oi }i=1 (that is, compute the event Eacc defined in Eq. (8)).
 Step 3: Exploitation.
        fˆ
 7: if Eacc = true then
 8:     Commit to π ? (fˆ) (i.e., run π ? (fˆ) for the remaining steps).
 9: else
10:     Run UCB for the remaining steps.

We first present the regret bound for our algorithm of the T2C algorithm. For simplicity, we consider
a finite hypothesis (i.e., |F| < ∞) here, and extend to infinite hypothesis case in Section 5.
We start by stating a condition that excludes abnormal observation distributions f [π]. Recall that for
any ζ ∈ (0, 1), the Rényi divergence of two distributions p, q is
                                             1
                                                ln x p(x)ζ q(x)1−ζ dx.
                                                   R
                               Dζ (pkq) = ζ−1                                                       (7)
The Rényi divergence Dζ (pkq) is non-decreasing in ζ, and limζ↑1 Dζ (pkq) = DKL (pkq) (Van Er-
ven & Harremos, 2014). We require the limits converge uniformly for all instances g ∈ F and
decisions π ∈ Π with a ζ bounded away from 1 (the choice of the constants in Condition 1 is not
critical to our result), as stated below.
Condition 1. For any fixed α > 0,   > 0, instance f ∈ F, there exists λ0 (α,  , f ) > 0 such
that for all λ ≤ λ0 (α,  , f ), g ∈ F and π ∈ Π, D1−λ (f [π]kg[π]) ≥ min{DKL (f [π]kg[π]) −
 , α}. Moreover, we require λ0 (α,  , f ) ≥  c1 min{1/α, c2 }c3 ι(f ) for some universal constants
c1 , c2 , c3 > 0, where ι(f ) > 0 is a function that only depends on f .
Condition 1 holds for a wide range of distributions, such as Gaussian, Bernoulli, multinomial,
Laplace with bounded mean, Log-normal (Gil et al., 2013), and tabular RL where f [π] is a dis-
tribution over a trajectory consists of state, action and reward tuples (see Theorem 5.1 for the proof
of tabular RL). A stronger but more interpretable variant of Condition 1 is that the log density ratio
of f [π] and g[π] has finite fourth moments (see Proposition B.4), therefore Condition 1 can also be
potentially verified for other distributions.
The main theorem analyzing Alg. 1 is shown below. The asymptotic regret of Alg. 1 matches the
constants in the lower bound (Theorem 3.2), indicating its asymptotic instance-optimality.
Theorem 3.3. Suppose F is a finite hypothesis class and satisfies Condition 1 The regret of Alg. 1
                       Reg ?
satisfies lim supn→∞ lnfn ,n ≤ C(f ? ).


                                                  5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Our algorithm is stated in Alg. 1 and consists of three steps: initialization, identification, and ex-
ploitation. In the initialization step, we explore uniformly for a short period and compute the MLE
estimate fˆ of the true instance (Line 3 of Alg. 1), where we only requires fˆ to be accurate with
moderate probability (i.e., 1 − 1/ ln n). The estimation is used to compute the lowest-regret list of
decisions that can distinguish the optimal decision of fˆ. Since we only collect o(ln n) samples, the
regret of this step is negligible asymptotically.
In the identification step, we hold the belief that fˆ is the true instance and solve C(fˆ, (ln ln n)1/4 )
to get the best list of decisions to fortify this belief (see Line 4 of Alg. 1). Then we collect more
samples using this list (with minor decorations) to boost the confidence of our initial estimation to
1 − 1/n (or reject it when the estimation is not accurate) by the following log-likelihood ratio test:
                     fˆ
                                                            Pm        ˆ[πi ](oi )
                        = I ∀g ∈ F and π ? (g) 6= π ? (fˆ), i=1 ln fg[π

                   Eacc                                                  i ](o i ) ≥ ln n   .         (8)
                                                   ˆ
Intuitively, if fˆ is not the ground-truth f ? , Eacc
                                                   f
                                                       is unlikely to hold because the expected log-
likelihood ratio is non-positive: Eo∼f ? [π] [ln(fˆ[π](o)/f ? [π](o))] = −DKL (f ? [π]kfˆ[π]) ≤ 0.
Hence, with high probability a wrong guess cannot be accepted. On the other hand, the first con-
straint (Eq. (3)) in the definition of C(fˆ) guarantees that when fˆ = f ? , the expected log-likelihood
ratio is large for all g ∈ F and π ? (g) 6= π ? (fˆ), so an accurate guess will be accepted. In this
step m = Θ̃(ln n), so Step 2 dominates the regret of Alg. 1. In other words, the efficiency of the
log-likelihood test is critical to our analysis.
Finally in the exploitation step, the algorithm commits to the optimal decision of fˆ if it believes this
estimation with confidence 1 − 1/n, or run a standard UCB algorithm as if on a multi-armed bandits
problem (with a well-known O(ln n) regret) when the initial estimation is not accurate (happens with
probability at most 1/ ln n). Hence, the expected regret here is O(ln n)/ ln n + O(n)/n = O(1).
Our three-stage algorithm is inspired by Lattimore & Szepesvari (2017), where their test in Step 2
only uses the reward information. However, the observation for general interactive decision making
problem contains much more information such as the transition in tabular RL problems. In contrast,
the T2C algorithm relies on a general hypothesis testing method (i.e., log-likelihood ratio test) and
achieves optimal regret for general interactive decision making problems.

4     P ROOF S KETCHES OF THE M AIN R ESULTS
In this section, we discuss the proof sketch of our main results. Section 4.1 discusses the proof
sketch of the lower bound, and Section 4.2 shows the main lemmas for each step in Alg. 1. In
Section 4.3, we discuss the log-likelihood ratio test in detail.

4.1   P ROOF S KETCH OF T HEOREM 3.2

Recall that C(f ) is the minimum regret of a list of decisions that can distinguish the instance f with
all other instances g (with a different optimal decision). Hence, to prove the lower bound, we show
that the sequence of decisions played by any consistent algorithm must also distinguish f , and thus,
C(f ) lower bounds the regret of any consistent algorithm.
For any consistent algorithm, number of interactions n > 0, and two instances f, g ∈ F with
different optimal decisions, let Pf,n and Pg,n denote the probability space generated by running
the algorithm on instances f and g respectively for n rounds. Since f, g have different optimal
decisions, Pf,n and Pg,n should be very different — following the same proof strategy in (Lattimore
& Szepesvari, 2017), we can show that
                                DKL (Pf,n kPg,n ) ≥ (1 + o(1)) ln n.
Let the random variable πi be the decision of the algorithm in round i. The chain rule of KL
divergence shows
                                  Pn                          P
       DKL (Pf,n kPg,n ) = Ef,n     i=1 DKL (f [πi ]kg[πi ]) =  π Ef,n [Nπ ]DKL (f [π]kg[π]).
                                 |Π|
Now consider the vector w ∈ R+ where wπ = Ef [Nπ ]/((1 + o(1)) ln n). Based on the derivation
above, we can verify that w is a valid solution to C(f, n), and therefore
              P                        P
   Regf,n = π Ef [Nπ ]∆(f, π) = π wπ ∆(f, π)(1 + o(1)) ln n ≥ C(f, n)(1 + o(1)) ln n.


                                                    6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Then the final result is proved by the fact that C(f ) = limn→∞ C(f, n).

4.2   P ROOF S KETCH OF T HEOREM 3.3

In the following, we discuss main lemmas and their proof sketches for the three steps of Alg. 1.
Step 1: Initialization. In this step we show that the max likelihood estimation can find the exact
instance (i.e., fˆ = f ? ) with probability at least 1 − 1/ ln n and negligible regret. Note that the
failure probability is not small enough to directly commit to the optimal decision of fˆ (i.e., play
π ? (fˆ) forever), which would incur linear regret when fˆ 6= f ? . Formally speaking, the main lemma
for Step 1 is stated as follows, whose proof is deterred to Appendix A.1.
Lemma 4.1. Under Condition 1, with probability at least 1 − 1/ ln n we get fˆ = f ? . In addition,
the regret of Step 1 is upper bounded by O( lnlnlnnn ).

Lemma 4.1 is not surprising since the MLE only requires O(log(1/δ)) samples to reach a failure
probability δ in general (Van de Geer, 2000, Section 7). Here we require 1/ ln n failure probability
but allow ln n/(ln ln n) = Ω(ln ln n) samples, hence the result is expected for large enough n.
Step 2: Identification. In the identification step, we boost the failure probability to 1/n using the
log-likelihood test. To this end, we compute the optimal list of decisions w = {π1 , · · · , πm } that
distinguishes fˆ by solving C(fˆ, (ln ln n)1/4 ) (Line 4 of Alg. 1). The choice of (ln ln n)1/4 is not
critical, and could be replaced by any smaller quantity that approaches infinity as n → ∞. Then we
run the log-likelihood ratio test using the observations collected by executing the list of decision w,
and achieve the following:
 (a) when the true instance f ? and the estimation fˆ have different optimal decisions, accept fˆ with
     probability at most 1/n;
 (b) when fˆ = f ? , accept fˆ with probability at least 1 − 1/ ln n.
In Section 4.3, we will discuss the log-likelihood ratio test in detail. Note that the regret after we
falsely reject the true instance is O(ln n) (by the regret bound of UCB algorithm), so we only require
a 1/ ln n failure probability for (b) because then it leads to a O(ln n)/ ln n = O(1) expected regret.
The main lemma for Step 2 is stated as follows, and its proof is deferred to Appendix A.2
Lemma 4.2. Under Condition 1, for any finite hypothesis F, for large enough n the following holds:
                                                       fˆ
 (a) conditioned on the event π ? (fˆ) 6= π ? (f ? ), Eacc is true with probability at most 1/n;
                                          fˆ
 (b) conditioned on the event fˆ = f ? , Eacc is true with probability at least 1 − 1/ ln n;
 (c) conditioned on the event  fˆ = f ? , the expected regret of Step 2 is upper bounded by
      C(f ? , (ln ln n)1/4 ) + o(1) ln n. Otherwise, the expected regret of Step 2 is upper bounded
     by O(ln n ln ln n).

Step 3: Exploitation. Finally, in Step 3 we either commits to the optimal decision π ? (fˆ) when
the estimation fˆ is accepted, or run a standard UCB algorithm with O(ln n) regret (Lattimore &
Szepesvári, 2020). Combining Lemma 4.1 and Lemma 4.2 we can prove that
 (a) the probability of Step 3 incurring a O(n) regret is at most 1/n, and
 (b) the probability of Step 3 incurring a O(ln n) regret is at most 1/ ln n.
As a result, the expected regret in Step 3 is O(1) and negligible . Finally Theorem 3.3 is proved by
stitching the three steps together, and deferred to Appendix A.4.

4.3   T HE L OG -L IKELIHOOD R ATIO T EST

The goal of the log-likelihood ratio test is to boost the confidence of our initial estimation fˆ to
1 − 1/n, so that the algorithm can safely commit to its optimal decision in Step 3. In other words,
the test should reject a wrong estimation but also accept a correct one.


                                                    7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Formally speaking, in the test we observe a list of observations {o1 , · · · , om } collected by the list of
decision {π1 , · · · , πm } on the true instance f ? , and achieve the following two goals simultaneously,
 (a) when fˆ and f ? are sufficiently different (i.e., their KL divergence is large in the sense that
     Pm           ˆ       ?                                   ˆ
       i=1 DKL (f [πi ]kf [πi ]) ≥ (1 + o(1)) ln n), accept f with probability at most 1/n, and
 (b) when fˆ = f ? , accept fˆ with probability at least 1 − 1/ ln n.
We prove that the log-likelihood ratio test with proper parameters achieves (a) and (b) under Condi-
tion 1 in the next lemma, whose proof is deferred to Appendix A.3.
Lemma 4.3. Given two sequences of distributions P = {Pi }m                                  m
                                                                     i=1 and Q = {Qi }i=1 , and a
sequence of independent random variables o = {oi }m       i=1 . For   any  fixed λ  >  0, c  > 0, and
      1
        Pm                                             Pm       Pi (oi )
β = m i=1 D1−λ (Pi kQi ), the test event Eacc = I        i=1 ln Qi (oi ) ≥ c satisfies

                                Pro∼Q (Eacc ) ≤ exp(−c),                                                 (9)
                                Pro∼P (Eacc ) ≥ 1 − exp(−λ(mβ − c)).                                    (10)

To use Lemma 4.3 in the proof of Lemma C.2, we set c = ln n and λ P       = poly(ln ln n). Note
                                                                             m
that the choice of w in Line 4 of Alg. 1 and Condition 1 implies mβ = i=1 D1−λ (Pi kQi ) '
Pm           ˆ       ?                                ˆ ?
   i=1 DKL (f [πi ]kf [πi ]) = (1 + o(1)) ln n when f , f have different optimal policies. So the
conclusion of this lemma matches the first two items in Lemma 4.2.
Lemma 4.3 is closely related to the Chernoff-Stein lemma (see Chernoff (1959) and Mao (2021, The-
orem 4.11)), with the difference that the failure probability of Eq. (10) in classical Chernoff-Stein
lemma is a constant, while here it decreases with m. The proof of Eq. (9) is the same as in Chernoff-
Stein lemma, and proof of Eq. (10) only requires an one-sided concentration of the empirical log-
likelihood ratio. Indeed, the expectation of empirical log-likelihood ratio can be lower bounded
         Pm       Pi (oi )   Pm                      Pm
by EP      i=1 ln Qi (oi ) =    i=1 DKL (Pi kQi ) ≥     i=1 D1−λ (Pi kQi ) = mβ. Hence, PrP (Eacc )
is the probability that the empirical log-likelihood ratio is (approximately) larger than its expecta-
tion. We also note that the concentration is non-trivial because we do not make assumptions on the
boundedness on the tail of Qi .

5    E XTENSIONS TO I NFINITE H YPOTHESIS C LASS
Now we extend our analysis to infinite hypothesis settings, and instantiate our results on tabular
RL. Our results in the infinite hypothesis case need two additional conditions. The first condition
requires an upper bound on covering number of the hypothesis, and is used to prove a infinite-
hypothesis version of Lemma 4.2. Formally speaking, for any f, g ∈ F, define their distance as
                                d(f, g) = supπ∈Π,o |f [π](o) − g[π](o)|.                                (11)
An   (proper) covering of F is a subset C ⊆ F, such that for any g ∈ F, there exists g 0 ∈ C with
d(g, g 0 ) ≤  . The covering number N (F,  ) is the size of the minimum   covering of F.
Condition 2. There exists constant c that depends on F such that ln N (F,  ) ≤ O(c ln(1/ )) for
every   > 0. In addition, the base measure of the probability space has a finite volume Vol < ∞.

The second condition upper bounds the distance of two instances by a polynomial of their KL
divergence, and is used to prove a stronger version of Lemma 4.1.
Condition 3. There exists a constant cmin > 0 (which may depend on f ? ) such that for all π ∈ Π
and o ∈ supp(f ? [π]) f ? [π](o) > cmin . In addition, there exists a constant ι(f ? ) > 0 that only
depends on f ? and c5 > 0, such that for all f ∈ F, π ∈ Π, when DKL (f ? [π]kf [π]) ≤ 1
                            kf ? [π] − f [π]k∞ ≤ ι(f ? )DKL (f ? [π]kf [π])c5 .

A lot of interactive decision making problems satisfy Conditions 2, 3, such as multi-armed ban-
dits and linear bandits with Bernoulli reward or truncated Gaussian reward. For bandit problems,
Conditions 2 and 3 only depend on the noise of the reward function and can be verified easily.
For tabular RL, an observation o denotes a trajectory (s1 , a1 , r1 , · · · , sH , aH , rH ) where the state-
action pairs (sh , ah ) are discrete random variables but the rewards rh are continuous. A decision


                                                     8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


π : S → A is a mapping from the state space to action space, so |Π| = |A||S| < ∞. In Appendix D,
we formally define the tabular RL problems where the reward rh given (sh , ah ) follows a truncated
Gaussian distribution, and prove that Conditions 1-3 are satisfied as stated in the following theorem.
Theorem 5.1. Let F be the family of tabular RL with truncated Gaussian reward and unique optimal
policies. Then Conditions 1, 2, 3 holds simultaneously.
For tabular RL with truncated Gaussian reward, the observation o is a mixture of discrete random
variables (i.e., the states and actions sh , ah ) and continuous random variables (i.e., the rewards
rh ). To prove Conditions 1-3, we deal with the discrete and continuous part of the observation
separately. We also have flexibility in the reward distribution, e.g., our proof technique can deal
with other distributions such as truncated Laplace distribution. We present these unified conditions
for bounded random variables, but Conditions 2 and 3 do not hold for unbounded random variables
because the base measure has an infinite volume (which contradicts to Condition 2), and the density
of the observation cannot be lower bounded (which contradicts to Condition 3). However, we can
still prove the same result using a slightly different approach (see Appendix E).
With Conditions 1-3, we can prove our main results for infinite hypothesis class. The asymptotic
regret of Alg. 1 in this case still matches the lower bound exactly. The proof of Theorem 5.2 is
deferred to Appendix C.1.
Theorem 5.2. Suppose F is an infinite hypothesis class that satisfies Conditions 1-3, the regret of
                             Reg ?
Alg. 1 satisfies lim supn→∞ lnfn ,n ≤ C(f ? ).
As a corollary of TheoremP5.1 and Theorem 5.2, our algorithm strictly improves upon previous best
gap-dependent bounds O( s,a:∆(s,a)>0 1/∆(s, a)) in Xu et al. (2021) and Simchowitz & Jamieson
(2019) because the gap-dependent bounds are not tight for many instances (Tirinzoni et al., 2021).
In the following we discuss the challenges when extending to infinite hypothesis settings.
Covering Number. With infinite hypothesis, we need to accept an accurate estimation even when
there are infinitely many other choices. Recall that the accept event is
                                                                   ˆ[πi ](oi )
                          h                                                           i
                    fˆ
                                                          Pm
                  Eacc = I ∀g ∈ F and π ? (g) 6= π ? (fˆ), i=1 ln fg[πi ](oi )
                                                                               ≥ ln n   . (12)
So informally speaking, we need to show that with high probability,
                                         Pm      fˆ[πi ](oi )
         ∀g ∈ F and π ? (g) 6= π ? (fˆ),                         w    ˆ
                                          i=1 ln g[πi ](oi ) & (D1−λ (f kg) −  )m ≥ ln n,          (13)
which is essentially an uniform concentration inequality as discussed in Section 4.3. So we resort
to a covering number argument. The standard covering argument is not directly suitable in this
case — even if d(g, g 0 ) is small, it’s still possible that ln(f [π](o)/g[π](o)) is very different from
ln(f [π](o)/g 0 [π](o)) (especially when g[π](o) is very close to 0). Instead, we consider the distribu-
tion with density ĝ[π](o) , (g 0 [π](o) +  )/Z where Z is the normalization factor, and only prove
a one-sided covering (that is, ln(f [π](o)/g[π](o)) ≥ ln(f [π](o)/ĝ[π](o)) − O( )). We state and
prove the uniform concentration in Appendix F.
Initialization. With infinite hypothesis, we cannot hope to recover the true instance f ? exactly —
some instances can be arbitrarily close to f ? and thus indistinguishable. Instead, we prove that the
estimation in Step 1 satisfies supπ∈Π DKL (f ? [π]kfˆ[π]) ≤ poly( lnlnlnnn ). The main lemma of Step 1
in the infinite hypothesis class case is stated in Lemma C.1.

6   C ONCLUSION
In this paper, we design instance-optimal algorithms for general interactive decision making prob-
lems with finite decisions. As an instantiation, our algorithm is the first instance-optimal algorithm
for tabular MDPs. For future works, we raise the following open questions.
 (a) To implement Alg. 1, we need to solve C(f, (ln ln n)1/4 /2), which is a linear programming
     with |Π| variables and infinitely many constraints. However, |Π| is exponentially large for
     tabular MDPs. Can we compute this optimization problem efficiently for tabular MDPs?
 (b) Although our algorithm is asymptotically optimal, the lower order terms may dominate the
     regret unless n is very large. Can we design non-asymptotic instance optimal algorithms?


                                                   9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


ACKNOWLEDGMENT

The authors would like to thank Yuanhao Wang, Jason D. Lee for helpful discussions, and the
support from JD.com.

R EFERENCES
Alekh Agarwal, Daniel Hsu, Satyen Kale, John Langford, Lihong Li, and Robert Schapire. Taming
  the monster: A fast and simple algorithm for contextual bandits. In International Conference on
  Machine Learning, pp. 1638–1646, 2014.
Mohammad Gheshlaghi Azar, Ian Osband, and Rémi Munos. Minimax regret bounds for reinforce-
 ment learning. In Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on Machine Learning, pp.
 263–272, 2017.
Christopher Berner, Greg Brockman, Brooke Chan, Vicki Cheung, Przemyslaw Debiak, Christy
  Dennison, David Farhi, Quirin Fischer, Shariq Hashme, Chris Hesse, et al. Dota 2 with large
  scale deep reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1912.06680, 2019.
Apostolos N Burnetas and Michael N Katehakis. Optimal adaptive policies for Markov decision
  processes. Mathematics of Operations Research, 22(1):222–255, 1997.
Herman Chernoff. Sequential design of experiments. The Annals of Mathematical Statistics, 30(3):
  755–770, 1959.
Richard Combes, Stefan Magureanu, and Alexandre Proutiere. Minimal exploration in structured
  stochastic bandits. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 30, 2017.
Thomas M Cover. Elements of information theory. John Wiley & Sons, 1999.
Rémy Degenne, Han Shao, and Wouter Koolen. Structure adaptive algorithms for stochastic bandits.
   In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 2443–2452. PMLR, 2020.
Jonas Degrave, Federico Felici, Jonas Buchli, Michael Neunert, Brendan Tracey, Francesco
  Carpanese, Timo Ewalds, Roland Hafner, Abbas Abdolmaleki, Diego de Las Casas, et al. Mag-
  netic control of tokamak plasmas through deep reinforcement learning. Nature, 602(7897):414–
  419, 2022.
Kefan Dong, Jiaqi Yang, and Tengyu Ma. Provable model-based nonlinear bandit and reinforcement
  learning: Shelve optimism, embrace virtual curvature. arXiv preprint arXiv:2102.04168, 2021.
Dylan Foster and Alexander Rakhlin. Beyond UCB: Optimal and efficient contextual bandits with
  regression oracles. In Proceedings of the 37th International Conference on Machine Learning,
  volume 119 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 3199–3210. PMLR, 13–18 Jul
  2020.
Dylan J Foster, Alexander Rakhlin, David Simchi-Levi, and Yunzong Xu. Instance-dependent
  complexity of contextual bandits and reinforcement learning: A disagreement-based perspective.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.03104, 2020.
Dylan J Foster, Sham M Kakade, Jian Qian, and Alexander Rakhlin. The statistical complexity of
  interactive decision making. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.13487, 2021.
Manuel Gil, Fady Alajaji, and Tamas Linder. Rényi divergence measures for commonly used uni-
 variate continuous distributions. Information Sciences, 249:124–131, 2013.
Todd L Graves and Tze Leung Lai. Asymptotically efficient adaptive choice of control laws incon-
  trolled markov chains. SIAM journal on control and optimization, 35(3):715–743, 1997.
Samarth Gupta, Shreyas Chaudhari, Gauri Joshi, and Osman Yağan. Multi-armed bandits with
  correlated arms. IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, 67(10):6711–6732, 2021.
Botao Hao, Tor Lattimore, and Csaba Szepesvari. Adaptive exploration in linear contextual bandit.
  In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pp. 3536–3545. PMLR, 2020.


                                                10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Chi Jin, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Sebastien Bubeck, and Michael I Jordan. Is q-learning provably effi-
  cient? In Proceedings of the 32nd International Conference on Neural Information Processing
  Systems, pp. 4868–4878, 2018.
Chi Jin, Zhuoran Yang, Zhaoran Wang, and Michael I Jordan. Provably efficient reinforcement
  learning with linear function approximation. In Conference on Learning Theory, pp. 2137–2143.
  PMLR, 2020.
Kwang-Sung Jun and Chicheng Zhang. Crush optimism with pessimism: Structured bandits beyond
 asymptotic optimality. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:6366–6376, 2020.
Johannes Kirschner, Tor Lattimore, Claire Vernade, and Csaba Szepesvári. Asymptotically optimal
  information-directed sampling. In Conference on Learning Theory, pp. 2777–2821. PMLR, 2021.
Junpei Komiyama, Junya Honda, and Hiroshi Nakagawa. Regret lower bound and optimal algorithm
  in finite stochastic partial monitoring. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 28,
  2015.
Tze Leung Lai, Herbert Robbins, et al. Asymptotically efficient adaptive allocation rules. Advances
  in applied mathematics, 6(1):4–22, 1985.
Tor Lattimore and Csaba Szepesvari. The end of optimism? an asymptotic analysis of finite-armed
  linear bandits. In Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pp. 728–737. PMLR, 2017.
Tor Lattimore and Csaba Szepesvári. Bandit algorithms. Cambridge University Press, 2020.
Yingkai Li, Yining Wang, and Yuan Zhou. Nearly minimax-optimal regret for linearly parameterized
  bandits. In Conference on Learning Theory, pp. 2173–2174. PMLR, 2019.
Stefan Magureanu, Richard Combes, and Alexandre Proutiere. Lipschitz bandits: Regret lower
  bound and optimal algorithms. In Conference on Learning Theory, pp. 975–999. PMLR, 2014.
Cheng Mao. Hypothesis testing: Lecture notes for math 6263 at georgia tech. 2021.
Volodymyr Mnih, Koray Kavukcuoglu, David Silver, Alex Graves, Ioannis Antonoglou, Daan Wier-
  stra, and Martin Riedmiller. Playing atari with deep reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1312.5602, 2013.
Volodymyr Mnih, Koray Kavukcuoglu, David Silver, Andrei A Rusu, Joel Veness, Marc G Belle-
  mare, Alex Graves, Martin Riedmiller, Andreas K Fidjeland, Georg Ostrovski, et al. Human-level
  control through deep reinforcement learning. nature, 518(7540):529–533, 2015.
Jungseul Ok, Alexandre Proutiere, and Damianos Tranos. Exploration in structured reinforcement
  learning. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pp. 8874–8882, 2018.
A Rajeev, Demosthenis Teneketzis, and Venkatachalam Anantharam. Asymptotically efficient adap-
  tive allocation schemes for controlled iid processes: Finite parameter space. IEEE Transactions
  on Automatic Control, 34(3), 1989.
David Silver, Aja Huang, Chris J Maddison, Arthur Guez, Laurent Sifre, George Van Den Driessche,
  Julian Schrittwieser, Ioannis Antonoglou, Veda Panneershelvam, Marc Lanctot, et al. Mastering
  the game of Go with deep neural networks and tree search. Nature, 529(7587):484–489, 2016.
David Silver, Julian Schrittwieser, Karen Simonyan, Ioannis Antonoglou, Aja Huang, Arthur Guez,
  Thomas Hubert, Lucas Baker, Matthew Lai, Adrian Bolton, et al. Mastering the game of Go
  without human knowledge. Nature, 550(7676):354, 2017.
Max Simchowitz and Kevin G Jamieson. Non-asymptotic gap-dependent regret bounds for tabular
 MDPs. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pp. 1153–1162, 2019.
Andrea Tirinzoni, Alessandro Lazaric, and Marcello Restelli. A novel confidence-based algorithm
  for structured bandits. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pp.
  3175–3185. PMLR, 2020.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Andrea Tirinzoni, Matteo Pirotta, and Alessandro Lazaric. A fully problem-dependent regret lower
  bound for finite-horizon mdps. arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.13013, 2021.
Andrea Tirinzoni, Aymen Al-Marjani, and Emilie Kaufmann. Near instance-optimal pac reinforce-
  ment learning for deterministic mdps. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.09251, 2022.
Sara Van de Geer. Empirical Processes in M-estimation. Cambridge University Press, 2000.
Tim Van Erven and Peter Harremos. Rényi divergence and kullback-leibler divergence. IEEE
  Transactions on Information Theory, 60(7):3797–3820, 2014.
Bart PG Van Parys and Negin Golrezaei. Optimal learning for structured bandits. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2007.07302, 2020.
Oriol Vinyals, Igor Babuschkin, Wojciech M Czarnecki, Michaël Mathieu, Andrew Dudzik, Juny-
  oung Chung, David H Choi, Richard Powell, Timo Ewalds, Petko Georgiev, et al. Grandmaster
  level in starcraft ii using multi-agent reinforcement learning. Nature, 575(7782):350–354, 2019.
Haike Xu, Tengyu Ma, and Simon S Du. Fine-grained gap-dependent bounds for tabular mdps via
  adaptive multi-step bootstrap. arXiv preprint arXiv:2102.04692, 2021.
Kunhe Yang, Lin Yang, and Simon Du. Q-learning with logarithmic regret. In International Con-
  ference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pp. 1576–1584. PMLR, 2021.
Andrea Zanette and Emma Brunskill. Tighter problem-dependent regret bounds in reinforcement
  learning without domain knowledge using value function bounds. In International Conference on
  Machine Learning, pp. 7304–7312, 2019.


                                               12
