Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


FASTER H YPERPARAMETER S EARCH FOR GNN S VIA
C ALIBRATED DATASET C ONDENSATION
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT

         Dataset condensation aims to reduce the computational cost of training multiple
         models on a large dataset by condensing the training dataset into a small synthetic
         set. State-of-the-art approaches rely on matching the model gradients for the real
         and synthetic data and have recently been applied to condense large-scale graphs
         for node classification tasks. Although dataset condensation may be efficient when
         training multiple models for hyperparameter optimization, there is no theoretical
         guarantee on the generalizability of the condensed data: data condensation often
         generalizes poorly across hyperparameters/architectures in practice, while we find
         and prove this overfitting is much more severe on graphs. In this paper, we consider
         a different condensation objective specifically geared towards hyperparameter
         search. We aim to generate the synthetic dataset so that the validation-performance
         rankings of the models, with different hyperparameters, on the condensed and
         original datasets are comparable. We propose a novel hyperparameter-calibrated
         dataset condensation (HCDC) algorithm, which obtains the synthetic validation
         data by matching the hyperparameter gradients computed via implicit differen-
         tiation and efficient inverse Hessian approximation. HCDC employs a supernet
         with differentiable hyperparameters, making it suitable for modeling GNNs with
         widely different convolution filters. Experiments demonstrate that the proposed
         framework effectively maintains the validation-performance rankings of GNNs and
         speeds up hyperparameter/architecture search on graphs.


1   I NTRODUCTION
Graph neural networks (GNNs) have found remarkable success in tackling a variety of graph-related
tasks (Hamilton, 2020). However, the prevalence of large-scale graphs in real-world contexts, such
as social, information, and biological networks (Hu et al., 2020), which frequently scale up to
millions/billions of nodes and edges, poses significant computational issues for training GNNs. While
training a single model can be expensive, designing deep learning models for new tasks requires
substantially more computation, as this involves training multiple models on the same dataset many
times to verify the design choice (e.g., the architecture and hyperparameter choice (Elsken et al.,
2019)). Towards this end, we consider the following question: how can we reduce the computational
cost for training multiple models on the same dataset, for hyperparameter search/optimization?
Natural approaches to reduce the training set size include methods such as graph coreset selec-
tion (Baker et al., 2020), graph sparsification (Batson et al., 2013), graph coarsening (Loukas, 2019)
and graph sampling (Zeng et al., 2019). However, all of these methods involve selecting samples
from the given training set, which limits the performance. A more effective alternative is to synthesize
informative samples rather than select from the given samples. Dataset condensation (Zhao et al.,
2020) has emerged as a competent data mechanism to synthesize data, with promising results. It aims
to produce a small synthetic training set such that a model trained on the synthetic set obtains testing
accuracy comparable to that trained on the original training set.
Although dataset condensation achieves the state-of-the-art performance for neural networks
trained on condensed samples, this technique is inadequate for accelerating hyperparameter
search/optimization, as: (1) theoretically, dataset condensation obtains synthetic samples that mini-
mize the performance drop of a specific model; however, there is no performance guarantee when
using this condensed data to train other models, and (2) in practice, it is unclear how condensation


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


methods compare with strong baselines such as various coreset methods, in terms of their ability to
preserve the outcome of architecture/hyperparameter optimization.
In this paper, we identify the poor generalizability of existing condensed data approaches on
graphs (Jin et al., 2021) across architectures/hyperparameters, as this topic has been overlooked in
the existing literature, which focuses more on image condensation. We prove that graph condensation
fails to preserve validation performance rankings of GNN architectures, and identify two dominant
reasons for this failure: (1) most GNNs differ from each other in terms of their convolution filter
design. Thus, when performing condensation with a single GNN, the condensed data is overfitted
to the corresponding GNN filter, a single biased point in the set of GNN filters; and (2) the learned
adjacency matrix of the synthetic graph considerably overfits the condensed data, and thus fails to
maintain the characteristics of the original adjacency matrix.
To solve the poor generalizability issue, we develop a new dataset condensation framework that
preserves the outcome of hyperparameter search/optimization on the condensed data. We propose
to learn synthetic data as well as its validation split such that the validation performance ranking of
architectures on the synthetic and original datasets are comparable.
Under the assumption of a continuous hyperparameter space or a generic supernet which interpolates
all architectures, we find and prove that the goal of preserving validation performance rankings can
be realized by matching the hyperparameter gradients on the synthetic and original validation data.
The hyperparameter gradients (or hypergradients for short) can be efficiently computed with constant
memory overhead by the implicit function theorem (IFT) and the Neumann series approximation of
an inverse Hessian (Lorraine et al., 2020). Consequently, we propose a hyperparameter calibrated
dataset condensation (HCDC) framework assuming continuous hyperparameters, which is suitable
to modeling GNNs with different convolution matrices. Experiments demonstrate the effectiveness
of the proposed framework in preserving the performance rankings of GNNs.
Although beyond the scope of this paper, HCDC also has the potential to be combined with the
supernets in differentiable neural architecture search (differentiable NAS) methods (Liu et al., 2018)
to tackle the general neural architecture space for image and text data.
Our contributions can be summarized as follows: (1) We formulate a new dataset condensation
objective for hyperparameter optimization and propose the hyperparameter calibrated dataset con-
densation (HCDC) framework that learns synthetic validation data by matching the hypergradients.
(2) We prove the hardness of generalizing the condensed graph across GNN architectures, and the
validity of HCDC in preserving the validation performance rankings of GNNs. (3) Experiments
demonstrate the effectiveness of HCDC in further reducing the search time of off-the-shelf graph
NAS algorithms, from several hours to minutes on graphs with millions of nodes.


2     S ETTINGS , BACKGROUND , AND C HALLENGES
2.1   S ETTINGS : N ODE C LASSIFICATION AND GNN S

This paper adopts graph learning notations, but HCDC is generally applicable to other data, tasks,
and models; see Appendix B for discussions.
Node classification on a graph considers a graph T = (A, X, y) with adjacency matrix
            nГ—n                          nГ—d
A вҲҲ {0,S 1} S , node features X вҲҲ R          , node class labels y, and mutually disjoint node-splits
Vtrain Vval Vtest = [n]. Using a graph neural network (GNN) fОё,О» : RnГ—n        вүҘ0 Г— R
                                                                                        nГ—d
                                                                                              вҶ’ RnГ—K ,
where Оё вҲҲ Оҳ denotes the parameters and О» вҲҲ Оӣ denotes thePhyper-parameters (if they exist), we aim
to find ОёT = arg minОё Ltrain
                          T   (Оё, О»), where Ltrain
                                               T   (Оё, О») := iвҲҲVtrain в„“([fОё,О» (A, X)]i , yi ) and в„“(yМӮ, y)
is the cross-entropy loss. The node classification loss Ltrain
                                                           T   (Оё, О») is under the transductive setting,
which can be easily generalized to the inductive setting by assuming only {Aij | i, j вҲҲ Vtrain } and
{Xi | i вҲҲ Vtrain } are used during training.


2.2   BACKGROUND : S TANDARD DATASET C ONDENSATION M ETHODS

Now, we review the standard dataset condensation (SDC) and its natural bilevel optimization (BL)
formulation (Wang et al., 2018).


                                                    2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


SDCвҖҷs objective. Standard dataset condensation aims to find a synthetic graph S = (AвҖІ , X вҖІ , yвҖІ )
of size c вүӘ n, with (weighted) adjacency matrix AвҖІ вҲҲ RcГ—cвүҘ0 , node features X вҲҲ R
                                                                                 вҖІ    cГ—d
                                                                                           , node labels
 вҖІ        c                              1         вҖІ          вҖІ
                                                         S
y вҲҲ [K] , and (possibly) train/validation splits Vtrain Vval = [c]. The goal of SDC is to obtain
comparable generalization performance on the real graph by training on the condensed graph, i.e.,
        T        test S             S
Ltest
  T (Оё , О») вүҲ LT (Оё , О») where Оё = arg minОё LS
                                                     train
                                                           (Оё, О») is the model parameters (of the same
GNN fОё,О» ) optimized on the synthetic graph. By posing ОёS as a function of the condensed graph S,
SDC can be formulated as a bilevel optimization problem,
            S вҲ— = arg minS Ltrain
                              T   (ОёS (S), О») s.t. ОёS (S) := arg minОё Ltrain   S   (Оё, О»).           (1)
However, the above problem involves a nested-loop optimization and solving the inner loop for ОёS (S)
at each iteration requires a computationally expensive procedure: unrolling the neural networkвҖҷs
computational graph for S over multiple optimization steps of Оё.
SDC in a gradient matching formulation. Zhao et al. (2020) alleviate this computational issue
by introducing a gradient matching (GM) formulation.
Parameter-matching formulation. To start, we assume neural network fОё,О» is a locally smooth
function, and thus similar weights ОёS вүҲ ОёT imply similar mappings. Then one can formulate the
condensation objective as matching the optimized parameters (which depends on initialization Оё0 ), i.e.,
finding S вҲ— = arg minS EОё0 вҲјPОё0 [D(ОёS (S, Оё0 ), ОёT (Оё0 ))]s.t.ОёS (S, Оё0 ) := arg minОё Ltrain
                                                                                       S     (Оё(Оё0 ), О»),
where ОёT (Оё0 ) := arg minОё Ltrain
                             T    (Оё(Оё 0 ), О») and D(В·, В·) is a distance function.
Reduction to gradient matching via approximations. The parameter-matching problem is still a
bilevel optimization but can be simplified via several approximations. (1) Firstly, ОёS (S, Оё0 ) is
approximated by the output of an incomplete gradient-descent optimization, ОёS (S, Оё0 ) вүҲ Оёt+1          S
                                                                                                            вҶҗ
  S           train S                                      T                                   S
Оёt вҲ’О·вҲҮОё LS (Оёt , О»). However, the target parameter Оё (Оё0 ) may be far away from Оёt+1 . Zhao et al.
                            S                                    T
(2020) propose to match Оёt+1     with incompletely optimized Оёt+1     вҶҗ ОёtT вҲ’ О·вҲҮОё LtrainT     (ОёT , О») at each
                                                                                        PT вҲ’1t
iteration t. Consequently, the SDCвҖҷs objective is now S = arg minS EОё0 вҲјPОё0 [ t=0 D(ОёtS , ОёtT )].
                                                             вҲ—

(2) Secondly, if we assume ОёtS can always track ОёtT (i.e., ОёtS вүҲ ОёtT ) from the initialization Оё0 up to
                                      S     T
iteration t, then we can replace D(Оёt+1  , Оёt+1 ) by D(вҲҮОё Ltrain
                                                             S    (ОёtS , О»), вҲҮОё Ltrain
                                                                                 T     (ОёtT , О»)) and then by
                              train S             train S
this approximation D(вҲҮОё LS (Оёt , О»), вҲҮОё LT (Оёt , О»)). Repeating this inductive argument, the
standard condensation objective is finally approximated by matching the gradients at each iteration t,
                                        hP                                                    i
                                             T вҲ’1
                S вҲ— = arg minS EОё0 вҲјPОё0      t=0 D вҲҮОё LS
                                                          train S
                                                               (Оёt , О»), вҲҮОё Ltrain
                                                                              T    (ОёtS , О») .              (2)
With this gradient matching objective, we obtain a single deep network with parameters Оё trained
on the condensed graph S. The condensed graph S is optimized such that the distance between
the gradient vectors of Ltrain
                          T     and of Ltrain
                                         S    w.r.t. the parameters Оё is minimized. Cosine distance
D(В·, В·) = cos(В·, В·) works well in practice (Zhao et al., 2020).

2.3      C HALLENGES : S TANDARD DATASET C ONDENSATION I S P ROBLEMATIC ACROSS GNN S
For ease of theoretical discussions, in this subsection, we consider single-layer message passing
GNNs. Message passing GNNs can be interpreted as iterative convolution over nodes (i.e., message
passing) (Ding et al., 2021) where X (0) = X, X (l+1) = Пғ(CОұ(l) (A)X (l) W (l) ) for l вҲҲ [L], and
f (A, X) = X (L) , where CОұ(l) (A) is the convolution matrix parametrized by Оұ(l) , W (l) is the
learnable linear weights, and Пғ(В·) denotes the non-linearity. One-dimensional convolution neural
                                                                               Pk=K
networks (1D-CNNs) can be expressed by a similar formula, f (X) = ( k=вҲ’K Оұ(k) P k )XW ,
parameterized by Оё = [Оұ, W ] where Оұ = [Оұ(вҲ’K) , . . . , Оұ(K) ]. P is the cyclic permutation matrix (of
a unit shift). The kernel size is (2K + 1), K вүҘ 0; see Appendix B.2 for details.
Despite the success of the gradient matching algorithm in preserving the model performance when
trained on the condensed dataset (Wang et al., 2022), it naturally overfits the model fОё,О» used during
condensation and generalizes poorly to others. There is no guarantee that the condensed synthetic data
S вҲ— which minimizes the objective (Eq. (2)) for a specific model fОё,О» (marked by its hyperparameter
О») can generalize well to other models fОё,О»вҖІ where О»вҖІ Мё= О». We aim to demonstrate that this overfitting
issue can be much more severe on graphs than on images, where our main theoretical results can be
informally summarized as follows.
   1
       The train/validation split of synthetic data is only required by HCDC; see Eq. (1) vs. Eq. (3).


                                                          3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Proposition. Standard dataset condensation using gradient matching algorithm (Eq. (2)) is prob-
lematic across GNNs. The condensed graph using a single-layer message passing GNN may fail to
generalize to the other GNNs with a different convolution matrix.

We first show the successful generalization of SDC across one-dimensional convolution neural
networks (1D-CNN). Then, we show a contrary result on GNNs: failed generalization of SDC across
GNNs. These theoretical analyses demonstrate the hardness of data condensation on graphs. Our
analysis is based on the achievability condition of a gradient matching objective; see Assumption 1
in Appendix A.
In Lemma 1 of Appendix C.1, under least square regression with linear GNN/CNN (see Appendix B.4
for formal definitions), if the standard dataset condensation GM objective is achievable, then the
optimizer on the condensed dataset S is also optimal on the original dataset T . Now, we study
the generalizability of the condensed dataset across different models. We first show a successful
generalization of SDC across different 1D-CNN networks; see Proposition 1 in Appendix A. As long
as we use a 1D-CNN with a sufficiently large kernel size K during condensation, we can generalize
the condensed dataset to a wide range of models, i.e., 1D-CNNs with a kernel size K вҖІ вүӨ K.
However, we obtain a contrary result for GNNs in terms of the generalizability of condensed datasets
across models. Two dominant effects, which cause the failure of the condensed graphвҖҷs ability to
generalize across GNNs, are discovered.
Firstly, the learned adjacency AвҖІ of the synthetic graph S can easily overfit the condensation objective
(see Proposition 2), and thus can fail to maintain the characteristics of the original structure and
distinguish between different architectures; see Proposition 2 in Appendix A for the theoretical result
and Table 1 for relevant experiments.

         Ratio (c/n)    AвҖІ learned       AвҖІ = Ic
           0.05%        59.2 Вұ 1.1     61.3 Вұ 0.5
           0.25%        63.2 Вұ 0.3     64.2 Вұ 0.4


 (a) Test accuracy of graph condensation
 with learned or identity adjacency.
   Condense\Test       GCN      SGC (K = 2)     GIN
         GCN       60.3 Вұ 0.3    59.2 Вұ 0.7   42.2 Вұ 4.3
         SGC       59.2 Вұ 1.1    60.5 Вұ 0.6   39.0 Вұ 7.1
         GIN       47.5 Вұ 3.6    43.6 Вұ 5.8   59.1 Вұ 1.1


 (b) Generalization accuracy of graphs con-
 densed with different GNNs (row) across
 GNNs (column) under c/n = 0.25%.                           (a) Condense ratio c/n = 0.2      (b) Condense ratio c/n = 0.8

Table 1: Test accuracy of GNNs trained                     Figure 1: The manifold of GNNs with convolution filters CО» =
on condensed Ogbn-arxiv (Hu et al., 2020)                  I+О»(1) L+О»(2) ( О»max
                                                                            2
                                                                                LвҲ’I) linear combination of first two orders
graph verifying the two effects (Proposi-                  of ChebNet (Defferrard et al., 2016), О»вҖҷs are hyperparameters;
tions 2 and 3) that hinders the generaliza-                see Appendices B.2 and E projected to the plane of validation
tion of the condensed graph across GNNs.                   accuracy on condensed (x-axis) and original (y-axis) graphs under
(a) Condensed adjacency is overfitted to the               two ratios c/n on Cora (Yang et al., 2016). The GNN with
SDC Objective, (b) Convolution filters and                          2
                                                           C = ( О»max  вҲ’1)L вҲқ L (red dot) is a biased point in this model
inductive bias mismatch across GNNs.                       space.
Secondly, GNNs differ from each other mostly on the design of convolution filter C(A), i.e., how
the convolution weights C depend on the adjacency information A. The convolution filter C(A)
used during condensation is a single biased point in вҖңthe space of convolutionsвҖқ; see Fig. 1 for
a visualization, thus there is a mismatch of inductive bias when transferring to a different GNN.
These two effects lead to the obstacle when transferring the condensed graph across GNNs, which is
formally characterized by Proposition 3 in Appendix A.
Proposition 3 provides an effective lower-bound on the relative estimation error of optimal model
parameters when a different convolution filter C вҖІ (В·) Мё= C(В·) is used.2 According to the spectral char-
acterization of convolution filters of GNNs (Table 1 of (Balcilar et al., 2021)), we can approximately
compute the maximum eigenvalue of Q for some GNNs. For example, if we condense with f C graph
   2
       If C вҖІ (В·) = C(В·) Lemma 1 guarantees WCSвҖІ = WCTвҖІ and the lower bound in Proposition 3 is 0.


                                                                   4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                              вҖІ
isomorphism network (GIN-0) (Xu et al., 2018) but train f C GCN on the condensed graph, we have
вҲҘWCSвҖІ вҲ’ WCT вҖІ вҲҘ/вҲҘWCT вҖІ вҲҘ вӘҶ deg + 1 where deg is the average node degree of the original graph. This
large lower bound hints the catastrophic failure when transferring across GIN and GCN; see Table 1.


3     H YPERPARAMETER CALIBRATED DATASET C ONDENSATION
Our goal is to develop an optimal and reliable condensation method for architecture/hyperparameter
search. Standard dataset condensation objective (Eq. (1)/Eq. (2)) does not accomplish this goal since
it does not generalize across GNNs, as proven in Section 2.3. In this section, we propose a new
condensation objective specifically for preserving the outcome of hyperparameter optimization (HPO)
on the condensed dataset.
HPOвҖҷs objective. HPO finds the optimal hyperparameter О»T such that the corresponding model
fОё,О»T minimizes the validation loss after training, i.e.,
    О»T = arg minО»вҲҲОӣ LвҲ—T (О») where LвҲ—T (О») := Lval T             T                 train
                                              T (Оё (О»), О») and Оё (О») := arg minОё LT     (Оё, О»).   (HPO)
                                                                            T
We see HPO itself is a bilevel optimization, where the optimal parameter Оё (О») is posed as a function
of the hyperparameter О», and so is the optimized validation loss LвҲ—T (О»); see Fig. 3 for illustration.
Dataset condensation for HPO. If both the train and validation sets are defined on the condensed
dataset S, the optimal hyperparameter О»S is well-defined. Our goal is to find the synthetic dataset S
such that we can obtain comparable validation performance if the hyperparameters are optimized on
the condensed dataset, i.e., LвҲ—T (О»T ) вүҲ LвҲ—T (О»S ). Clearly, this goal looks very similar to the goal of
                                                                                T       test S
standard dataset condensation, preserving generalization performance LtestT (Оё ) вүҲ LT (Оё ), which
inspires us to formulate the new objective as a bilevel optimization problem too,
                  S вҲ— = arg minS LвҲ—T О»S (S) s.t. О»S (S) = arg minО»вҲҲОӣ LвҲ—S (О»),

                                                                                                     (3)
where optimized validation losses LвҲ—T (В·) and LвҲ—S (В·) are defined following Eq. (HPO).
However, two challenges exist: (1) This formulation (Eq. (3)) is a nested optimization (for dataset
condensation) over another nested optimization (for HPO) which is challenging to solve as high
order gradients are required. (2) In addition, another challenge lies in the search space/feasible set
of the hyperparameters Оӣ. In contrast to parameter optimization, where the search space is usually
assumed to be the continuous and unbounded Euclidean space, the search space of hyperparameters
Оӣ can be either a discrete set or a continuous one. Examples of discrete hyperparameters include
neural network type, width, depth, batch size, etc. Often we face compositions of these discrete- and
continuous-natured hyperparameters, and we can either model them all as discrete ones and search
by grid search, Bayesian optimization, and reinforcement learning; or relax the discrete search space
to a continuous one.
Hyperparameter calibration: a sufficient alternative to HPOвҖҷs objective. To solve the afore-
mentioned two challenges, we propose an sufficient alternative to Eq. (HPO). Specifically, we propose
to identify the condensed dataset that preserves the outcome of HPO on Оӣ without solving the HPO
objective. We call this hyperparameter calibration, which is formally defined in Definition 1.
Definition 1 (Hyperparameter Calibration). Given original dataset T , generic model fОё,О» , and
hyperparameter search space Оӣ, we say a condensed dataset S is hyperparameter calibrated, if for
any О»1 Мё= О»2 вҲҲ Оӣ, it holds that,
                            LвҲ—T (О»1 ) вҲ’ LвҲ—T (О»2 ) LвҲ—S (О»1 ) вҲ’ LвҲ—S (О»2 ) > 0,

                                                                                                 (HC)
In other words, changes of the optimized validation loss on T and S always have the same sign
between hyperparameters О»1 Мё= О»2 .

It is clear that if hyperparameter calibration (HC) is satisfied, HPO on the original and condensed
datasets yields the same result. Therefore, our mission changes to ensuring hyperparameter calibra-
tion for a single pair of hyperparameters (О»1 , О»2 ).
HCDC: hypergradient alignment objective for dataset condensation. To proceed, we assumes
the existence of a continuous extension of the search space: the (possibly discrete) search space Оӣ
can be extended to a compact and connected set ОӣМғ вҠғ Оӣ, where we can define continuation of the


                                                   5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


 (a) Discrete Оӣ = {О»i }   (b) Continuous Оӣ вҲӢ О»S          (a) Train loss Ltrain
                                                                         T          (b) Validation loss Lval
                                                                                                         T


Figure 2: Illustration of the constructed ex-   Figure 3: Loss landscape w.r.t. Оё and О». A hyperparameter О» has
tended search space ОӣМғ illustrated as the or-   an optimal parameter ОёT (О») blue curve in (Оё, О»)-plane in (a)
ange trajectory for both a) discrete Оӣ and      that minimizes the train loss. In (b), injecting optimal parameters
(b) continuous Оӣ. The trajectory starts from    ОёT (О») into the validation loss, we   obtain a function of validation
О»Si,0 = О»i вҲҲ Оӣ for discrete Оӣ (or random        loss w.r.t. О» denoted as LвӢҶT (О») in (L, О»)-plane, shown as the
points for continuous Оӣ), and updates through   orange curve. The purple dash line illustrates the hypergradients,
О»S          S          вҲ—    S
  i,t+1 вҶҗ О»i,t вҲ’ О·вҲҮО» LS (О»i,t ).                i.e., gradient of LвӢҶT (О») w.r.t. О».


generic model fОё,О» on ОӣМғ so that fОё,О» is differentiable anywhere in ОӣМғ. In Section 4, we will elaborate
on how to construct such an extended search space ОӣМғ.
Now, with the existence of such a continual extension of the search space, if we limit our step size to
be small, we only need to ensure hyperparameter calibration in Eq. (HC) under the special case that
О»1 is within the neighborhood of О»2 , i.e., О»1 вҲҲ Br (О»2 ) for some r > 0. The change in validation loss
is approximated up to first-order by the hypergradients, i.e., LвҲ—T (О»1 ) вҲ’ LвҲ—T (О»2 ) вүҲ вҹЁвҲҮО» LвҲ—T (О»), вҲҶО»вҹ©,
where О»1 = О» + вҲҶО», О»2 = О» with r вүҘ вҲҘвҲҶО»вҲҘ2 вҶ’ 0+ . The hyperparameter calibration condition
within this tiny neighborhood Br (О») is then simplified to вҲҮО» LвҲ—T (О») вҲҘ вҲҮО» LвҲ—S (О»), i.e., the two
hypergradient vectors are aligned and pointing to the same direction.
Assuming the extended search space ОӣМғ can be covered by the union of many small neighborhoods,
we derive the following notion and equivalence relation of hypergradient alignment.
Definition 2 (Hypergradient Alignment). We say hypergradients are aligned in an extended search
space ОӣМғ, if for any О» вҲҲ ОӣМғ, it holds that вҲҮО» LвҲ—T (О») вҲҘ вҲҮО» LвҲ—S (О»), i.e., cos(вҲҮО» LвҲ—T (О»), вҲҮО» LвҲ—S (О»)) = 0.
Theorem 1 (Equivalence between Hypergradient Alignment and Hyperparameter Calibration). Hy-
pergradient alignment (Definition 2) is equivalent to hyperparameter calibration (Definition 1) on
the connected and compact set, e.g., the extended search space ОӣМғ.

We summarize the relations between the two notions (Definitions 1 and 2) as follows,
  Hypergrad. Alignment in ОӣМғ вҮҗвҮ’ Hyperpara. Calibration in ОӣМғ =вҮ’ Hyperpara. Calibration in Оӣ.
Therefore, hypergradient alignment on ОӣМғ is sufficient to ensure hyperparameter calibration on Оӣ, and
hence the outcome of HPO over Оӣ is preserved. Consequently, as the core of our hyperparameter
calibrated dataset condensation (HCDC), we propose the hypergradient alignment objective below
            S вҲ— = arg minS О»вҲҲОӣМғ D вҲҮО» Lval         T               val S
                             P
                                             T (Оё (О»), О»), вҲҮО» LS (Оё (О»), О») ,                (HCDC)
where cosine distance D(В·, В·) = cos(В·, В·) is used.

4    I MPLEMENTATIONS OF HCDC AND A PPLICATIONS TO GNN S
Finally, we work on implementing and simplifying the hyperparameter calibrated dataset condensation
(HCDC) objective and apply it to the graph architecture/hyperparameter search problem.
Constructing the extended search space ОӣМғ.           The HCDC objective requires hypergradient
alignment over all О»вҖҷs in an extended space ОӣМғ that is a compact and connected superset of Оӣ.
Under the discrete search space Оӣ, which consists of p candidate hyperparameters, one can naively
construct ОӣМғ as O(p2 ) continuous paths connecting pairs of candidate hyperparameters (shown as blue
lines in Fig. 2a). This is apparently undesirable due to its quadratic complexity in p. We propose
a construction of ОӣМғ with a linear complexity in p, which works as follows. For any i вҲҲ [p], we
construct a вҖңrepresentativeвҖқ path, named i-th HPO trajectory, which starts from О»Si,0 = О»i вҲҲ Оӣ and


                                                     6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


updates through О»Si,t+1 вҶҗ О»Si,t вҲ’ О·вҲҮО» LвҲ—S (О»Si,t ), shown as the orange dashed lines in Fig. 2a. All
of the p trajectories will approach the optima О»S , forming вҖңconnectedвҖқ paths between any pair of
hyperparameters О»i Мё= О»j вҲҲ Оӣ. This construction is also used in a continuous search space to save
computation (except that we randomly select the starting points О»i вҲј PОӣ ). To extend general discrete
neural architecture space Оӣ into a continuously differentiable ОӣМғ, differentiable NAS approaches
surveyed in Appendix D.3 can be used, and we leave exploration in this direction to future work.
Computing hypergradients and optimizing hypergradient alignment loss in Eq. (HCDC). The
hypergradients are the gradients of the optimized validation loss LвҲ—T (О») = Lval      T
                                                                                 T (Оё (О»), О») w.r.t
the hyperparameters О»; see Fig. 3 for the illustration. The efficient computation of hypergradients
вҲҮО» LвҲ—T (О») and вҲҮО» LвҲ—S (О») uses the implicit function theorem (IFT),


                                 вҲӮ 2 Ltrain (Оё,О»)    вҲӮ 2 Ltrain (Оё,О»)  вҲ’1
            вҲҮО» LвҲ—T (О») = вҲ’            T
                                    вҲӮО»вҲӮОё T
                                                          T
                                                        вҲӮОёвҲӮОё T
                                                                            вҲҮОё Lval            val
                                                                                T (Оё, О») + вҲҮО» LT (Оё, О»),      (IFT)


where вҲҮО» Lval T (Оё, О») is the direct gradient, which is 0 when О» only affects the loss through the model
                                                                               вҲӮ 2 Ltrain (Оё,О»)
fОё,О» . The first term is the product of the training mixed partials                  T
                                                                                    вҲӮО»вҲӮОё T
                                                                                                 , inverse training
           вҲӮ 2 Ltrain (Оё,О»)  вҲ’1                                     val
Hessian         T
                вҲӮОёвҲӮОё T
                                 , and the validation gradients вҲҮОё LT (Оё, О»). While the other parts can be
computed by back-propagation, the inverse Hessian needs to be approximated. Instead of using the
conjugate gradient method, Lorraine et al. (2020) propose a stable, tractable and efficient Neumann
                             вҲӮ 2 Ltrain (Оё,О»)  вҲ’1         Pi          вҲӮ 2 Ltrain (Оё,О»)  j
series approximation,             T
                                  вҲӮОёвҲӮОё T
                                                  = limiвҶ’вҲһ j=0 I вҲ’ вҲӮОёвҲӮОё    T
                                                                                 T          with constant memory
constraint. To optimize the synthetic validation set S val w.r.t. the cosine hypergradient matching
loss in Eq. (HCDC), we only need to take gradients of вҲҮОё Lval                                 val
                                                                    S (Оё, О») and вҲҮО» LS (Оё, О») w.r.t. S
                                                                                                                val
                                                                                                                    ,
which can be handled by the same back-propagation technique in SDC, where we take gradients of
вҲҮОё Ltrain
      S   (Оё, О») w.r.t S train .
Connecting HCDC to SDC (Eq. (2)). Theoretically speaking, the objective of HCDC, preserving
the outcome of hyperparameter optimization (HPO), is orthogonal to the objective of SDC, which pre-
serves the generalization performance. Therefore, we use SDC to learn the synthetic training dataset
S train in Eq. (2) and HCDC to learn the synthetic validation dataset S val in Eq. (HCDC). Learning
the synthetic training and validation dataset may result in disconnected training and validation set,
which is allowed in graph learning.
Which graph architecture/hyperparameter search problems can HCDC solve?                           We illus-
trate how to tackle the two types of search spaces: (1) discrete and finite Оӣ and (2) continuous
and bounded Оӣ with two typical examples originated from the problem of searching for the best
convolution matrix C(A) on a large graph T = (A, X, y). (1) Discrete and finite search space Оӣ:
often the most important question of architecture search on large graphs is what design of convolution
filter performs best on the given graph? One may simply train the set of p prior-defined GNNs
    C (i)                                                                    (1)              (p)
{f[Оұ  (i) ,W ] | i = 1, . . . , p} whose convolution matrices are C = {CОұ(1) (A), . . . , CОұ(p) (A)} and

compare their validation performance. We can formulate this problem as HPO, by defining an вҖңinter-
                    C                                                  (1) (1)                     (p)
polatedвҖқ model f[Оұ,W     ],О» whose convolution matrix is CОұ,О» (A) = О»     CОұ(1) (A)+В· В· В·+О»(p) CОұ(p) (A),
where hyperparameters О» = [О»(1) , . . . , О»(p) ] вҲҲ Оӣ and parameters Оұ = [Оұ(1) , . . . , Оұ(p) ]. The search
space Оӣ = {О»1 = ep1 , . . . , О»p = epp } is the set of unit vectors in Rp . (2) Continuous and bounded
search space Оӣ: one may also use a continuous   Ppgeneric formula, e.g., truncated series, to model a wide
range of convolution filters, i.e., CО» (A) = i=1 О»(i) C (i) (A), for example in ChebNet (Defferrard
et al., 2016) or SIGN (Frasca et al., 2020) (see Appendix B.2). The formula of CО» (A) is a special
case of the CОұ,О» (A) in (1), despite the search space Оӣ is now continuous.
The complete pseudo-code of HCDC. We conclude this section by summarizing the implementa-
tion of HCDC in Algorithm 1. We assume a discrete and finite search space Оӣ.
In Line 8, to compute вҲҮSval D вҲҮО» LвҲ—T (О»), вҲҮО» LвҲ—S (О») , we note that only вҲҮО» LвҲ—S (О») depends on

                                       вҲӮ 2 Ltrain (Оё,О»)    вҲӮ 2 Ltrain (Оё,О»)  вҲ’1
Sval . By Eq. (IFT), вҲҮО» LвҲ—S (О») = вҲ’          S
                                            вҲӮО»вҲӮОё S
                                                                 S
                                                                вҲӮОёвҲӮОё S
                                                                                вҲҮОё Lval
                                                                                    S (Оё, О») (there is no direct
gradients since О» only affects the loss through the model fОё,О» ). Since only the validation loss term
вҲҮОё Lval                                                                         val
      S (Оё, О») depends on Sval , we only need to compute вҲҮSval вҲҮОё LS (Оё, О») by back-propagation.


                                                             7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Algorithm 1 HCDC: hyperparameter calibrated dataset condensation, which aims to preserve the
validation performance ranking of architectures/hyperparameters.
Require: Original dataset T . A set of NN architectures fОё,О» where О» вҲҲ Оӣ = {О»1 , . . . , О»p }.
Require: Condensed training data Strain learned by standard gradient-matching algorithm (Eq. (2)). Randomly
   initialized synthetic graph Sval for C classes.
 1 for repeat k = 0, . . . , K вҲ’ 1 do
 2      for О» = О»1 , . . . , О»p do
 3          Initialize Оё вҶҗ Оё0 вҲј PОё0
 4          for epoch t = 0, . . . , TОё вҲ’ 1 do
 5              Update Оё вҶҗ Оё вҲ’ О·Оё вҲҮОё LtrainS   (Оё, О»).
 6              if t mod TО» = 0 then
 7                   Update О» вҶҗ О» вҲ’ О·О» вҲҮО» LвҲ—S (О»).             в–· Hypergradients calculated using Eq. (IFT).
                Update Sval вҶҗ Sval вҲ’ О·S вҲҮSval D вҲҮО» LвҲ—T (О»), вҲҮО» LвҲ—S (О»)

 8
 9 return Condensed validation data Sval .



5    R ELATED W ORK
Graph condensation (Jin et al., 2021) achieved the state-of-the-art on preserving GNNsвҖҷ performance
on the simplified graph. Jin et al. (2021) adapted the gradient matching algorithm (Zhao et al.,
2020) (Eq. (2)) to graph data, together with a MLP-based graph generative model (Anand & Huang,
2018), leaving out several major issues on its efficiency, performance, and generalizability. While
the efficiency was improved by reducing the number of gradient matching steps (Jin et al., 2022),
the performance degradation on medium- and large-sized graphs still renders graph condensation
impractical. Our HCDC is designed for hyperparameter/architecture search, where we train multiple
models on the same dataset and the efficiency gain is much more significant.
Implicit differentiation methods apply the implicit function theorem (IFT) (Eq. (IFT)) to nested-
optimization problems (Wang et al., 2019). Lorraine et al. (2020) approximated the inverse Hessian
by Neumann series, which is a stable alternative to conjugate gradients (Shaban et al., 2019) and
scales IFT to large networks with constant memory. Lorraine et al. (2020) also showed that unrolling
differentiation around locally optimal parameters for i steps is equivalent to approximating the inverse
Hessian by Neumann series up to the first i terms.
In addition, we summarize graph reduction methods (including graph coreset selection, graph
sampling, graph sparsification, and graph coarsening), as well as more dataset condensation and
coreset selection methods beyond graphs and differentiable NAS methods in Appendix D.


6    E XPERIMENTS
In this section we validate the effectiveness of hyperparameter calibrated dataset condensation
(HCDC) when applied to speed up graph architecture/hyperparameter search. SpearmanвҖҷs rank
correlation coefficient rs between two rankings of the ordered list of hyperparameters on the original
and condensed datasets, which is concisely referred to as correlation, is used as an important
evaluation metric, in addition to the percentage accuracy metric (referred to as performance).
Synthetic experiments on CIFAR-10. We first consider a synthetically created set of hyperparam-
eters on an image dataset, CIFAR-10. Consider the M -fold cross validation, where a fraction of 1/M
samples are used as the validation dataset each time. The M -fold cross-validation process can be
modeled by a set of M hyperparameters {ПҶi вҲҲ {0, 1} | i = 1, . . . , M }, where ПҶi = 1 if and only if
the i-th fold is used for validation. The problem of finding the best validation performance among
the M results can be modeled as a hyperparameter optimization problem with a discrete search
space |Оӣ| = M . We compare HCDC with the gradient matching (Zhao et al., 2020) and distribution
matching (Zhao & Bilen, 2021b) baselines. We also consider a uniform random sampling baseline
and an early-stopping baseline where we train the same number of iterations (with the same batchsize)
as the other methods but on the original dataset. The results of M = 20 and c/n = 2% and 4% are
reported in Table 2, where we see HCDC achieves the highest rank correlation. This experiment
shows that HCDC can be applied to general types of data and tasks as long as the extended search
space can be effectively and efficiently constructed.


                                                    8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                          Ratio (ctrain /n)
                           Method          2%         4%
                          Random          вҲ’0.03          0.07
                         SDC-GM            0.64          0.78
                         SDC-DM            0.77          0.86
                    Early-Stopping         0.11          0.24
                           HCDC           0.91           0.94


Table 2: The rank correlation and validation performance                                   Figure 4: Speed-up of the search process of graph
on the original dataset of the M -fold cross validation                                    NAS when combined with HCDC on Ogbn-arxiv,
ranked/selected on the condensed dataset on CIFAR-10.                                      best test performance so far vs. time spent.

Finding the best convolution filter on (large) graphs. One application of HCDC we analyzed
in Section 4 is to speed up the selection of the best-suited convolution filter design on large graphs.
Following the method discussed in Section 4, we test HCDC against (1) Random: the random
uniform sampling of nodes and find their induced subgraph, (2) GCond-X: graph condensation (Jin
et al., 2021) but fix the synthetic adjacency to identity, (3) GCond: graph condensation algorithm
in (Jin et al., 2021), and (4) Whole Graph: when the model selection is performed on the original
dataset. We use random uniform sampling to find the training synthetic subgraph before we apply
HCDC. For the other coreset/condensation methods, which do not define the validation split, we
randomly split the train and validation nodes according to the original split ratio. We report not
only the SpearmanвҖҷs rank correlation, but also the test performance (on the original dataset) of the
model selected by the condensed dataset. In Table 3, we see HCDC consistently outperforms the
other approaches, and the test performance of selected architecture is close to the ground-truth best
performance.
          Method         Ratio                 Random                  GCond-X                       GCond                      HCDC            Whole Graph
          Dataset      (ctrain /n)     Corr.        Perf. (%)      Corr.    Perf. (%)        Corr.       Perf. (%)      Corr.      Perf. (%)     Perf. (%)
                         0.9%        0.29 Вұ .08     81.2 Вұ 1.1   0.16 Вұ .07   79.5 Вұ 0.7   0.61 Вұ .03    81.9 Вұ 1.6   0.80 Вұ .03   83.0 Вұ 0.2
           Cora          1.8%        0.40 Вұ .04     81.9 Вұ 0.5   0.21 Вұ .07   80.3 Вұ 0.4   0.76 Вұ .06    83.2 Вұ 0.9   0.85 Вұ .03   83.4 Вұ 0.2    83.8 Вұ 0.4
                         3.6%        0.51 Вұ .04     82.2 Вұ 0.6   0.23 Вұ .04   80.9 Вұ 0.6   0.81 Вұ .04    83.2 Вұ 1.1   0.90 Вұ .01   83.4 Вұ 0.3
                         1.3%        0.38 Вұ .11     71.9 Вұ 0.8   0.15 Вұ .07   70.7 Вұ 0.9   0.68 Вұ .03    71.3 Вұ 1.2   0.79 Вұ .01   73.1 Вұ 0.2
          Citeseer       2.6%        0.56 Вұ .06     72.2 Вұ 0.4   0.29 Вұ .05   70.8 Вұ 0.5   0.79 Вұ .05    71.5 Вұ 0.7   0.83 Вұ .02   73.3 Вұ 0.5    73.7 Вұ 0.6
                         5.2%        0.71 Вұ .05     73.0 Вұ 0.3   0.35 Вұ .08   70.2 Вұ 0.4   0.83 Вұ .03    71.1 Вұ 0.8   0.89 Вұ .02   73.4 Вұ 0.4
                         0.1%        0.59 Вұ .08     70.1 Вұ 1.7   0.39 Вұ .06   69.8 Вұ 1.4   0.59 Вұ .07    70.3 Вұ 1.4   0.77 Вұ .04   71.9 Вұ 0.8
         Ogbn-arxiv     0.25%        0.63 Вұ .05     70.3 Вұ 1.3   0.44 Вұ .03   70.1 Вұ 0.7   0.64 Вұ .05    70.5 Вұ 1.0   0.83 Вұ .03   72.4 Вұ 1.0    73.2 Вұ 0.8
                         0.5%        0.68 Вұ .07     70.9 Вұ 1.0   0.47 Вұ .05   70.0 Вұ 0.7   0.67 Вұ .05    71.1 Вұ 0.6   0.88 Вұ .03   72.6 Вұ 0.6
                         0.1%        0.42 Вұ .09     92.1 Вұ 1.6   0.39 Вұ .04   90.9 Вұ 0.8   0.53 Вұ .06    90.9 Вұ 1.7   0.79 Вұ .03   92.1 Вұ 0.9
           Reddit       0.25%        0.50 Вұ .06     92.7 Вұ 1.3   0.41 Вұ .05   90.9 Вұ 0.5   0.61 Вұ .04    91.2 Вұ 1.2   0.83 Вұ .01   92.9 Вұ 0.7    94.1 Вұ 0.7
                         0.5%        0.58 Вұ .06     92.8 Вұ 0.7   0.42 Вұ .03   91.5 Вұ 0.6   0.66 Вұ .02    92.1 Вұ 0.9   0.87 Вұ .01   93.1 Вұ 0.5


Table 3: SpearmanвҖҷs rank correlation and test performance of convolution filter selected on the condensed graph.
Speeding up off-the-shelf graph architecture search algorithms. Finally, we test HCDC on
how much speed-up it can provide to the off-the-shelf graph architecture search methods. We use
graph NAS (Gao et al., 2019) on Ogbn-arxiv with a condensation ratio of c/n = 0.5%. The search
space of architectures is the same as the set used in Table 3 with a focus on graphs with different
convolution filters. We plot the best test performance of searched architecture (so far) versus the time
spent during searching (in seconds) in Fig. 4. We see HCDC, as a dataset condensation approach, can
further speed up the search process of graph NAS and is orthogonal to the efficient search algorithms
like Bayesian optimization or reinforcement learning used by NAS methods.

7    C ONCLUSION
This paper considers a novel objective for dataset condensation: preserving the outcome of hyperpa-
rameter search/optimization. We propose the hyperparameter calibration formulation for this goal,
which is then realized by aligning the hyperparameter gradients. We demonstrate both theoretically
and experimentally that HCDC can effectively preserve the validation performance rankings of GNNs
and accelerate the hyperparameter/architecture search on graphs. However, the overall performance
of HCDC can be affected by (1) how the supernet generalize to unseen architectures; (2) where we
align hypergradients in the search space; (3) how we learn the synthetic training set; (4) how we
parameterize the synthetic graph/dataset; and leave the heuristic exploration of all possible techniques
for these design choices for future work. Beyond graph datasets, HCDC has the potential to be
integrated with differentiable neural architecture search (NAS) methods (Liu et al., 2018; Wang et al.,
2020) to address general neural architecture space. We hope our work opens up a promising new
avenue for speeding up hyperparameter/architecture search by compressing the underlying dataset.


                                                                                    9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


R EFERENCES
Rahaf Aljundi, Min Lin, Baptiste Goujaud, and Yoshua Bengio. Gradient based sample selection for
  online continual learning. Advances in neural information processing systems, 32, 2019.
Namrata Anand and Possu Huang. Generative modeling for protein structures. Advances in neural
  information processing systems, 31, 2018.
Daniel Baker, Vladimir Braverman, Lingxiao Huang, Shaofeng H-C Jiang, Robert Krauthgamer, and
  Xuan Wu. Coresets for clustering in graphs of bounded treewidth. In International Conference on
  Machine Learning, pp. 569вҖ“579. PMLR, 2020.
Muhammet Balcilar, Renton Guillaume, Pierre HГ©roux, Benoit GaГјzГЁre, SГ©bastien Adam, and Paul
 Honeine. Analyzing the expressive power of graph neural networks in a spectral perspective. In
 Proceedings of the International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2021.
Joshua Batson, Daniel A Spielman, Nikhil Srivastava, and Shang-Hua Teng. Spectral sparsification
  of graphs: theory and algorithms. Communications of the ACM, 56(8):87вҖ“94, 2013.
Yoshua Bengio. Gradient-based optimization of hyperparameters. Neural computation, 12(8):
  1889вҖ“1900, 2000.
Ondrej Bohdal, Yongxin Yang, and Timothy Hospedales. Flexible dataset distillation: Learn labels
  instead of images. arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.08572, 2020.
ZalГЎn Borsos, Mojmir Mutny, and Andreas Krause. Coresets via bilevel optimization for continual
  learning and streaming. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:14879вҖ“14890,
  2020.
Vladimir Braverman, Shaofeng H-C Jiang, Robert Krauthgamer, and Xuan Wu. Coresets for clustering
  in excluded-minor graphs and beyond. In Proceedings of the 2021 ACM-SIAM Symposium on
  Discrete Algorithms (SODA), pp. 2679вҖ“2696. SIAM, 2021.
Chen Cai, Dingkang Wang, and Yusu Wang. Graph coarsening with neural networks. In International
  Conference on Learning Representations, 2020.
Yutian Chen, Max Welling, and Alex Smola. Super-samples from kernel herding. In Proceedings of
  the Twenty-Sixth Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, pp. 109вҖ“116, 2010.
Wei-Lin Chiang, Xuanqing Liu, Si Si, Yang Li, Samy Bengio, and Cho-Jui Hsieh. Cluster-gcn: An
 efficient algorithm for training deep and large graph convolutional networks. In Proceedings of the
 25th ACM SIGKDD international conference on knowledge discovery & data mining, pp. 257вҖ“266,
 2019.
MichaГ«l Defferrard, Xavier Bresson, and Pierre Vandergheynst. Convolutional neural networks on
 graphs with fast localized spectral filtering. In Advances in neural information processing systems,
 volume 29, 2016.
Mucong Ding, Kezhi Kong, Jingling Li, Chen Zhu, John Dickerson, Furong Huang, and Tom
 Goldstein. Vq-gnn: A universal framework to scale up graph neural networks using vector
 quantization. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:6733вҖ“6746, 2021.
Thomas Elsken, Jan Hendrik Metzen, and Frank Hutter. Neural architecture search: A survey. The
  Journal of Machine Learning Research, 20(1):1997вҖ“2017, 2019.
Fabrizio Frasca, Emanuele Rossi, Davide Eynard, Ben Chamberlain, Michael Bronstein, and Federico
  Monti. Sign: Scalable inception graph neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.11198, 2020.
Yang Gao, Hong Yang, Peng Zhang, Chuan Zhou, and Yue Hu. Graphnas: Graph neural architecture
  search with reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1904.09981, 2019.
Chengcheng Guo, Bo Zhao, and Yanbing Bai. Deepcore: A comprehensive library for coreset
  selection in deep learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.08499, 2022.


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Will Hamilton, Zhitao Ying, and Jure Leskovec. Inductive representation learning on large graphs.
 Advances in neural information processing systems, 30, 2017.
William L Hamilton. Graph Representation Learning. Morgan & Claypool Publishers, 2020.
Weihua Hu, Matthias Fey, Marinka Zitnik, Yuxiao Dong, Hongyu Ren, Bowen Liu, Michele Catasta,
 and Jure Leskovec. Open graph benchmark: Datasets for machine learning on graphs. Advances in
 neural information processing systems, 33:22118вҖ“22133, 2020.
ZHAO Huan, YAO Quanming, and TU Weiwei. Search to aggregate neighborhood for graph neural
  network. In 2021 IEEE 37th International Conference on Data Engineering (ICDE), pp. 552вҖ“563.
  IEEE, 2021.
Zengfeng Huang, Shengzhong Zhang, Chong Xi, Tang Liu, and Min Zhou. Scaling up graph
  neural networks via graph coarsening. In Proceedings of the 27th ACM SIGKDD Conference on
  Knowledge Discovery & Data Mining, pp. 675вҖ“684, 2021.
Rishabh Iyer, Ninad Khargoankar, Jeff Bilmes, and Himanshu Asanani. Submodular combinatorial
  information measures with applications in machine learning. In Algorithmic Learning Theory, pp.
  722вҖ“754. PMLR, 2021.
Eric Jang, Shixiang Gu, and Ben Poole. Categorical reparameterization with gumbel-softmax. In
  International Conference on Learning Representations, 2017.
Wei Jin, Lingxiao Zhao, Shichang Zhang, Yozen Liu, Jiliang Tang, and Neil Shah. Graph condensation
 for graph neural networks. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2021.
Wei Jin, Xianfeng Tang, Haoming Jiang, Zheng Li, Danqing Zhang, Jiliang Tang, and Bing Yin.
 Condensing graphs via one-step gradient matching. In Proceedings of the 28th ACM SIGKDD
 Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, pp. 720вҖ“730, 2022.
Jang-Hyun Kim, Jinuk Kim, Seong Joon Oh, Sangdoo Yun, Hwanjun Song, Joonhyun Jeong, Jung-
  Woo Ha, and Hyun Oh Song. Dataset condensation via efficient synthetic-data parameterization.
  In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 11102вҖ“11118. PMLR, 2022.
Thomas N Kipf and Max Welling. Semi-supervised classification with graph convolutional networks.
  In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2016.
Johannes Klicpera, Stefan WeiГҹenberger, and Stephan GГјnnemann. Diffusion improves graph
  learning. In Advances in neural information processing systems. PMLR, 2019.
Suraj Kothawade, Vishal Kaushal, Ganesh Ramakrishnan, Jeff Bilmes, and Rishabh Iyer. Prism: A
  rich class of parameterized submodular information measures for guided data subset selection. In
  Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 36, pp. 10238вҖ“10246, 2022.
Jan Larsen, Lars Kai Hansen, Claus Svarer, and M Ohlsson. Design and regularization of neural
  networks: the optimal use of a validation set. In Neural Networks for Signal Processing VI.
  Proceedings of the 1996 IEEE Signal Processing Society Workshop, pp. 62вҖ“71. IEEE, 1996.
Liam Li and Ameet Talwalkar. Random search and reproducibility for neural architecture search. In
  Uncertainty in artificial intelligence, pp. 367вҖ“377. PMLR, 2020.
Hanxiao Liu, Karen Simonyan, and Yiming Yang. Darts: Differentiable architecture search. In
  International Conference on Learning Representations, 2018.
Mengyang Liu, Shanchuan Li, Xinshi Chen, and Le Song. Graph condensation via receptive field
 distribution matching. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.13697, 2022.
Jonathan Lorraine, Paul Vicol, and David Duvenaud. Optimizing millions of hyperparameters by
  implicit differentiation. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pp.
  1540вҖ“1552. PMLR, 2020.
Andreas Loukas. Graph reduction with spectral and cut guarantees. J. Mach. Learn. Res., 20(116):
 1вҖ“42, 2019.


                                                 11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Andreas Loukas and Pierre Vandergheynst. Spectrally approximating large graphs with smaller
  graphs. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 3237вҖ“3246. PMLR, 2018.
Jelena Luketina, Mathias Berglund, Klaus Greff, and Tapani Raiko. Scalable gradient-based tuning
   of continuous regularization hyperparameters. In International conference on machine learning,
   pp. 2952вҖ“2960. PMLR, 2016.
Chris J Maddison, Andriy Mnih, and Yee Whye Teh. The concrete distribution: A continuous
  relaxation of discrete random variables. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2017.
James Martens and Roger Grosse. Optimizing neural networks with kronecker-factored approximate
  curvature. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 2408вҖ“2417. PMLR, 2015.
Timothy Nguyen, Zhourong Chen, and Jaehoon Lee. Dataset meta-learning from kernel ridge-
  regression. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2020.
Timothy Nguyen, Roman Novak, Lechao Xiao, and Jaehoon Lee. Dataset distillation with infinitely
  wide convolutional networks. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:5186вҖ“5198,
  2021.
Peter Ochs, RenГ© Ranftl, Thomas Brox, and Thomas Pock. Bilevel optimization with nonsmooth
  lower level problems. In International Conference on Scale Space and Variational Methods in
  Computer Vision, pp. 654вҖ“665. Springer, 2015.
Mansheej Paul, Surya Ganguli, and Gintare Karolina Dziugaite. Deep learning on a data diet: Finding
 important examples early in training. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:
 20596вҖ“20607, 2021.
Fabian Pedregosa. Hyperparameter optimization with approximate gradient. In International
  conference on machine learning, pp. 737вҖ“746. PMLR, 2016.
Omri Puny, Heli Ben-Hamu, and Yaron Lipman. From graph low-rank global attention to 2-fwl
 approximation. In International Conference on Machine Learning. PMLR, 2020.
Sylvestre-Alvise Rebuffi, Alexander Kolesnikov, Georg Sperl, and Christoph H Lampert. icarl:
  Incremental classifier and representation learning. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on
  Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 2001вҖ“2010, 2017.
Yu Rong, Yatao Bian, Tingyang Xu, Weiyang Xie, Ying Wei, Wenbing Huang, and Junzhou Huang.
  Self-supervised graph transformer on large-scale molecular data. In Advances in neural information
  processing systems, volume 33, 2020.
Venu Satuluri, Srinivasan Parthasarathy, and Yiye Ruan. Local graph sparsification for scalable
  clustering. In Proceedings of the 2011 ACM SIGMOD International Conference on Management
  of data, pp. 721вҖ“732, 2011.
Ozan Sener and Silvio Savarese. Active learning for convolutional neural networks: A core-set
  approach. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2018.
Amirreza Shaban, Ching-An Cheng, Nathan Hatch, and Byron Boots. Truncated back-propagation
 for bilevel optimization. In The 22nd International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and
 Statistics, pp. 1723вҖ“1732. PMLR, 2019.
Martin Simonovsky and Nikos Komodakis. Graphvae: Towards generation of small graphs using
 variational autoencoders. In International conference on artificial neural networks, pp. 412вҖ“422.
 Springer, 2018.
Felipe Petroski Such, Aditya Rawal, Joel Lehman, Kenneth Stanley, and Jeffrey Clune. Generative
  teaching networks: Accelerating neural architecture search by learning to generate synthetic
  training data. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 9206вҖ“9216. PMLR, 2020.
Mariya Toneva, Alessandro Sordoni, Remi Tachet des Combes, Adam Trischler, Yoshua Bengio, and
 Geoffrey J Gordon. An empirical study of example forgetting during deep neural network learning.
 In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2018.


                                                12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Petar VelicМҢkovicМҒ, Guillem Cucurull, Arantxa Casanova, Adriana Romero, Pietro Lio, and Yoshua
  Bengio. Graph attention networks. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2018.
Kai Wang, Bo Zhao, Xiangyu Peng, Zheng Zhu, Shuo Yang, Shuo Wang, Guan Huang, Hakan
  Bilen, Xinchao Wang, and Yang You. Cafe: Learning to condense dataset by aligning features.
  In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp.
 12196вҖ“12205, 2022.
Ruochen Wang, Minhao Cheng, Xiangning Chen, Xiaocheng Tang, and Cho-Jui Hsieh. Rethinking ar-
  chitecture selection in differentiable nas. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2020.
Tongzhou Wang, Jun-Yan Zhu, Antonio Torralba, and Alexei A Efros. Dataset distillation. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1811.10959, 2018.
Yuanhao Wang, Guodong Zhang, and Jimmy Ba. On solving minimax optimization locally: A
  follow-the-ridge approach. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2019.
Zhili Wang, Shimin Di, and Lei Chen. Autogel: An automated graph neural network with explicit
  link information. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:24509вҖ“24522, 2021.
Sirui Xie, Hehui Zheng, Chunxiao Liu, and Liang Lin. Snas: stochastic neural architecture search. In
   International Conference on Learning Representations, 2018.
Keyulu Xu, Weihua Hu, Jure Leskovec, and Stefanie Jegelka. How powerful are graph neural
  networks? In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2018.
Zhilin Yang, William Cohen, and Ruslan Salakhudinov. Revisiting semi-supervised learning with
  graph embeddings. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 40вҖ“48. PMLR, 2016.
Arber Zela, Thomas Elsken, Tonmoy Saikia, Yassine Marrakchi, Thomas Brox, and Frank Hutter.
  Understanding and robustifying differentiable architecture search. In International Conference on
  Learning Representations, 2019.
Hanqing Zeng, Hongkuan Zhou, Ajitesh Srivastava, Rajgopal Kannan, and Viktor Prasanna. Graph-
  saint: Graph sampling based inductive learning method. In International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2019.
Jiawei Zhang, Haopeng Zhang, Congying Xia, and Li Sun. Graph-bert: Only attention is needed for
   learning graph representations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2001.05140, 2020.
Bo Zhao and Hakan Bilen. Dataset condensation with differentiable siamese augmentation. In
  International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 12674вҖ“12685. PMLR, 2021a.
Bo Zhao and Hakan Bilen. Dataset condensation with distribution matching. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2110.04181, 2021b.
Bo Zhao, Konda Reddy Mopuri, and Hakan Bilen. Dataset condensation with gradient matching. In
  International Conference on Learning Representations, 2020.
Barret Zoph, Vijay Vasudevan, Jonathon Shlens, and Quoc V Le. Learning transferable architectures
  for scalable image recognition. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and
  pattern recognition, pp. 8697вҖ“8710, 2018.


                                                 13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Supplementary Material
A     S TANDARD DATASET C ONDENSATION IS P ROBLEMATIC ACROSS GNN S
In this section, we complete the theoretical details behind Section 2.3, which shows standard dataset
condensation is problematic across GNNs.
Assumption 1 (Achievability of a gradient matching Objective). A gradient matching objective is
                                                                                вҲ’1
defined to be achievable if there exists a non-degenerate trajectory (ОёtS )Tt=0     (i.e., a trajectory that
                                                  S          S
spans the entire parameter space Оҳ, i.e., span(Оё0 , . . . , ОёT вҲ’1 ) вҠҮ Оҳ), such that the gradient matching
loss (the objective of Eq. (2) without expectation) on this trajectory is 0.
Proposition 1 (Successful Generalization of SDC across 1D-CNNs). Consider least-squares regres-
                                                                    Pk=K
sion with one-dimensional linear convolution f 2K+1 (X)Оё = ( k=вҲ’K Оұ(k) P k )XW parameterized
by Оё = [Оұ, W ] where Оұ = [Оұ(вҲ’K) , . . . , Оұ(K) ]. P is the cyclic permutation matrix (of a unit shift).
The kernel size is (2K + 1), K вүҘ 0. If the gradient matching objective of f 2K+1 is achievable, then
                                                                                                     вҲ’1
the condensed dataset S вҲ— achieves the gradient matching objective on any trajectory {ОёtвҖІS }Tt=0         for
                             вҖІ
                          2K +1                        вҖІ                вҖІ
any linear convolution fОёвҖІ       with kernel size (2K + 1), K вүҘ K вүҘ 0.

The intuition behind Proposition 1 is that the 1D-CNN of kernel size (2K + 1) is a вҖңsupernetвҖқ of
the 1D-CNN of kernel size (2K вҖІ + 1) if K вҖІ вүӨ K, and the condensed dataset via a bigger model
can generalize well to smaller ones. This result suggests us to use a sufficiently large model during
condensation, to enable the generalization of the condensed dataset to a wider range of models.
Proposition 2 (Condensed Adjacency Overfits SDC Objective). Consider least-squares regression
with a linear GNN, f (A, X) = C(A)XW parameterized by W and C(A) which depends on graph
adjacency A. For any (full-ranked) synthetic node features X вҖІ вҲҲ RcГ—d , there exists a synthetic
adjacency matrix AвҖІ вҲҲ RcГ—c
                         вүҘ0 such that the gradient matching objective is achievable.
Proposition 3 (Failed Generalization of SDC across GNNs). Consider least-squares regression with a
linear GNN, fW C
                 (A, X) = C(A)XW parametrized by W , there always exists a condensed graph S вҲ— ,
such that the gradient matching objective for f C is achievable. However, if we train a new linear GNN
  CвҖІ
fW   (A, X) with convolution matrix C вҖІ (AвҖІ ) on S вҲ— , the relative error between the optimized model pa-
              CвҖІ
rameters of fW   on the real and condensed graphs is вҲҘWCSвҖІ вҲ’WCT вҖІ вҲҘ/вҲҘWCT вҖІ вҲҘ вүҘ max{Пғmax (Q)вҲ’1, 1вҲ’
                                               CвҖІ                                           CвҖІ
Пғmin (Q)}, where WCT вҖІ = arg minW вҲҘy вҲ’ fW         (A, X)вҲҘ22 , WCSвҖІ = arg minW вҲҘyвҖІ вҲ’ fW         (AвҖІ , X вҖІ )вҲҘ22 ,
                                                                   вҲ’1
and Q = X вҠӨ [C(A)]вҠӨ [C(A)]X X вҠӨ [C вҖІ (A)]вҠӨ [C вҖІ (A)]X

                                                                      .

B     M ORE P RELIMINARIES
In this section, we describe in greater details the types of data, downstream tasks, and neural network
models that our hyperparameter-calibrated dataset condensation (HCDC) applies to. Moreover, we
also religiously define the simplified linear convolution regression problem with least-square loss and
linear convolution models, which is the assumed setup for Lemma 1 and Propositions 1 to 3.

B.1    D OWNSTREAM TASKS

In Section 2 we have defined the downstream task that this paper mainly focus on, node clas-
sification on graphs. Where we are given a graph T = (A, X, y) with adjacency matrix
A вҲҲ {0, 1}nГ—n ,Snode S features X вҲҲ RnГ—d , node class labels y вҲҲ [K]n , and mutually disjoint
node-splits Vtrain Vval Vtest = [n], and the goal is to predict the node labels.
Here, to give a background on the convolution neural networks (CNNs) applications discussed
in Section 2.3, we show as follows the settings above can be also used to describe per-pixel
classification on images (e.g., for semantic segmentation) where CNNs are usually used.
For per-pixel classification, we are given a set of n images of size w Г— h, so the pixel values of
the j-th image can be formatted as a tensor Xj вҲҲ RwГ—hГ—c if there are c channels. We are also
                                   wГ—h
given the pixel    S Yj вҲҲ [K]
             S labels                   for each image j вҲҲ [n] and the mutually disjoint image-
splits Itrain Ival Itest = [n]. Clearly, we can reshape the pixel values and pixel labels of


                                                     14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


the j-th image to wh Г— c and wh respectively, and concatenate those matrices from all images.
Following this, denoting n = nwh, we obtain the concatenated pixel value matrix X вҲҲ RnГ—c
and the concatenated pixel label vector y вҲҲ [K]n . The image-splits are translated into pixel-level
splits where  train = {i | (j вҲ’ 1)wh вүӨ i вүӨ jwh, j вҲҲ Itrian } (similar for Vval and Vtest ) and
             VS
Vtrain Vval Vtest = [n]. We can also define the auxiliary adjacency matrix A вҲҲ {0, 1}nГ—n on
       S
the n = nwh pixels, where A is block diagonal A = diag(A1 , . . . , An ) and Aj вҲҲ {0, 1}whГ—wh is
the assumed adjacency (e.g. a two-dimensional grid) of the j-th image.

B.2    N EURAL N ETWORK M ODELS
                                                                     nГ—n
This paper mainly focus on graph neural networks (GNNs) fОё,О» : RвүҘ0        Г— RnГ—d вҶ’ RnГ—K , where
Оё вҲҲ Оҳ denotes the parameters and О» вҲҲ Оӣ denotes the hyperparameters. In Section 2 we have seen
that most GNNs can be interpreted as iterative convolution / message passing over nodes (Ding et al.,
2021; Balcilar et al., 2021) where X (0) = X and f (A, X) = X (L) , and for l вҲҲ [L], the update-rule
is,
                                 X (l+1) = Пғ CОұ(l) (A)X (l) W (l) ,                              (4)

where CОұ(l) (A) is the convolution matrix parametrized by Оұ(l) , W (l) is the learnable linear weights,
and Пғ(В·) denotes the non-linearity. Thus the parameters Оё consists of all ОұвҖҷs (if they exist) and W вҖҷs,
i.e., Оё = [Оұ(0) , . . . , Оұ(LвҲ’1) , W (0) , . . . , W (LвҲ’1) ].
More specifically, it is possible for GNNs to have more than one convolution filters per layer (Ding
et al., 2021; Balcilar et al., 2021) and we may generalize Eq. (4) to,
                                                  p
                                                  X
                                    (l+1)               (i)
                                X           =Пғ         CОұ(l,i) (A)X (l) W (l,i) .                           (5)
                                                 i=1


Within this common framework, GNNs differ from each other by the choice of convolution filters
{C (i) }, which can be either fixed or learnable. If C (i) is fixed, there is no parameters Оұ(l,i) for any
l вҲҲ [L]. If C (i) is learnable, the convolution matrix relies on the learnable parameters Оұ(l,i) and can be
different in each layers (thus should be denoted as C (l,i) ). Usually for GNNs, the convolution matrix
depends on the parameters in two possible ways: (1) the convolution matrix C (l,i) is scaled by the
scalar parameter Оұ(l,i) вҲҲ R, i.e., C (l,i) = Оұ(l,i) C(i) (e.g. GIN (Xu et al., 2018), ChebNet (Defferrard
et al., 2016), and SIGN (Frasca et al., 2020)); or (2) the convolution matrix is constructed by
                                                    (l)    (l)
node-level self-attentions [C (l,i) ]ij = hОұ(l,i) Xi,: , Xj,: [C(i) ]i,j (e.g., GAT (VelicМҢkovicМҒ et al., 2018),
Graph Transformers (Rong et al., 2020; Puny et al., 2020; Zhang et al., 2020)). Based on (Ding et al.,
2021; Balcilar et al., 2021), we summarize the popular GNNs reformulated into the convolution over
nodes / message-passing formula (Eq. (5)) in Table 4.
Convolutional neural networks can also be reformulated into the form of Eq. (5). For simplicity
we only consider one-dimensional convolution neural network (1D-CNN) and the generalization to
2D/3D-CNNs is trivial. If we denote the constant cyclic permutation matrix (which corresponds to
a unit shift) as P вҲҲ RnГ—n , the update rule of a 1D-CNN with kernel size (2K + 1), K вүҘ 0 can be
written as,
                                            k=K
                                              X
                              X (l+1) = Пғ          Оұk P k X (l) W (l,k) .                    (6)
                                                 k=вҲ’K
We will use this common convolution formula of GNNs (Eq. (5)) and 1D-CNNs (Eq. (6)) in Ap-
pendix B.4 and Proposition 1.

B.3    OTHER T YPES OF DATA , TASKS , AND M ODELS

In Appendices B.1 and B.2 we have discussed the formal definition of two possible tasks (1) node
classification on graphs and (2) per-pixel classification on images, and reformulated many popular
GNNs and CNNs into a general convolution form (Eqs. (5) and (6)). However, we want to note that
the application of dataset condensation methods (including the standard dataset condensation (Wang
et al., 2018; Zhao et al., 2020; Zhao & Bilen, 2021b) and our HCDC) is not limited by the specific
types of data, tasks, and models.


                                                        15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                Model Name                   Design Idea       Conv. Matrix Type    # of Conv.      Convolution Matrix

       GCN1 (Kipf & Welling, 2016)          Spatial Conv.           Fixed                1          C=D  e вҲ’1/2 A
                                                                                                                eDe вҲ’1/2
                                                                                                    (
                                                                                                     C (1) = In
    SAGE-Mean2 (Hamilton et al., 2017)     Message Passing          Fixed                2
                                                                                                     C (2) = DвҲ’1 A
                                                                                                    пЈұ
                                                                                                    пЈҙC(s) = A + In and
                                                                                                    пЈҙ
                                                                                                    пЈІ
                                                                                                       (s)      (l)      (l)
       GAT3 (VelicМҢkovicМҒ et al., 2018)     Self-Attention         Learnable        # of heads        ha(l,s) (Xi,: , Xj,: ) = exp LeakyReLU(
                                                                                                    пЈҙ
                                                                                                    пЈі (X (l) W (l,s) вҲҘ X (l) W (l,s) ) В· a(l,s) )
                                                                                                    пЈҙ
                                                                                                            i,:              j,:
                                                                                                    (
                                                                   Fixed +                           C (1) = A
           GIN1 (Xu et al., 2018)             WL-Test                                    2                                     (2)
                                                                   Learnable                         C(2) = In and hПө(l) = 1 + Пө(l)
                                                                                                    пЈұ
                                                                                                      (1)       (2)
                                                                                                    пЈІC = In , C = 2L/О»max вҲ’ In ,
                                                                                                    пЈҙ
                                                                                                    пЈҙ
       SGC2 (Defferrard et al., 2016)       Spectral Conv.         Learnable       order of poly.    C(s) = 2C(2) C(sвҲ’1) вҲ’ C(sвҲ’2)
                                                                                                    пЈҙ
                                                                                                    пЈі and h(s) = Оё(s)
                                                                                                    пЈҙ
                                                                                                    пЈұ       Оё (s)
                                                                                                    пЈҙC(1) = In , C(2) = 2L/О»max вҲ’ In ,
                                                                                                    пЈҙ
                                                                                                    пЈІ
     ChebNet2 (Defferrard et al., 2016)     Spectral Conv.         Learnable       order of poly.    C(s) = 2C(2) C(sвҲ’1) вҲ’ C(sвҲ’2)
                                                                                                    пЈҙ
                                                                                                    пЈі and h(s) = Оё(s)
                                                                                                    пЈҙ
                                                                                                              Оё (s)
       GDC3 (Klicpera et al., 2019)           Diffusion             Fixed                1          C=S
                                                                                                    пЈұ
                                                                                                    пЈІC(s)
                                                                                                    пЈҙ
                                                                                                      i,j = 1 and h
                                                                                                                   (s)
                                                                                                                       (l,s)           (l,s)
                                                                                                                                                      (l)   (l)
                                                                                                                                                   (Xi,: , Xj,: )
                                                                                                                          (WQ        ,WK       )
 Graph Transformers4 (Rong et al., 2020)    Self-Attention         Learnable        # of heads                   (l)  (l,s) (l) (l,s)
                                                                                                    пЈі= exp вҲҡ 1 (Xi,: WQ )(Xj,: WK )T

                                                                                                    пЈҙ
                                                                                                                  dk,l

1                                                    2 (2)
   Where A e = A + In , D          e = D + In .        C represents mean aggregator. Weight matrix in (Hamilton et al., 2017) is
    (l)       (l,1)          (l,2)      3                                  (l,s)
 W =W                 вҲҘW .                Need row-wise normalization. Ci,j is non-zero if and only if Ai,j = 1, thus GAT follows
 direct-neighbor aggregation.                4
                                               The weight matrices of the two convolution supports are the same, W (l,1) = W (l,2) .
 5
   Where normalized Laplacian L = In вҲ’ DвҲ’1/2 ADвҲ’1/2 and О»max is its largest eigenvalue, which can be approximated as
                                  6
                                    Where S is the diffusion matrix S = вҲһ            k                                      вҲ’t tk
                                                                          P
 2 for a large graph.                                                        k=0 Оёk T , for example, decaying weights Оёk = e k! and
                                     вҲ’1/2     вҲ’1/2    7
 transition matrix T = D           e      A
                                          eDe      .    Need row-wise normalization. Only describes the global self-attention layer,
            (l,s)      (l,s)
 where WQ , WQ вҲҲ Rfl ,dk,l are weight matrices which compute the queries and keys vectors. In contrast to GAT, all
                (l,s)
 entries of Ci,j are non-zero. Different design of Graph Transformers (Puny et al., 2020; Rong et al., 2020; Zhang et al.,
 2020) use graph adjacency information in different ways, and is not characterized here, see the original papers for details.

                          Table 4: Summary of GNNs formulated as generalized graph convolution.


For HCDC, we can follow the conventions in (Zhao et al., 2020) to define the train/validation losses
on iid samples and define the notion of dataset condensation as learning a smaller synthetic dataset
with less number of samples. Here we leave the readers to (Zhao et al., 2020) for formal definitions
of condensation on datasets with iid samples.
More generally speaking, our HCDC can be applied as long as (1) the train and validation losses, i.e.,
Ltrain
  T    (Оё, О») and Lval
                   T (Оё, О») can be defined (as functions of the parameters and hyperparameters);
and (2) we have an well-defined notion of the learnable synthetic dataset S, (e.g., which includes
prior-knowledge like what is the format of the synthetic data in S and how the same model fОё,О» is
applied).

B.4       T HE L INEAR C ONVOLUTION R EGRESSION P ROBLEM

For the ease of theoretical analysis, in Lemma 1 and Propositions 1 to 3 we consider a simplified
linear convolution regression problem as follows,
                                           ОёT = arg min вҲҘCОұ (A) XW вҲ’ yвҲҘ2                                                                                      (7)
                                                             Оё=[Оұ,W ]

where we are given continuous labels y and use sum-of-squares loss в„“(yМӮ, y) = вҲҘyМӮ вҲ’ yвҲҘ22 instead
of the cross entropy loss used for node/pixel classification. We also assume a linear GNN/CNN
fОё=[Оұ,W ] (A, X) = CОұ (A)XW is used, where CОұ (A) is the convolution matrix which depends on
the adjacency matrix A and the parameters Оұ вҲҲ Rp , and W is the learnable linear weights with d
elements (hence, the complete parameters consists of two parts, i.e., Оё = [Оұ, W ]).
As explained in Appendix B.2, this linear convolution model fОё=[Оұ,W ] (A, X) = CОұ (A)XW already
generalizes a wide variety of GNNs and CNNs. For example, it can represents the (single-layer)
graph convolution network (GCN) (Kipf & Welling, 2016) whose convolution matrix is defined as
             1      1
C(A) = DМғвҲ’ 2 AМғDМғвҲ’ 2 where AМғ and DМғ are the вҖңself-loop-addedвҖқ adjacency and degree matrix (for


                                                                        16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


GCNN there is no learnable parameters in C( A) so we omit Оұ). It also generalizes the one-dimensional
                                                                                      Pk=K
convolution neural network (1D-CNN), where the convolution matrix is CОұ (A) = k=вҲ’K [Оё]k P k
and P is the cyclic permutation matrix correspond to a unit shift.
It is important to note that although we considered this simplified linear convolution regression
problem in some of our theoretical results, which is both convex and linear. We argue that most of the
theoretical phenomena reflected by Lemma 1 and Propositions 1 to 3 can be generalized to the general
non-convex losses and non-linear models; see Appendix C.4 for the corresponding discussions.

C     P ROOFS AND E XTENDED T HEORETICAL R ESULTS
In this section, we provide the proofs to the theoretical results Lemma 1 and Propositions 1 to 3 and
Theorem 1, together with some extended theoretical discussions, including generalizing the linear
convolution regression problem to non-convex losses and non-linear models (see Appendix C.4).
To proceed, please recall the linear convolution regression problem defined in Appendix B.4, the
achievability of gradient-matching objective (Eq. (2)) defined as Assumption 1 in Section 2.3.

C.1   VALIDITY OF S TANDARD DATASET C ONDENSATION

As the first step, we verify the validity of the standard dataset condensation (SDC) using the gradient-
matching objective Eq. (2) for the linear convolution regression problem.
Lemma 1. (Validity of SDC) Consider least square regression with linear convolution model
fW (A, X) = C(A)XW parameterized by W . If the gradient-matching objective of fW is achievable,
then the optimizer on the condensed dataset S, i.e., W S = arg minW LS (W ) is also optimal for the
original dataset, i.e., LT (W S ) = minW LT (W ).

Proof. In the linear convolution regression problem, sum-of-squares loss is used, and LT (W ) =
вҲҘCXW вҲ’yвҲҘ22 (similarly LS (W ) = вҲҘC вҖІ X вҖІ W вҲ’yвҖІ вҲҘ22 where C вҖІ = C(AвҖІ )). We assume X вҠӨ C вҠӨ CX вҲҲ
RdГ—d is invertible and we can apply the optimizer formula for ordinary least square (OLS) regression
to find the optimizer W T of LT (W ) as,
                               W T = (X вҠӨ C вҠӨ CX)вҲ’1 X вҠӨ C вҠӨ y.
Also, we can compute the gradients of LT (W ) w.r.t W as,
                                вҲҮW LT (W ) = 2X вҠӨ C вҠӨ (CXW вҲ’ y),
and similarly for вҲҮW LS (W ).
Given the achievability of the gradient-matching objective of fW , we know there ex-
                                              вҲ’1
ists a non-degenerate trajectory (WtS )Tt=0        which spans the entire parameter space, i.e.,
        S          S         d
span(W0 , . . . , WT вҲ’1 ) = R , such that the gradient-matching loss (the objective of Eq. (2) without
expectation) on this trajectory is 0. Assuming D(В·, В·) is the L2 norm (Zhao et al., 2020), this means,
                           вҲҮW LT (WtS ) = вҲҮW LS (WtS ) for t вҲҲ [T ].
Substitute in the formula for the gradients вҲҮW LT (W ) and вҲҮW LS (W ), we then have,
                X вҠӨ C вҠӨ (CXWtS вҲ’ y) = X вҖІвҠӨ C вҖІвҠӨ (C вҖІ X вҖІ WtS вҲ’ yвҖІ ) for       t вҲҲ [T ].
                         вҲ’1
Since the set of {WtS }Tt=0 spans the complete parameter space Rd , we can transform the set of
               S T вҲ’1
vectors {Пүt В·Wt }t=0 to the set of unit vectors {edi }dвҲ’1    d
                                                      i=0 вҲҲ R by a linear transformation. Meanwhile,
the set of T equations above can be transformed to,
                  X вҠӨ C вҠӨ (CXedi вҲ’ y) = X вҖІвҠӨ C вҖІвҠӨ (C вҖІ X вҖІ edi вҲ’ yвҖІ ) for i вҲҲ [d].
This directly leads to X вҠӨ C вҠӨ CX = X вҖІвҠӨ C вҖІвҠӨ C вҖІ X вҖІ and X вҠӨ C вҠӨ y = X вҖІвҠӨ C вҖІвҠӨ yвҖІ .
Using the formula for the optimizers W T and W S above, we readily get,
             W T = (X вҠӨ C вҠӨ CX)вҲ’1 X вҠӨ C вҠӨ y = (X вҖІвҠӨ C вҖІвҠӨ C вҖІ X вҖІ )вҲ’1 X вҖІвҠӨ C вҖІвҠӨ yвҖІ = W S .
And hence,
                               LT (W S ) = LT (W T ) = min LT (W ),
                                                           W
which concludes the proof.


                                                  17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Despite its simplicity, Lemma 1 directly verifies the validity of the gradient-matching formulation of
standard dataset condensation on some specific learning problems. Although the gradient-matching
formulation (Eq. (2)) is an efficient but weaker formulation than the bilevel formulation of SDC
(Eq. (1)), we see it is strong enough for some the linear convolution regression problem.

C.2    G ENERALIZATION I SSUES OF SDC

Now, we move forward and focus on the generalization issues of (the gradient-matching formulation
of) the standard dataset condensation (SDC) across GNNs.
To start with, we prove the successful generalization of SDC across 1D-CNNs as follows, which is
very similar to the proof of Lemma 1.
Proof of Proposition 1: In Proposition 1, we consider one-dimensional linear convolution models
              Pk=K
f 2K+1 (X) = ( k=вҲ’K Оұ(k) P k )XW parameterized by Оұ вҲҲ Rp and W вҲҲ Rd (where p = 2K + 1).
If we denote,
                               k=K
                               X
                         C=          Оұ(k) P k and Оё = [Оұ, W ] вҲҲ Rp+d
                                   k=вҲ’K
then from the proof of Lemma 1 we know the gradients of LT (W ) w.r.t W is again,
                                  вҲҮW LT (W ) = 2X вҠӨ C вҠӨ (CXW вҲ’ y).

We know the achievability of the gradient-matching objective means there exists a non-degenerate
                   вҲ’1
trajectory (ОёtS )Tt=0 which spans the entire parameter space, i.e., span(Оё0S , . . . , ОёTS вҲ’1 ) = Rp+d . By
                                                                     вҲ’1
decomposing ОёtS into [ОұtS , WtS ], we know that there exists (ОұtS )Tt=0 which spans Rp and there exists
    S T вҲ’1                d
(Wt )t=0 which spans R .
                                                                 T вҲ’1
Since the gradient-matching objective is minimized to 0 on (WtS )t=0  which spans Rd , following the
same procedure as the proof of Lemma 1, we again obtain,
                                               X вҠӨ C вҠӨ y = X вҖІвҠӨ C вҖІвҠӨ yвҖІ .
                                                                                         вҲ’1
Mean while, since the same gradient-matching objective is also minimized to 0 on (ОұtS )Tt=0 which
       p
spans R , we have,
                   k=K
                   X                       вҠӨ                k=K
                                                            X                           вҠӨ
            XвҠӨ            (ОұtS )(k) P k        y = X вҖІвҠӨ               (ОұtS )(k) P вҖІk        yвҖІ    for   t вҲҲ [T ].
                   k=вҲ’K                                    k=вҲ’K
                                                                    вҲ’1
Again by linear combining the above T equations and because (ОұtS )Tt=0 can be transformed to the
unit vectors in Rp , we have,
                               вҠӨ             вҠӨ
                       X вҠӨ P k y = X вҖІвҠӨ P вҖІk yвҖІ for k = вҲ’K, . . . , K.
                                       вҲ’1                              вҖІ
Hence, for any new trajectory (ОұtвҖІS )Tt=0 which spans Rp where pвҖІ = 2K вҖІ + 1, by linear combining
the above equations, we have,
                  k=K
                  X                        вҠӨ                k=K
                                                            X                            вҠӨ
           XвҠӨ            (ОұtвҖІS )(k) P k        y = X вҖІвҠӨ               (ОұtвҖІS )(k) P вҖІk        yвҖІ   for   t вҲҲ [T вҖІ ].
                  k=вҲ’K                                     k=вҲ’K
                                                                                            вҲ’1
With similar procedure for the X C CX part, we conclude that on the new trajectory (ОёtвҖІS )Tt=0
                                     вҠӨ     вҠӨ

                                     вҲҮW LT (Оұ, W ) = вҲҮW LS (Оұ, W ).

It remains to prove that on any new trajectory вҲҮОұ LT (Оұ, W ) = вҲҮОұ LS (Оұ, W ). Only need to note
that,
                          вҲҮОұ(k) LT (Оұ, W ) = 2W вҠӨ X вҠӨ P k (CXW вҲ’ y).
Hence, by the p equations above we can readily show,
                             X вҠӨ P k y = X вҖІвҠӨ P вҖІk yвҖІ           for     k = вҲ’K, . . . , K.


                                                           18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Again with similar procedure for the X вҠӨ C вҠӨ CX part, we finally can show that on the new trajectory
         вҲ’1
(ОёtвҖІS )Tt=0
                                  вҲҮОұ LT (Оұ, W ) = вҲҮОұ LS (Оұ, W ).
This concludes the proof.                                                                         в–Ў

Then we focus on the linear GNNs, we want to verify the insight that the learned adjacency AвҖІ of the
condensed graph has вҖңtoo many degrees of freedomвҖқ so that can easily overfit the gradient-matching
objective, no matter what learned synthetic features X вҖІ are. Again, the proof of Proposition 2 uses
some results in the proof of Lemma 1.
Proof of Proposition 2: Now, we consider a linear GNN defined as f (A, X) = C(A)XW . From
the proof of Lemma 1, we know that for the gradient-matching objective of f to be achievable, it is
equivalent to require that,
                     X вҠӨ C вҠӨ CX = X вҖІвҠӨ C вҖІвҠӨ C вҖІ X вҖІ    and X вҠӨ C вҠӨ y = X вҖІвҠӨ C вҖІвҠӨ yвҖІ ,
where C and C вҖІ refer to C(A) and C(AвҖІ ) respectively.
Firstly we note that once we find C вҖІ and X вҖІ such that satisfy the first condition X вҠӨ C вҠӨ CX =
X вҖІвҠӨ C вҖІвҠӨ C вҖІ X вҖІ , we can always find yвҖІ вҲҲ Rc such that X вҠӨ C вҠӨ y = X вҖІвҠӨ C вҖІвҠӨ yвҖІ since X вҠӨ C вҠӨ y вҲҲ R is
a scalar.
Now, we focus on finding the convolution matrix C вҖІ and the node feature matrix X вҖІ of the condensed
synthetic graph to satisfy X вҠӨ C вҠӨ CX = X вҖІвҠӨ C вҖІвҠӨ C вҖІ X вҖІ . We assume n вү« c вү« d and consider
the diagonalization of X вҠӨ C вҠӨ CX вҲҲ RdГ—d . Since X вҠӨ C вҠӨ CX is positive semi-definite, it can be
diagonalized as X вҠӨ C вҠӨ CX = V S 2 V вҠӨ where V вҲҲ Rd is an orthogonal matrix and S вҲҲ Rd is a
diagonal matrix that S = diag(s1 , . . . , sd ).
For any (real) semi-unitary matrix U вҲҲ RcГ—d such that U вҠӨ U = Id , we can construct C вҖІ X вҖІ =
U SV вҠӨ вҲҲ RcГ—d and we can easily verify they satisfy the condition,
                      X вҖІвҠӨ C вҖІвҠӨ C вҖІ X вҖІ = V SU вҠӨ U SV вҠӨ = V S 2 V вҠӨ = X вҠӨ C вҠӨ CX.

Then since X вҖІ is full ranked, for any X вҖІ , by considering the singular-value decomposition of X вҖІ , we
see that we can always find a convolution matrix C вҖІ such that C вҖІ X вҖІ = U SV and this concludes the
proof.                                                                                                 в–Ў

Finally, we use some results of Proposition 2 to prove Proposition 3, the failure of SDC when
generalizating across GNNs.
Proof of Proposition 3: We prove by two steps.
For the first step, we aim to show that there always exist a condensed synthetic dataset S such
that achieves the gradient-matching objective but the learned adjacency matrix AвҖІ = Ic is the
identity matrix. Clearly this directly follows form the proof of Proposition 2, where we only require
C вҖІ X вҖІ = U SV (see the proof of Proposition 2 for details). If the learned adjacency matrix AвҖІ = Ic ,
the for any GNNs, the corresponding convolution matrix C вҖІ is also (or proportional to) identity, thus
we only need to set the learned node feature matrix X вҖІ = U SV to satisfy the condition. The first
step is proved.
For the second step, we evaluate the relative estimation error of the optimal parameter when transfer
                C
to a new GNN fW    with convolution filter C(В·), i.e., вҲҘWCS вҲ’ WCT вҲҘ/вҲҘWCT вҲҘ. Using the formula for the
optimal parameter in the proof of Lemma 1 again, we have,
                                    WCT = (X вҠӨ CвҠӨ CX)вҲ’1 X вҠӨ CвҠӨ y,
and
                              WCS = (X вҖІвҠӨ CвҖІвҠӨ CвҖІ X)вҲ’1 X вҖІвҠӨ CвҖІвҠӨ yвҖІ ,
where C = C(A ) = C(Ic ) = C(Ic ) (the last equation use the fact that the convolution matrix of
        вҖІ        вҖІ

GNNs are the same if the underlying graph is identity).
                                     C
Moreover, by the validity of SDC on fW , we know, (see the proof of Lemma 1 for details),
                     X вҖІвҠӨ C вҖІвҠӨ C вҖІ X вҖІ = X вҠӨ C вҠӨ CX        and   X вҖІвҠӨ C вҖІвҠӨ yвҖІ = X вҠӨ C вҠӨ y


                                                      19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Thus, altogether we derive that X вҖІвҠӨ CвҖІвҠӨ CвҖІ X = X вҠӨ C вҠӨ CX and X вҖІвҠӨ CвҖІвҠӨ yвҖІ = X вҠӨ C вҠӨ y. And
therefore,
                               WCS = (X вҠӨ C вҠӨ CX)вҲ’1 X вҠӨ C вҠӨ y.
Now, note that,
       вҲҘWCS вҲ’ WCT вҲҘ/вҲҘWCT вҲҘ
                                                   вҲ’1
          X вҠӨ [C(A)]вҠӨ [C(A)]X X вҠӨ [C(A)]вҠӨ [C(A)]X     ) вҲ’ Id X вҠӨ C вҠӨ y /вҲҘX вҠӨ C вҠӨ yвҲҘ

      =
     вүҘ max{Пғmax (Q) вҲ’ 1, 1 вҲ’ Пғmin (Q)}
                                                   вҲ’1
where Q = X вҠӨ [C(A)]вҠӨ [C(A)]X X вҠӨ [C(A)]вҠӨ [C(A)]X

                                                      . This concludes the proof.                   в–Ў

C.3   VALIDITY OF HCDC

Finally, we complete the proof of Theorem 1 with more detials.
Proof of Theorem 1: Firstly, we prove the necessity by contradiction.
If there exists О»0 вҲҲ ОӣМғ s.t. the two gradient vectors are not aligned at О»0 , then there exists small
perturbation вҲҶО»0 such that LвҲ—T (О»0 + вҲҶО»0 ) вҲ’ LвҲ—T (О»0 ) and LвҲ—S (О»0 + вҲҶО»0 ) вҲ’ LвҲ—S (О»0 ) have different
signs.
Secondly, we prove the sufficiency by path-integration.
For any pair О»1 Мё= О»2 вҲҲ ОӣМғ, we have a path Оі(О»1 , О»2 ) вҲҲ ОӣМғ from О»2 and О»1 , then integrating hypergra-
dients вҲҮО» LвҲ—T (О») along the path recovers the hyperparameter-calibration condition. More specifically,
along the path we have LвҲ—T (О»1 ) вҲ’ LвҲ—T (О»2 ) = Оі(О»1 ,О»2 ) вҲҮО» LвҲ—T (О»)dО» (similar for вҲҮО» LвҲ—S (О»)). Thus
                                                R

we have,
                         (LвҲ—T (О»1 ) вҲ’ LвҲ—T (О»2 ))(LвҲ—S (О»1 ) вҲ’ LвҲ—S (О»2 ))
                          Z                             Z
                       =                вҲҮО» LвҲ—T (О»)dО»                 вҲҮО» LвҲ—S (О»)dО»
                             Оі(О»1 ,О»2 )                   Оі(О»1 ,О»2 )
                         Z              q            q
                       вүҘ                  вҲҮО» LвҲ—T (О»), вҲҮО» LвҲ—S (О») dО»
                            Оі(О»1 ,О»2 )
                       вүҘ0
the second last inequality by Cauchy-Schwarz inquality and the last inequality by
cos(вҲҮО» LвҲ—T (О»), вҲҮО» LвҲ—T (О»)) = 0 for any О» вҲҲ Оі(О»1 , О»2 ) вҲҲ ОӣМғ.
This concludes the proof.                                                                           в–Ў

C.4   G ENERALIZE TO N ON -C ONVEX AND N ON -L INEAR C ASE

Although the results above are obtained for least squares loss and linear convolution model, it still
reflects the nature of general non-convex losses and non-linear models. Since dataset condensation is
effectively matching the local minima {ОёT } of the original loss Ltrain
                                                                    T   (Оё, ПҲ) with the local minima
{ОёS } of the condensed loss Ltrain
                               S   (Оё, ПҲ), within the small neighborhoods surrounding the pair of local
minima (ОёT , ОёS ), we can approximate the non-convex loss and non-linear model with a convex/linear
one respectively. Hence the generalizability issues with convex loss and liner model may hold.

D     E XTENDED R ELATED W ORK
This section contains the extensive discussions of many related work/areas which cannot be fitted
into the main paper due to the page limit.

D.1   DATASET C ONDENSATION AND C ORESET S ELECTION

Firstly, we review the two main approaches to reducing the training set size while preserving model
performance.


                                                   20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Dataset condensation (or distillation) is first proposed in (Wang et al., 2018) as a learning-to-learn
problem by formulating the network parameters as a function of synthetic data and learning them
through the network parameters to minimize the training loss over the original data. However, the
nested-loop optimization precludes it scaling up to large-scale in-the-wild datasets. Zhao et al. (2020)
alleviate this issue by enforcing the gradients of the synthetic samples w.r.t. the network weights
to approach those of the original data, which successfully alleviates the expensive unrolling of
the computational graph. Based on the meta-learning formulation in (Wang et al., 2018), Bohdal
et al. (2020) and Nguyen et al. (2020; 2021) propose to simplify the inner-loop optimization of a
classification model by training with ridge regression which has a closed-form solution, while Such
et al. (2020) model the synthetic data using a generative network. To improve the data efficiency
of synthetic samples in gradient-matching algorithm, Zhao & Bilen (2021a) apply differentiable
Siamese augmentation, and Kim et al. (2022) introduce efficient synthetic-data parametrization.
Recently, a new distribution-matching framework (Zhao & Bilen, 2021b) proposes to match the
hidden features rather than the gradients for fast optimization, but may suffer from performance
degradation compared to gradient-matching (Zhao & Bilen, 2021b), where Kim et al. (2022) provide
some interpretation.
Graph condensation (Jin et al., 2021) achieves the state-of-the-art performance for preserving GNNsвҖҷ
performance on the simplified graph. However, Jin et al. (2021) only adapt the gradient-matching
algorithm of dataset condensation Zhao et al. (2020) to graph data, together with a MLP-based
generative model for edges (Anand & Huang, 2018; Simonovsky & Komodakis, 2018), leaving out
several major issues on efficiency, performance, and generalizability. Subsequent work aims to apply
the more efficient distribution-matching algorithm (Zhao & Bilen, 2021b; Wang et al., 2022) of
dataset condensation to graph (Liu et al., 2022) or speed up gradient-matching graph condensation by
reducing the number of gradient-matching-steps (Jin et al., 2022). While the efficiency issue of graph
condensation is mitigated (Jin et al., 2022), the performance degradation on medium- and large-sized
graphs still renders graph condensation practically meaningless. Our HCDC is specifically designed
for repeated training in architecture search, which is, in contrast, well-motivated.
Coreset selection methods choose samples that are important for training based on heuristic criteria,
for example, minimizing the distance between coreset and whole-dataset centers (Chen et al., 2010;
Rebuffi et al., 2017), maximizing the diversity of selected samples in the gradient space (Aljundi
et al., 2019), discovering cluster centers (Sener & Savarese, 2018), and choosing samples with the
largest negative implicit gradient (Borsos et al., 2020). Forgetting (Toneva et al., 2018) measures
the forgetfulness of trained samples and drops those that are not easy to forget. GraNd (Paul et al.,
2021) selects the training samples that contribute most to the training loss in the first few epochs.
Prism (Kothawade et al., 2022) select samples to maximize submodular set-functions which are
combinatorial generalizations of entropy measures (Iyer et al., 2021). Recent benchmark (Guo et al.,
2022) of a variety of coreset selection methods for image classification indicates Forgetting, GraNd,
and Prism are among the best performing corset methods but still evidently underperform the dataset
condensation baselines. Although coreset selection can be very efficient, most of the methods above
suffer from three major limitations: (1) their performance is upper-bounded by the information in
the selected samples; (2) most of them do not directly optimize the synthetic samples to preserve
the model performance; and (3) most of them select samples incrementally and greedily, which are
short-sighted.


D.2   G RAPH R EDUCTION

Secondly, we summarize the traditional graph reduction method for graph neural network training.
Graph coreset selection is a non-trivial generalization of the above method coreset methods given
the non-iid nature of graph nodes and the non-linearity nature of GNNs. The very few off-the-shelf
graph coreset algorithms are designed for graph clustering (Baker et al., 2020; Braverman et al., 2021)
and are not optimal for the training of GNNs.
Graph sampling methods (Chiang et al., 2019; Zeng et al., 2019) can be as simple as uniformly
sampling a set of nodes and finding their induced subgraph, which is understood as a graph-counterpart
of uniform sampling of iid samples. However, most of the present graph sampling algorithms (e.g.,
ClusterGCN (Chiang et al., 2019) and GraphSAINT (Zeng et al., 2019)) are designed for sampling
multiple subgraphs (mini-batches), which forms a cover of the original graph for training GNNs


                                                  21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


with memory constraint. Therefore those graph mini-batch sampling algorithms are effectively graph
partitioning algorithms and not optimized to find just one representative subgraph.
Graph sparsification (Batson et al., 2013; Satuluri et al., 2011) and graph coarsening (Loukas
& Vandergheynst, 2018; Loukas, 2019; Huang et al., 2021; Cai et al., 2020) algorithms are usually
designed to preserve specific graph properties like graph spectrum and graph clustering. Such
objectives are often not aligned with the optimization of downstream GNNs and are shown to be
sub-optimal in preserving the information to train GNNs well (Jin et al., 2021).


D.3    OTHER R ELATED A REAS

Lastly, we list two important relevant areas to this work, implicit differentiation methods based on the
implicit function theorem (IFT), and the differentiable neural architecture search (NAS) algorithms.
Implicit differentiation methods apply the implicit function theorem (IFT) to the nested-optimization
problems (Ochs et al., 2015; Wang et al., 2019). The IFT requires inverting the training Hessian with
respect to the network weights, where early work either computes the inverse explicitly (Bengio,
2000; Larsen et al., 1996) or approximates it as the identity matrix (Luketina et al., 2016). Conjugate
gradient (CG) is applied to invert the Hessian approximately (Pedregosa, 2016), but is difficult to
scale to deep networks. Several methods have been proposed to efficiently approximate Hessian
inverse, for example, 1-step unrolled differentiation (Luketina et al., 2016), Fisher information
matrix (Larsen et al., 1996), NN-structure aided Kronecker-factored inversion (Martens & Grosse,
2015). Lorraine et al. (2020) use the Neumann inverse approximation, which is a stable alternative to
CG (Shaban et al., 2019) and successfully scale gradient-based bilevel-optimization to large networks
with constant memory constraint. It is shown that unrolling differentiation around locally optimal
weights for i steps is equivalent to approximating the Neumann series inverse approximation up to
the first i terms.
Differentiable NAS methods, e.g., DARTS (Liu et al., 2018) explore the possibility of transforming
the discrete neural architecture space into a continuously differentiable form and further uses gradient
optimization to search the neural architecture. DARTS follows a cell-based search space (Zoph et al.,
2018) and continuously relaxes the original discrete search strategy. Despite its simplicity, several
work cast double on the effectiveness of DARTS (Li & Talwalkar, 2020; Zela et al., 2019). SNAS (Xie
et al., 2018) points out that DARTS suffers from the unbounded bias issue towards its objective, and
it remodels the NAS and leverages the Gumbel-softmax trick (Jang et al., 2017; Maddison et al.,
2017) to learn the exact architecture parameter. Differentiable NAS techniques have also been applied
to graphs to automatically design data-specific GNN architectures (Wang et al., 2021; Huan et al.,
2021).


E     I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS

In this section we list more implementation details on the experiments in Section 6.
For the synthetic experiments on CIFAR-10, we randomly split the CIFAR-10 images into M = 20
splits and perform cross validation. For the baseline methods (Random, SDC-GM, SDC-DM), the
dataset condensation is performed independently for each split. For HCDC, we first condense the
training set of the synthetic dataset by SDC-GM. Then, we learn a separate validation set of with
1/M -size of the training set and train with the HCDC objective on the M -HPO trajectories as
described in Section 4. We report the correlation between the ranking of splits (in terms of their
validation performance on this split). For the Early-Stopping method, we only train the same number
iterations as the other methods (with the same batchsize), which means there are only c/n вҲ— 500
epochs.
For the experiments about finding the best convolution filter on (large) graphs, we create the set
of ten candidate convolution filters as (see Table 4 for definitions and references) GCN, SAGE-
Mean, SAGE-Max, GAT, GIN-Пө, GIN-0, SGC(K=2), SGC(K=3), ChebNet(K=2), ChebNet(K-3).
The implementations are provided by PyTorch Geometric https://pytorch-geometric.
readthedocs.io/en/latest/modules/nn.html. We also select the GNN width from
{128, 256} and the GNN depth from {2, 4} so there are 10 Г— 2 Г— 2 = 40 models in total.


                                                  22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


For the experiments about speeding up off-the-shelf graph architecture search algorithms, we adopt
GraphNAS (Gao et al., 2019) togher with their proposed search space from their official repository
https://github.com/GraphNAS/GraphNAS. We apply to Ogbn-arxiv with condensation
ratio ctrain /n = 0.5%.


                                               23
