Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


T HE C HALLENGES OF E XPLORATION FOR
O FFLINE R EINFORCEMENT L EARNING
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                             A BSTRACT
         Offline Reinforcement Learning (ORL) enables us to separately study the two in-
         terlinked processes of reinforcement learning: collecting informative experience
         and inferring optimal behaviour. The second step has been widely studied in the
         offline setting, but just as critical to data-efficient RL is the collection of infor-
         mative data. The task-agnostic setting for data collection, where the task is not
         known a priori, is of particular interest due to the possibility of collecting a single
         dataset and using it to solve several downstream tasks as they arise. We investi-
         gate this setting via curiosity-based intrinsic motivation, a family of exploration
         methods which encourage the agent to explore those states or transitions it has not
         yet learned to model. With Explore2Offline, we propose to evaluate the quality
         of collected data by transferring the collected data and inferring policies with re-
         ward relabelling and standard offline RL algorithms. We evaluate a wide variety
         of data collection strategies, including a new exploration agent, Intrinsic Model
         Predictive Control (IMPC), using this scheme and demonstrate their performance
         on various tasks. We use this decoupled framework to strengthen intuitions about
         exploration and the data prerequisites for effective offline RL.


1   I NTRODUCTION
The field of offline reinforcement learning (ORL) is growing quickly, motivated by its promise to
use previously-collected datasets to produce new high-quality policies. It enables the disentangling
of collection and inference processes underlying effective RL (Riedmiller et al., 2021). To date, the
majority of research in the offline RL setting has focused on the inference side - the extraction of a
performant policy given a dataset, but just as crucial is the development of the dataset itself. While
challenges of the inference step are increasingly well investigated (Levine et al., 2020; Agarwal
et al., 2020), we instead investigate the collection step. For evaluation, we investigate correlations
between the properties of collected data and final performance, how much data is necessary, and
the impact of different collection strategies. Whereas most existing benchmarks for ORL (Fu et al.,
2020; Gulcehre et al., 2020) focus on the single-task setting with the task known a priori, we evaluate
the potential of task-agnostic exploration methods to collect datasets for previously-unknown tasks.
Task-agnostic data is an exciting avenue to pursue to illuminate potential tasks of interest in a space
via unsupervised learning. In this setting, we transfer information from the unsupervised pretraining
phase not via the policy (Yarats et al., 2021) but via the collected data.
Historically the question of how to act - and therefore collect data - in RL has been studied through
the exploration-exploitation trade-off, which amounts to a balance of an agent’s goals in solving a
task immediately versus collecting data to perform better in the future. Task-agnostic exploration ex-
pands this well-studied direction towards how to explore in the absence of knowledge about current
or future agent goals (Dasagi et al., 2019). In this work, we particularly focus on intrinsic moti-
vation (Oudeyer & Kaplan, 2009), which explores novel states based on rewards derived from the
agent’s internal information. These intrinsic rewards can take many forms, such as curiosity-based
methods that learning a world model (Burda et al., 2018b; Pathak et al., 2017; Shyam et al., 2019),
data-based methods that optimize statistical properties of the agent’s experience (Yarats et al., 2021),
or competence-based metrics that extract skills (Eysenbach et al., 2018). In particular, we perform
a wide study of data collected via curiosity-based exploration methods, similar to ExORL (Yarats
et al., 2022). In addition, we introduce a novel method for effectively combining curiosity-based
rewards with model predictive control.


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                      Intrinsic Exploration Agent                       Offline Reinforcement Learning
                      Task-agnostic Intrinsic Rewards                via Critic Regularized Regression (CRR)


                                                    Record Agent’s       Task-agnostic
                                                      Experience          transitions



                 Reward Model

                                                                                          Extrinsic Reward
                                                                                              Function

Figure 1: The Explore2Offline framework for evaluating data-efficient intrinsic agents. First the
agent acts in the environment task-agnostically to search for novel states. After a set lifetime, the
agent experience stored in a replay buffer is labeled with the rewards of a task of interest. This
replay buffer is used to train an RL policy with the offline reinforcement learning algorithm Critic
Regularized Regression in order to finally evaluate the quality of exploration in the environment.


In Explore2Offline, we use offline RL as a mechanism for evaluating exploration performance of
these curiosity-based models, which separates the fundamental feedback loop key to RL in order
to disentangle questions of collection and inference Riedmiller et al. (2021) as displayed in Fig. 1.
With this methodology, our paper has a series of contributions for understanding properties and
applications of data collected by curiosity-based agents.
Contribution 1: We propose Explore2Offline to combine offline RL and reward relabelling for
transferring information gained in the data from task-agnostic exploration to downstream tasks. Our
results showcase how experiences from intrinsic exploration can solve many tasks, partially reaching
similar performance to state-of-the-art online RL data collection.
Contribution 2: We propose Intrinsic Model Predictive Control (IMPC) which combines a learned
dynamics model and a curiosity approach to enable online planning for exploration to minimize
the potential of stale intrinsic rewards. A large sweep over existing and new methods shows where
task-agnostic exploration succeeds and where it fails.
Contribution 3: By investigating multi-task downstream learning, we highlight a further strength
of task-agnostic data collection where each datapoint can be assigned multiple rewards in hindsight.

2     R ELATED W ORKS
2.1   C URIOSITY- DRIVEN E XPLORATION

Intrinsic exploration is a well studied direction in reinforcement learning with the goal of enabling
agents to generate compelling behavior in any environment by having an internal reward represen-
tation. Curiosity-driven learning uses learned models to reward agents that reach states with high
modelling error or uncertainty. Many recent works use the prediction error of a learned neural net-
work model to reward agents’ that see new states Burda et al. (2018b); Pathak et al. (2017). Often,
the intrinsic curiosity agents are trained with on-policy RL algorithms such as Proximal Policy Op-
timization (PPO) to maintain recent reward labels for visited states. Burda et al. (2018a) did a wide
study on different intrinsic reward models, focusing on pixel-based learning. Instead, we use off-
policy learning and re-label the intrinsic rewards associated with a tuple when learning the policy.
Other strategies for using learned dynamics models to explore is to reward agents based on the vari-
ance of the predictions Pathak et al.; Sekar et al. or the value function (Lowrey et al., 2018). We
build on recent advancements in intrinsic curiosity with the Intrinsic Model Predictive Control agent
that has two new properties: online planning of states to explore and using a separate reward model
from the dynamics model used for control.

2.2   U NSUPERVISED P RETRAINING IN RL

Recent works have proposed a two-phase RL setting consisting of a long “pretraining” phase in a
version of the environment without rewards, and a sample-limited “task learning” phase with visible
rewards (Schwarzer et al., 2021). In this setting the agent attempts to learn task-agnostic information
about the environment in the first phase, then rapidly re-explore to find rewards and produce a policy


                                                            2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


specialized to the task. Various methods have addressed this setting with diverse policy ensembles,
such as a policy conditioned on a random variable whose marginal state distribution exhibits high
coverage (Eysenbach et al., 2018) or finding a set of policies with diverse successor features (Hansen
et al., 2020). Similarly Liu & Abbeel (2021) learn a single policy which approximately maximizes
the estimated entropy of its state distribution in a contrastive representation space. Another strategy
collects diverse data during the pretraining phase and uses it to learn representations and exploration
rewards that are beneficial for downstream tasks (Yarats et al., 2021). A central focus of all of these
methods is delivering agents which can explore efficiently at task learning time. While the pretrain-
ing and data collection phases of unsupervised RL pretraining and Explore2Offline (respectively)
are similar, in Explore2Offline the task learning phase is performed on relabeled offline transitions,
enabling us to use information acquired throughout training and not only the final policy.


2.3   E VALUATING TASK - AGNOSTIC E XPLORATION

While there are many proposed methods for exploration, evaluation of exploration methods is varied.
Recent work in exploration have proposed a variety of evaluation metrics, including fine-tuning of
agents post-exploration (Laskin et al., 2021), sample-efficiency and peak performance of online
RL (Whitney et al., 2021), zero-shot transfer of learned dynamics models (Sekar et al.), multi-
environment transfer (Parisi et al., 2021), and skill extraction to a separate curriculum (Groth et al.,
2021). Task-agnostic exploration has been investigated via random data (Cabi et al., 2019) and
intrinsic motivation as a source of data for offline RL (Dasagi et al., 2019; Endrawis et al., 2021),
but has only been evaluated in the single-task setting and limited by current ORL implementations.
Offline RL is a compelling candidate for evaluating exploration data because of its emerging ability
to generalize across experiences in addition to imitating useful behaviors.
Complementary work echoes the importance of data collection for offline RL from the perspective
of unsupervised RL (Yarats et al., 2022), while our work focuses more on the relationship between
the exploration challenges of an environment and how a new exploration algorithm could address
current data generation shortcomings.


2.4   O FFLINE R EINFORCEMENT L EARNING

With Offline Reinforcement Learning, we decouple the learning mechanism from exploration by
training agents from fixed datasets. Various recent methods have demonstrated strong performance
in the offline setting (Wang et al., 2020; Kumar et al., 2020; Peng et al., 2019; Fujimoto & Gu, 2021).
In Explore2Offline we use a variant of Critic Regularised Regression (Wang et al., 2020).
Many datasets and benchmarks such as D4RL (Fu et al., 2020) and RL Unplugged (Gulcehre et al.,
2020) have been proposed to investigate different approaches. The use of offline datasets has even
been extended to improve online RL performance (Nair et al., 2020). Our goal is related; instead
of investigating multiple offline RL approaches, we investigate mechanisms to generate datasets
for downstream tasks. Analysis over the desired state-action and reward distributions for ORL are
studied, but little work is done to address how best to generate this data (Schweighofer et al., 2021).
On the theory side, recent works have investigated the Explore2Offline setting, which they call
“reward-free exploration” (Jin et al., 2020; Kaufmann et al., 2021). These works study algorithms
which guarantee the discovery of ε-optimal policies after polynomially many episodes of task-
agnostic data collection, though the algorithms they study are not straightforwardly applicable to
the high-dimensional deep RL setting with function approximation.


2.5   R EWARD R ELABELLING

By using off-policy or even offline learning, data generated for one task and reward can be applied
to learn a variety of potential tasks. In off-policy RL, we can identify useful rewards for an existing
trajectory based on later states from the same trajectories (Andrychowicz et al., 2017), uncertainty
over a trajectory (Nasiriany et al., 2021), distribution of goals (Nasiriany et al., 2021), related tasks
(Riedmiller et al., 2021; Wulfmeier et al., 2019), agent-intrinsic tasks (Wulfmeier et al., 2021), via
inverse reinforcement learning (Eysenbach et al., 2020) as well as other mechanisms (Li et al., 2020).


                                                   3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


In the context of pure offline RL, we can go one step further as we are not required to find the optimal
tasks for stored trajectory data. In this setting, data can be used for learning with a massive set of
rewards such as all states visited along stored trajectories (Chebotar et al., 2021). We will evaluate
our approaches for exploration across downstream tasks and relabel data with all possible tasks.


3     M ETHODOLOGY

3.1   R EINFORCEMENT L EARNING

Reinforcement Learning (RL) is a framework where an agent interacts with an environment to solve
a task by trial and error. The objective of an agent is often to maximize the cumulative future reward
on a predetermined task, E[ ∑τ =0 γ rτ ∣s0 = st ].We utilize the setting where an agent’s interactions
                                 ∞     τ

with an environment are modeled as a Markov Decision Process (MDP). A MDP is defined by a
state of the environment s, an action a that is taken by an agent according to a policy πθ (st ), a
transition function p(st+1 ∣st , at ) governing the next state distribution, and a discount factor γ ∈
[0, 1] weighting future rewards. With a transition in dynamics, the agent receives a reward rt from
the environment and stores the SARS data in a dataset D ∶ {sk , ak , rk , sk+1 }. Alternatively to
this environment-centric reward formulation is the concept of intrinsic rewards, where the agent
maximizes an internal notion of reward in an task-agnostic manner to collect data.

3.2   C URIOSITY- DRIVEN E XPLORATION

Existing Methods Reaching new, valuable areas of the state-space is crucial to solving sparse
tasks with RL. One method to balance attaining new experiences, exploration, with the goal of
solving a task, exploitation, is using curiosity models. Curiosity models are a subset of intrinsic
                                                                      int.
rewards an agent can use to explore by creating a reward signal, r . These models encourage
exploration by optimizing the signal from a learned model that corresponds to a modeling error or
uncertainty, which often occurs at states that have not been visited frequently. We deploy a series
of intrinsic models: the simplest, Next Step Model Error maximizes the error of a learned one-step
model r = ∥ŝt+1 − st+1 ∥ , Random Network Distillation (RND) maximizes the distance of a
         int.                  2

learned state encoding to that of a static encoding r = ∥η̂(st ) − η(s)∥ (Burda et al., 2018b),
                                                     int.                    2

the Intrinsic Curiosity Module (ICM) maximizes the error on a forward dynamics model learned
in the latent space, φ(s), of a inverse dynamics model r = ∥φ̂t − φ∥ (Pathak et al., 2017), and
                                                          int.             2

Dynamics Disagreement (DD) maximizes the variance of an ensemble of learned one-step dynamics
models r = σ(ŝt+1 ) (Pathak et al.).
          int.     i



Intrinsic Model Predictive Control
Model Predictive Control (MPC) on a                 Uninteresting State

learned model has been used for con-                Memory Novel State

trol across a variety of simulated an real          Current Novel State

                                                   Executed     Imagined
world settings (Wieber; Camacho & Alba,            Behavior     Trajectories
2013), including recently with model-                                        Online Intrinsic Planning Agent
based reinforcement learning (MBRL)
algorithms (Williams et al., 2017; Chua Figure 2: A conceptual depiction of an exploration
et al., 2018; Lambert et al., 2019). MBRL with foresight via planning. By simulating the fu-
using MPC is an iterative loop of learning a ture with a learned dynamics model, ideally an agent
predictive model of environment dynamics should be able to avoid damaging states before hav-
fθ (⋅) (e.g. a one-step transition model), and ing experienced them to collect interesting data in a
acting in the environment through the use sample-efficient manner.
of model based planning with the learned
model. This planning step usually involves optimizing for a sequence of actions that maximizes
the expected future reward (Eqn. 1), for example, via sample based optimization; the MPC loop
executes the first action of this sequence followed by replanning.
                                         τ
                         a = arg max ∑ r(ŝt , at ), s.t. ŝt+1 = fθ (st , at ).                        (1)
                                at∶t+τ   t



                                                     4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


               Curiosity Model              Training Labels       Eval. Labels       MPC Compatible
    Random Network Distillation (RND)             {s}                 {s}                 Yes
                                               {s, a, s }          {s, a, s }
                                                       ′                   ′
    Intrinsic Curiosity Module (ICM)                                                      No
                                               {s, a, s }          {s, a, s }
                                                       ′                   ′
    Next Step Model Error (NSM)                                                           No
                                               {s, a, s }            {s, a}
                                                       ′
    Dynamics Dissimilarity (DD)                                                           Yes
Table 1: The intrinsic models used with the components of a tuple needed for training and evaluation.
To function with planning, an intrinsic model cannot need access to the next state to compute reward.


The reward function r defines the behavior of the planned sequence of actions in model-based plan-
ning. For task-specific RL this can be the task reward function (known or estimated from data).
Instead, our Intrinsic MPC (IMPC) agent uses a curiosity based reward for planning in order to en-
courage task agnostic exploration by reasoning about what states are currently interesting and novel.
The goal of planning being used to visit new interesting states, rather than states that were recorded
with high intrinsic reward in the replay memory is shown in Fig. 2. This evaluation occurs by sam-
pling action sequences, unrolling them using the forward dynamics model, scoring the rollouts with
the learned curiosity model, and finally taking the first action of the sequence with the highest score.
Given that this evaluation happens with access to only imagined states and a proposed action, only
a subset of intrinsic models can be used with planning, as summarized in Tab. 1. We primarily
evaluate IMPC using the RND curiosity model, but we also present results with the DD model.
We use the Cross Entropy Method (CEM) (De Boer et al.), a sample based optimization procedure
for planning. Inspired by prior work Byravan et al. (2021) we use a policy to generate action can-
didates for the planner; this policy is trained using the Maximum a-posteriori Policy Optimization
(MPO) algorithm (Abdolmaleki et al., 2018) from data generated by the MPC actor. Additionally, to
amortize the cost of planning we interleave planning with directly executing actions sampled from
the learned policy. This is achieved by specifying a planning probability 0 < ρ < 1; at each step in
the actor loop we choose either to plan or execute the policy action according to ρ (we use ρ = 0.9).
Additional algorithmic details are included in Appendix A.1.

3.3    O FFLINE R EINFORCEMENT L EARNING

To train an agent offline from task-agnostic exploration data, we determine rewards from observa-
tions in hindsight. While the approach relies on the ability to compute rewards based on observa-
tions, a large set of tasks can be described in this manner (Li et al., 2020). In comparison to online
learning, we have the benefit that we do not need to determine for which task data is most infor-
mative given a commensurate number of tasks. Instead we can relabel the data with all possible
rewards to maximise its utility. Given the new task rewards, we replace the intrinsic reward in our
trajectory data and apply a variant of a recent state-of-the-art offline RL algorithm, Critic Regu-
larised Regression (CRR) Wang et al. (2020). While we apply CRR for our investigation, the overall
method is general in that it could be applied with other approaches. We iteratively update critic and
actor optimising their respective losses following Equation 2 and 3.
                   LQ = EB [D(Qθ (st , at ), (rt + γEat ∼π(st+1 ) Qθ′ (st+1 , at )))],              (2)

Since we use a distributional categorical critic, we apply the divergence measure D instead of the
squared Euclidean loss, following (Bellemare et al.). With f = ReLU(Â(st , at )) and Â the advan-
                                        N
tage estimator via Qπ (st , at ) − 1/m ∑i=1 Qπ (st , ai ), the policy is optimized as:

                   π(at ∣st ) = arg max E(st ,at )∼B [f (Qπ , π, st , at ) log π(a∣s)].             (3)
                                    π


4     E XPERIMENTS
4.1    E XPERIMENTAL S ETTING

Exploration Agents In this work we benchmark a variety of task-agnostic exploration agents.
We classify agents as reactive, selecting actions with a policy, or planning, selecting actions by


                                                    5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                          Explore Suite                X Control Suite
                                             Task-aware                                                                                      Task-aware


                                                                                          Offline RL Evaluation Episode Reward
 Observed Exploration Reward


                                       Dataset Size (Environment Steps)                                                                     Dataset Size (Environment Steps)

Figure 4: Comparing the collected rewards of an exploration agent (left) to the reward achieved
when training an offline RL algorithm on the same data (right). There is a substantial gain in
performance with offline RL algorithms simply by having more data, irregardless as to if the data
                                                       th        th
has higher density of observed rewards. The median, 90 and 10 percentiles are shown for each
agent, combined across tasks. Note: the MPO agent learns online and is the only task-aware method.


optimizing over trajectories. The reactive agents are trained with Maximum Apriori Optimization
(MPO) (Abdolmaleki et al., 2018) and include the curiosity models RND, DD, ICM, and NS. We
compare these to IMPC with DD and RND optimized with CEM and a fixed random agent that sam-
ples from the action distribution. Some figures will include a label of MPO, which corresponds to the
benchmark of the task-aware RL agents, which provides interesting context to Explore2Offline. The
online agent represents the state-of-the-art performance when the task is known a priori – matching
it without an environment reward function would highlight the potential of Explore2Offline.

Environments In this work, we investigate                                                                                           Reacher, Easy                         Walker, Stand
the exploration performance of a variety of
DeepMind Control Suite tasks (Tassa et al.,
2018). We evaluate 4 domains (Ball-in-Cup,
Finger, Reacher, and Walker) including 14
tasks with a variety of state-action sizes, with
further details included in the Appendix. In or-
der to include more challenging environments                                                                                     Reacher, Easy Explore               Walker, Stand Explore
for task-agnostic exploration, we use modifica-
tions proposed by Whitney et al. (2021), Ex-
plore Suite, which include constrained initial
states and sparser reward functions.

4.2                            TASK -AGNOSTIC DATA C OLLECTION

We compare the amount of task-reward re-
ceived per-episode across a variety of agents
and tasks, which is an intuitive metric for ex-
                                                   Figure 3: Collected reward per-episode (1000
ploration agent performance but can only act
                                                   env. steps) distributions across a subset of tasks
as a proxy for exploration. To evaluate task-
                                                   and their Explore Suite variants. Boxplots show
agnostic reward, the exploration agents are run
                                                   the median episode reward (red line), 25th and
without access to the environment rewards,
                                                   75th percentiles (box), and the maximum and
with the rewards are relabelled after. The dis-
                                                   minimum reward computed over 5000 training
tributions of normalized reward achieved dur-
                                                   episodes (whiskers). Only a horizontal line indi-
ing the 5000 training episodes for four example
                                                   cates that the episode reward is equal or near 0.
tasks are documented for all of the exploration
agents in Fig. 3. Crucially, the Explore Suite variants are challenging for the random agent across
its lifetime, where all of the examples shown have median episode-reward of 0. There is a wide
diversity in the agent-task pairings by proxy of measuring experienced reward, showcasing the large
potential of future work to better understand this area.
To give an overall view of data collection for each agent, we show in Fig. 4 (left) the Control and
                                                                        th         th
Explore Suite average collected reward across all tasks. The median, 90 and 10 percentiles are


                                                                                          6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


  Domain, Task                                  Best Task-Agnostic                    Random Agent      IMPC-RND               Task-Aware
  Ball-in-Cup, Catch                                  973.28                             943.04           973.40                 984.11
  Ball-in-Cup, Catch Exp.                             962.56                               0.00           938.59                 974.27
  Finger, Turn Easy                                   981.76                             822.27           981.76                 983.16
  Finger, Turn Easy Exp.                              947.94                             915.97           944.22                 968.67
  Finger, Turn hard                                   975.33                             543.57           975.33                 977.27
  Finger, Turn hard Exp.                              952.63                             690.79           595.06                 965.60
  Reacher, Easy                                       955.01                             955.01           900.67                 766.79
  Reacher, Easy Exp.                                  813.91                             612.77           740.70                 973.91
  Reacher, Hard                                       719.90                             428.38           719.90                 587.37
  Reacher, Hard Exp.                                  930.95                             261.20           410.78                 973.91
  Walker, Stand                                       534.99                             297.63           302.12                 991.73
  Walker, Stand Exp.                                  258.55                             243.53            81.28                 982.79
  Walker, Walk                                        445.53                             146.76            96.88                 978.36
  Walker, Walk Exp.                                   426.07                              47.54            78.88                 975.06
                                                                      6
Table 2: The best performance with 5 × 10 transition datasets for all 7 task-agnostic exploration
agents, the specific performance of Random Agent and IMPC-RND (to illustrate strengths and weak-
nesses), and the task-aware MPO agent (the reported number is the median across 3 ORL seeds on
a fixed dataset). Bold represents the best reward across a task and the median of near-best agents
                     th     th
being within the 10 -to-90 percentile range of the best agent. This shows where exploration agents
perform similarly and consistently to online RL for dataset collection. Even for some tasks where
intrinsic agents are near to task-aware exploration, the online RL has much tighter performance
across seeds. Results for all agents are shown in Appendix A.3.



                                  Finger, Turn-Easy       Finger, Turn-Easy Explore      Walker, Walk   Walker, Walk Explore
              Offline RL Reward


                                                      Observed Reward During Collection Episodes
Figure 5: Correlation of final offline RL performance to cumulative reward in the training set on
two example tasks and their explore-suite variants. The ORL performances are the median across 3
trials for each task and agent. As the dataset sizes we use span many orders of magnitude of samples,
both axes are plotted on a log-scale. Across all tasks, there is a trend of more reward in the training
distribution relating to a better performing CRR agent.


shown for each agent, combined across tasks. Here we also show what reward a task-aware agent
(MPO) will collect in its lifetime. It is included to indicate an upper target for exploration, rather than
a competitive baseline. An important artifact here is the random agent’s flatness of reward achieved
across time – the other exploration agents show an increase in median reward as the dataset size
grows (especially on Explore Suite). This change in reward distribution across dataset size indicates
a diversity of behaviors in the intrinsic exploration agents, while the random agent receives reward
from the same distribution repeatedly. This can be seen as a curiosity-based agent such as IMPC
with RND achieves varied rewards and the random agent has a repeated reward distribution.
While the collected reward can be a indicator of the usefulness of an exploration agent, it is not
directly transferable to a task-focused policy capable of solving tasks. Without careful environment
design, task-agnostic agents focusing on novel states will cover the entire state-space regardless of
the predefined downstream task.

4.3   E VALUATING O FFLINE RL ON E XPLORATION DATA


                                                                               7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023



                                                                                                    Target task
                                                       1,000         Training           Easy Transfer      Medium Transfer     Hard Transfer
We study the performance of intrinsic
agents via a SOTA offline reinforcement                    800
learning algorithm, Critic Regularized Re-


                                               Pointmass
                                                           600
gression (CRR) (Wang et al., 2020). For
each agent, 3 policies were trained on                     400
                                           3
dataset sizes within the range of 2 × 10                   200
           6
to 5 × 10 environment steps. The mean
                                                            0
of the performance across all explore and
control suite tasks with confidence inter-             1,000
vals is shown in Fig. 4 (right). Due to
                                                           800
the width of this study, we were only able
to evaluate the offline RL performance on


                                               Finger
                                                           600

3 seeds per each collected dataset – the
                                                           400
median, max and min across these three
policies from CRR are shown in each sub-                   200

plot. Here, we see three core findings that
                                                            0
we will continue to detail: 1) for dataset


                                                             MPO + NextStep


                                                                                    MPO + NextStep


                                                                                                        MPO + NextStep


                                                                                                                             MPO + NextStep
                                                              MPO + RND


                                                                                     MPO + RND


                                                                                                         MPO + RND


                                                                                                                              MPO + RND
                                                              MPC + RND


                                                                                     MPC + RND


                                                                                                         MPC + RND


                                                                                                                              MPC + RND
                                                              MPO Online


                                                                                     MPO Online


                                                                                                         MPO Online


                                                                                                                              MPO Online
                                                              MPO + ICM


                                                                                     MPO + ICM


                                                                                                         MPO + ICM


                                                                                                                              MPO + ICM
                                                               MPO + DD


                                                                                      MPO + DD


                                                                                                          MPO + DD


                                                                                                                               MPO + DD
                                                               MPC + DD


                                                                                      MPC + DD


                                                                                                          MPC + DD


                                                                                                                               MPC + DD
                  5
sizes < 1 × 10 , there is little benefit
to task-aware learning for data collection
and the random agent is a strong baseline                                       MPC + Exploration   MPO + Exploration   Online
versus other intrinsic model-based agents;                                                    Agent type
2) on larger datasets, the task-aware RL         Figure 6: Performance across tasks in the Finger and
method, MPO, jumps ahead of the explor-          Pointmass domains for offline RL agents trained on a
ers, but the exploration agents all continue     single dataset. From left to right the tasks become qual-
to improve in offline RL performance with        itatively less similar to the initial task. Task-agnostic
more data; 3) the novel IMPC approach            exploration regimes show the potential for better per-
with RND, along with existing methods of         formance over task-aware learning, but the results are
MPO with RND or DD, performs best on             varied across task.
average with the largest datasets.
To showcase which tasks are solved by the Explore2Offline framework, we document the median
                                                          6
performance of the exploration agents with the full 5 × 10 steps training set size versus the task-
aware MPO in Tab. 2. Explore2Offline with these agents solve all but the Walker domain tasks, with
further results included in the Appendix.
To highlight why dataset size and observed reward are such powerful indicators of ORL perfor-
mance, we show in Fig. 5 the correlation for the Finger Turn and Walker Walk tasks of the cumu-
lative reward in a dataset versus the offline RL performance for that dataset. There is a clear trend
of more reward resulting in a better policy for the tasks paired with the environment. Fig. 7 uses
Spearman’s rank correlation to visualise how dataset size is a considerably better predictor of perfor-
mance than any reward statistics including mean, sum or 80% quantile. This further emphasises the
importance to transfer via increasingly large datasets instead instead of the final exploration policy.
In the next section we will evaluate how re-using data from task-agnostic exploration can enable
multi-task performance.


4.4   E VALUATING TASK - AGNOSTIC DATA FOR M ULTITASK RL

A key motivation for collecting task-agnostic data is its applicability when there are a variety of
downstream tasks of interest, including those which might not be known at data collection time.
In the ideal case, task-agnostic exploration could collect a single dataset, then offline RL could
consume that data (along with relabeled rewards) to solve arbitrary tasks. We evaluate the quality of
datasets collected by various exploration agents for use with multiple downstream tasks.
For this evaluation we collected one dataset for the Pointmass and Finger environments using each
of seven exploration agents, then trained policies for downstream tasks by relabeling the data with
different reward functions. Each of the tasks is defined by a sparse +1 reward corresponding to a
particular goal state. As a baseline, the Online agent collects experience using a standard online RL
algorithm as it learns to solve a “Training” task, while all of the other data collection agents are task
agnostic. The datasets collected by each agent are evaluated with offline RL on the “Training” task


                                                                 8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


and three others: “Easy Transfer”, “Medium Transfer”, and “Hard Transfer”. These datasets are
ranked in the level of challenge that a task-aware agent has in generalization. Tasks increase in chal-
lenge when goals require moving farther away from the training goal, which can be either travelling
further in the same direction (often easier) or entirely misaligned (for harder generalization). Due
to the dynamics of the systems, farther-away targets may be easier to discover, e.g. the “Medium
Transfer” target for Pointmass lies in the corner of the arena. Full details of these environments,
along with experiments on three more, are available in Appendix A.4.
The performance of the exploration agents and the
task-aware MPO agent are varied across the tasks
as shown in Fig. 6. Depicted is the mean reward
achieved of offline RL policies trained on 3 ran-
                                             6
dom seeds for each of 3 datasets of 5 × 10 transi-
tions. While collecting data specifically for the tar-
get downstream task is the best option when the data
will be used only on that task, the task-aware per-
formance can degrade on even a slightly misaligned
test-task when compared to task-agnostic counter-
parts. The potential for multitask transfer of ex-       Figure 7: Spearman’s rank correlation be-
ploration agents is highlighted, but further work is     tween performance of the ORL policy and
needed in more open ended environments to show           data statistics such as reward (mean, cumula-
                                                                      th
the potential of Explore2Offline.                        tive and 80 quantile) as well as dataset size
                                                         for task-agnostic datasets.

5   D ISCUSSION
Explore2Offline points to interesting directions for further understanding and utilizing task-agnostic
exploration agents. To start, there are two trends that point to a need for further work on explo-
ration methods. On average across our evaluation suite, the random agent performs very closely to
the curiosity-based methods, and any particular exploration method varies substantially across task.
The performance of the random agent suggests some similarities in the data collected by the random
agent and the curiosity-based methods. As mentioned previously, curiosity-based methods are ex-
haustive (given enough time), and do not consider useful trends that may be common in downstream
tasks. This shows a need for future exploration methods to be able to prioritize interesting subsets
of a state-space and generalize across domains to create flexible agents.
Although our evaluation demonstrates the potential of using offline RL on task-agnostic data, there
is substantial variation across task-agent pairings with the chosen static offline RL algorithm (CRR).
This variation needs to be studied in more detail to better understand the limitations posed by the
algorithm, and differentiate them from the quality of the data itself.
The intrinsic MPC agent can be progressed by utilizing it in other forms of deep RL evaluation. By
transferring a learned dynamics model, this flexible exploration agent could also be evaluated as a
task-aware agent (i.e. zero-shot learning of a new task) or in online RL by weighting the intrinsic
reward model and the environment reward (i.e. better explore-exploit balance).

6   C ONCLUSION
We introduce Explore2Offline, a method for utilizing task-agnostic data for policy learning of un-
known downstream tasks. We describe how an agent can be used to collect the requisite data once
for solving multiple tasks, and demonstrate performance comparable to an online learning agent.
Additionally, we show policies trained on task-agnostic data may be robust to variations to the ini-
tial task compared to task-aware learning, resulting in better transfer performance. Finally, data from
the new exploration agent, Intrinsic Model Predictive Control, performs strongly across many tasks.
As offline RL emerges as a useful tool in more domains, a deeper understanding of the required
data for learning will be needed. Directions for future work include developing better exploration
methods specifically for offline training, and identification of experiences with high information for
effective datasets.


                                                  9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


R EFERENCES
Abbas Abdolmaleki, Jost Tobias Springenberg, Yuval Tassa, Remi Munos, Nicolas Heess, and Mar-
  tin Riedmiller. Maximum a posteriori policy optimisation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1806.06920,
  2018.
Rishabh Agarwal, Dale Schuurmans, and Mohammad Norouzi. An optimistic perspective on offline
  reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 104–114. PMLR,
  2020.
Marcin Andrychowicz, Filip Wolski, Alex Ray, Jonas Schneider, Rachel Fong, Peter Welinder, Bob
 McGrew, Josh Tobin, Pieter Abbeel, and Wojciech Zaremba. Hindsight experience replay. arXiv
 preprint arXiv:1707.01495, 2017.
Marc G Bellemare, Will Dabney, and Rémi Munos. A distributional perspective on reinforcement
 learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning.
Zdravko I Botev, Dirk P Kroese, Reuven Y Rubinstein, and Pierre L’Ecuyer. The cross-entropy
  method for optimization. In Handbook of statistics, volume 31.
Yuri Burda, Harri Edwards, Deepak Pathak, Amos Storkey, Trevor Darrell, and Alexei A Efros.
  Large-scale study of curiosity-driven learning. preprint arXiv:1808.04355, 2018a.
Yuri Burda, Harrison Edwards, Amos Storkey, and Oleg Klimov. Exploration by random network
  distillation. In Int. Conference on Learning Representations, 2018b.
Arunkumar Byravan, Leonard Hasenclever, Piotr Trochim, Mehdi Mirza, Alessandro Davide Ia-
  longo, Yuval Tassa, Jost Tobias Springenberg, Abbas Abdolmaleki, Nicolas Heess, Josh Merel,
  et al. Evaluating model-based planning and planner amortization for continuous control. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2110.03363, 2021.
Serkan Cabi, Sergio Gomez Colmenarejo, Alexander Novikov, Ksenia Konyushkova, Scott E. Reed,
  Rae Jeong, Konrad Zolna, Yusuf Aytar, David Budden, Mel Vecerı́k, Oleg O. Sushkov, David
  Barker, Jonathan Scholz, Misha Denil, Nando de Freitas, and Ziyun Wang. A framework for
  data-driven robotics. ArXiv, abs/1909.12200, 2019.
Eduardo F Camacho and Carlos Bordons Alba. Model predictive control. Springer science, 2013.
Yevgen Chebotar, Karol Hausman, Yao Lu, Ted Xiao, Dmitry Kalashnikov, Jake Varley, Alex Irpan,
  Benjamin Eysenbach, Ryan Julian, Chelsea Finn, et al. Actionable models: Unsupervised offline
  reinforcement learning of robotic skills. arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.07749, 2021.
Kurtland Chua, Roberto Calandra, Rowan McAllister, and Sergey Levine. Deep reinforcement learn-
  ing in a handful of trials using probabilistic dynamics models. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 31, 2018.
Vibhavari Dasagi, Robert Lee, Jake Bruce, and Jürgen Leitner. Evaluating task-agnostic exploration
  for fixed-batch learning of arbitrary future tasks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1911.08666, 2019.
Pieter-Tjerk De Boer, Dirk P Kroese, Shie Mannor, and Reuven Y Rubinstein. A tutorial on the
  cross-entropy method. Annals of operations research, 134(1).
Shadi Endrawis, Gal Leibovich, Guy Jacob, Gal Novik, and Aviv Tamar. Efficient self-supervised
  data collection for offline robot learning. In 2021 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and
  Automation (ICRA), pp. 4650–4656. IEEE, 2021.
Benjamin Eysenbach, Abhishek Gupta, Julian Ibarz, and Sergey Levine. Diversity is all you need:
  Learning skills without a reward function. arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.06070, 2018.
Benjamin Eysenbach, Xinyang Geng, Sergey Levine, and Ruslan Salakhutdinov. Rewriting history
  with inverse rl: Hindsight inference for policy improvement. arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.11089,
  2020.
Justin Fu, Aviral Kumar, Ofir Nachum, George Tucker, and Sergey Levine. D4rl: Datasets for deep
  data-driven reinforcement learning. preprint arXiv:2004.07219, 2020.


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Scott Fujimoto and Shixiang Shane Gu. A minimalist approach to offline reinforcement learning.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.06860, 2021.
Oliver Groth, Markus Wulfmeier, Giulia Vezzani, Vibhavari Dasagi, Tim Hertweck, Roland Hafner,
  Nicolas Heess, and Martin Riedmiller. Is curiosity all you need? on the utility of emergent
  behaviours from curious exploration. arXiv preprint arXiv:2109.08603, 2021.
Caglar Gulcehre, Ziyu Wang, Alexander Novikov, Tom Le Paine, Sergio Gomez Colmenarejo, Kon-
  rad Zolna, Rishabh Agarwal, Josh Merel, Daniel Mankowitz, Cosmin Paduraru, et al. Rl un-
  plugged: Benchmarks for offline reinforcement learning. arXiv e-prints, 2020.
Steven Stenberg Hansen, Will Dabney, André Barreto, Tom Van de Wiele, David Warde-Farley,
  and Volodymyr Mnih. Fast task inference with variational intrinsic successor features. ArXiv,
  abs/1906.05030, 2020.
Chi Jin, Akshay Krishnamurthy, Max Simchowitz, and Tiancheng Yu. Reward-free exploration
  for reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 4870–4879.
  PMLR, 2020.
Emilie Kaufmann, Pierre Ménard, Omar Darwiche Domingues, Anders Jonsson, Edouard Leurent,
  and Michal Valko. Adaptive reward-free exploration. In Algorithmic Learning Theory, pp. 865–
  891. PMLR, 2021.
Aviral Kumar, Aurick Zhou, George Tucker, and Sergey Levine. Conservative q-learning for offline
  reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.04779, 2020.
Nathan O. Lambert, D. S. Drew, J. Yaconelli, S. Levine, R. Calandra, and K. S. J. Pister. Low-
  level control of a quadrotor with deep model-based reinforcement learning. IEEE Robotics and
  Automation Letters, 4(4), 2019.
Michael Laskin, Denis Yarats, Hao Liu, Kimin Lee, Albert Zhan, Kevin Lu, Catherine Cang, Lerrel
 Pinto, and Pieter Abbeel. Urlb: Unsupervised reinforcement learning benchmark. Advances in
 Neural Information Processing Systems, 2021.
Sergey Levine, Aviral Kumar, George Tucker, and Justin Fu. Offline reinforcement learning: Tuto-
  rial, review, and perspectives on open problems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.01643, 2020.
Alexander C Li, Lerrel Pinto, and Pieter Abbeel. Generalized hindsight for reinforcement learning.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.11708, 2020.
Hao Liu and Pieter Abbeel. Behavior from the void: Unsupervised active pre-training. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2103.04551, 2021.
Kendall Lowrey, Aravind Rajeswaran, Sham Kakade, Emanuel Todorov, and Igor Mordatch. Plan
  online, learn offline: Efficient learning and exploration via model-based control. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1811.01848, 2018.
Rémi Munos, Tom Stepleton, Anna Harutyunyan, and Marc G Bellemare. Safe and efficient off-
   policy reinforcement learning. preprint arXiv:1606.02647, 2016.
Ashvin Nair, Abhishek Gupta, Murtaza Dalal, and Sergey Levine. Awac: Accelerating online rein-
  forcement learning with offline datasets. arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.09359, 2020.
Soroush Nasiriany, Vitchyr H Pong, Ashvin Nair, Alexander Khazatsky, Glen Berseth, and Sergey
  Levine. Disco rl: Distribution-conditioned reinforcement learning for general-purpose policies.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.11707, 2021.
Pierre-Yves Oudeyer and Frederic Kaplan. What is intrinsic motivation? a typology of computa-
  tional approaches. Frontiers in neurorobotics, 1:6, 2009.
Simone Parisi, Victoria Dean, Deepak Pathak, and Abhinav Gupta. Interesting object, curious agent:
  Learning task-agnostic exploration. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34,
  2021.


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Deepak Pathak, Dhiraj Gandhi, and Abhinav Gupta. Self-supervised exploration via disagreement.
  In International conference on machine learning.
Deepak Pathak, Pulkit Agrawal, Alexei A Efros, and Trevor Darrell. Curiosity-driven exploration
  by self-supervised prediction. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 2778–2787.
  PMLR, 2017.
Xue Bin Peng, Aviral Kumar, Grace Zhang, and Sergey Levine. Advantage-weighted regression:
  Simple and scalable off-policy reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.00177, 2019.
Martin Riedmiller, Jost Tobias Springenberg, Roland Hafner, and Nicolas Heess. Collect & infer-a
 fresh look at data-efficient reinforcement learning. In 5th Annual Conference on Robot Learning,
 2021.
Max Schwarzer, Nitarshan Rajkumar, Michael Noukhovitch, Ankesh Anand, Laurent Charlin, R De-
 von Hjelm, Philip Bachman, and Aaron C Courville. Pretraining representations for data-efficient
 reinforcement learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:12686–12699,
 2021.
Kajetan Schweighofer, Markus Hofmarcher, Marius-Constantin Dinu, Philipp Renz, Angela Bitto-
  Nemling, Vihang Patil, and Sepp Hochreiter. Understanding the effects of dataset characteristics
  on offline reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2111.04714, 2021.
Ramanan Sekar, Oleh Rybkin, Kostas Daniilidis, Pieter Abbeel, Danijar Hafner, and Deepak Pathak.
  Planning to explore via self-supervised world models. In International Conference on Machine
  Learning.
Pranav Shyam, Wojciech Jaśkowski, and Faustino Gomez. Model-based active exploration. In
  International conference on machine learning, pp. 5779–5788. PMLR, 2019.
Yuval Tassa, Yotam Doron, Alistair Muldal, Tom Erez, Yazhe Li, Diego de Las Casas, David Bud-
  den, Abbas Abdolmaleki, Josh Merel, Andrew Lefrancq, et al. Deepmind control suite. preprint
  arXiv:1801.00690, 2018.
Ziyu Wang, Alexander Novikov, Konrad Zolna, Josh S Merel, Jost Tobias Springenberg, Scott E
  Reed, Bobak Shahriari, Noah Siegel, Caglar Gulcehre, Nicolas Heess, et al. Critic regularized
  regression. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33, 2020.
William F Whitney, Michael Bloesch, Jost Tobias Springenberg, Abbas Abdolmaleki, Kyunghyun
 Cho, and Martin Riedmiller. Decoupled exploration and exploitation policies for sample-efficient
 reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2101.09458, 2021.
Pierre-Brice Wieber. Trajectory free linear model predictive control for stable walking in the pres-
  ence of strong perturbations. In IEEE-RAS International Conference on Humanoid Robots.
Grady Williams, Nolan Wagener, Brian Goldfain, Paul Drews, James M Rehg, Byron Boots, and
  Evangelos A Theodorou. Information theoretic mpc for model-based reinforcement learning. In
  2017 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pp. 1714–1721. IEEE,
  2017.
Markus Wulfmeier, Abbas Abdolmaleki, Roland Hafner, Jost Tobias Springenberg, Michael Ne-
 unert, Tim Hertweck, Thomas Lampe, Noah Siegel, Nicolas Heess, and Martin Riedmiller. Com-
 positional transfer in hierarchical reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.11228, 2019.
Markus Wulfmeier, Arunkumar Byravan, Tim Hertweck, Irina Higgins, Ankush Gupta, Tejas Kulka-
 rni, Malcolm Reynolds, Denis Teplyashin, Roland Hafner, Thomas Lampe, et al. Representation
 matters: Improving perception and exploration for robotics. In 2021 IEEE International Confer-
 ence on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pp. 6512–6519. IEEE, 2021.
Denis Yarats, Rob Fergus, Alessandro Lazaric, and Lerrel Pinto. Reinforcement learning with pro-
  totypical representations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2102.11271, 2021.
Denis Yarats, David Brandfonbrener, Hao Liu, Michael Laskin, Pieter Abbeel, Alessandro Lazaric,
  and Lerrel Pinto. Don’t change the algorithm, change the data: Exploratory data for offline
  reinforcement learning, 2022.


                                                12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


      Domain           Task                    ds , da        Description & Explore Suite Modifications
                       Catch                                  Agent moves a cup to swing a ball attached
      Ball-in-Cup                               8,2
                       Catch Explore                          via string into it. The explore suite version
                                                              restricts the initial states to avoid trivial so-
                                                              lutions.
                       Turn-Easy                               Agent controls a finger, similar to a manip-
                       Turn-Easy Explore                       ulator, to interact with objects. The explore
      Finger                                    12,2
                       Turn-Hard                               suite version restricts the initial state of the
                       Turn-Hard Explore                       finger to be away from the object.
                       Turn-Easy                              Agent controls a 2d manipulator to reach
                       Turn-Easy Explore                      an arbitrary target state.
      Reacher                                   6,2
                       Turn-Hard                              The explore suite version restricts the pos-
                       Turn-Hard Explore                      sible targets to a positive cone in front of
                                                              the manipulator.
                       Stand                                  Agent controls a 2d humanoid robot to
                       Stand Explore                          move forward or stand. The explore suite
      Walker                                   24, 6
                       Walk                                   version allows the robot to start on the
                       Walk Explore                           ground rather than standing and has a
                                                              sparse walking reward.

            Table 3: Extra information on the tasks used in the paper in DM Control Suite.
A      A PPENDIX

Here we include additional experimental context and results.


A.1     A LGORITHMIC D ETAILS

A summary of the exploration algorithm, Intrinsic Model Predictive Control is shown in Alg. 1. We
utilize a distributed setup where multiple actors and learners can be deployed concurrently.

Algorithm 1 Intrinsic MPC
    Given: Randomly initialized proposal πθ , dynamics model mφ , reward model ri , random critic Qψ .
    {Modules to be learned}
    Given: Planning probability pplan , replay buffer B, MPO loss weight α, learning rates & optimizers
    (ADAM) for the different modules. {Known modules and parameters}

    {Exploration loop – Asynchronously on the actors}
    while True do
      Initialize ENV and observe state s0 .
      while episode is not terminated do
         {Choose between intrinsic planner and random action depending on pplan }
         {Use learned proposal (πθ ) as proposal for planner}.
         sample x ∼ U [0, 1]
                  PLANNER(st , πθ , mφ , r) if x ≤ pplan
         at ∼ {
                  πθ (st )                     otherwise.
         Step ENV(st , at ) → (st+1 ) and write transition to replay buffer B
      end while
    end while

    {Asynchronously on the learner}
    while True do
      Sample batch B of trajectories, each of sequence length T from the replay buffer B
      Label rewards with reward model ri .
      Update action-value function Qψ based on B using Retrace (Munos et al., 2016).
      Update model mφ based on B using multi-step.
      Update reward model ri based on B.
      Update proposal πθ based on B using (Byravan et al., 2021))
    end while


                                                         13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


The PLANNER subroutine takes in the current state st , the action proposal πθ , a dynamics model
mφ that predicts next state st+1 given current state st and action at , the reward function model
ri (st , at ). Optionally, a learned state-value function Vψ (s) (with parameters ψ) that predicts the
expected return from state s can be provided. We use the Cross-Entropy Method (CEM) (Botev
et al.), shown in Alg. 2.

Algorithm 2 CEM planner
  Given: state s0 , action proposal πθ , dynamics model mφ , reward model ri , planning horizon H,
  number of samples S, elite fraction E, noise standard deviation σinit , and number of iterations I.

  {Rollout proposal distribution using the model.}
  (s0 , a0 , s1 , . . . , sH ) ← proposal(mφ , πθ , H)
  µ ← [a0 , a1 , . . . , aH ]                                                          {initial plan}
  σ ← σinit
  {Evaluate candidate action sequences open loop according to the model and compute associated
  returns.}
  for i = 1 . . . I do
     for k = 1 . . . S do
        pk ∼ N (µ, σ)                                                  {Sample candidate actions.}
        rk ←evaluate actions(mφ , pk , H, ri )
     end for
     Rank candidate sequences by reward and retain top E fraction.
     Compute mean µelite and per-dim standard deviation σelite based on the retained elite sequences.
     µ ← (1 − αmean )µ + αmean µelite                                 {Update mean; αmean = 0.9}
     σ ← (1 − αstd )σ + αstd σelite                      {Update standard deviation; αstd = 0.5}
  end for
  return first action in µ


A.2   A DDITIONAL E NVIRONMENT D ETAILS

The state-actions dimensions (ds , da ) and descriptions for the environments used in this paper are
detailed in Tab. 3. Additional collected reward distributions are shown in Fig. 11.

A.3   F ULL O FFLINE RL AGENT-TASK P ERFORMANCES

To supplement the results discussed in Sec. 4.3, we have included the performance per dataset size
for all agents across all tasks. The results are shown in Fig. 13 and show the considerable variation
when studying any given agent or task. There is substantially more variation across task than across
agent, showing the value in continuing to fine-tune a set of tasks for benchmarking task-agnostic
agents. The mean performance across all tasks is shown in Fig. 9, with a per-task breakdown shown
in Table 4. A subset of agents and tasks are shown in Fig. 8 to show the convergence on a set of
tasks.

A.4   A DDITIONAL M ULTI - TASK L EARNING E XPERIMENTS

To compliment Sec. 4.4, we have included additional experiments for multi-task learning in the
Reacher, Cheetah, and Walker environments, shown in Fig. 10. For these tasks, there is less clear
of a benefit of using task-agnostic learning to generate data for offline RL policy generation. In our
experience, this limited performance can be due to the fact that the environments are designed with
specific behaviors and algorithms in mind, reducing the need for a diverse exploration method. A
description of the starting state and the goal state for each task, as well as for the Pointmass and
Finger environments from the main text, is available in Table 4.


                                                 14
      Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                           Task-aware
                                        Ball-in-Cup, Catch                                   Finger, Turn-Easy
Offline RL Evaluation Episode Reward


                                           Reacher, Easy                                      Walker, Stand


                                                      Dataset Size (Environment Steps)

      Figure 8: Highlighting performance of a subset of tasks and agents to showcase the relative differ-
      ences that can emerge across tasks. The median, max and min across 3 training seeds are shown for
      one input dataset.
Offline RL Evaluation Episode Reward


                                                                  2 × 103    1 × 104   5 × 104 1 × 105 1 × 106 5 × 106


                                       Task-aware

      Figure 9: The median, max and min across 3 training seeds are shown for different dataset sizes.
      This figure shows how most of the exploration methods we evaluated performed similarly, yet our
      new IMPC agent with RND does have the best overall performance.


                                                                        15
 Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                         Target task
                          Training        Easy Transfer            Medium Transfer     Hard Transfer
               1,000


                   800
         Reacher


                   600


                   400


                   200


                    0

               1,000


                   800
         Cheetah


                   600


                   400
Domain


                   200


                    0


               1,000


                   800


                   600
         Walker


                   400


                   200


                    0
                     MPO + NextStep


                                       MPO + NextStep


                                                                MPO + NextStep


                                                                                     MPO + NextStep
                      MPO + RND


                                        MPO + RND


                                                                 MPO + RND


                                                                                      MPO + RND
                      MPC + RND


                                        MPC + RND


                                                                 MPC + RND


                                                                                      MPC + RND
                      MPO Online


                                        MPO Online


                                                                 MPO Online


                                                                                      MPO Online
                      MPO + ICM


                                        MPO + ICM


                                                                 MPO + ICM


                                                                                      MPO + ICM
                       MPO + DD


                                         MPO + DD


                                                                  MPO + DD


                                                                                       MPO + DD
                       MPC + DD


                                         MPC + DD


                                                                  MPC + DD


                                                                                       MPC + DD


                                     MPC + Exploration        MPO + Exploration   Online
                                                   Agent type
 Figure 10: Performance across multiple tasks for offline RL agents trained on a single task-agnostic
 dataset.



                                                         16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                     Ball-in-Cup, Catch                             Finger, Turn-Hard


                 Ball-in-Cup, Catch Explore                     Finger, Turn-Hard Explore


Figure 11: Collected reward per-episode (1000 environment steps) distributions across a subset of
tasks and their Explore Suite variants. Boxplots depict the median episode reward (red line), 25th
and 75th percentiles (box), and the maximum and minimum reward over 5000 episodes (whiskers).
Across the suite of tasks we studied, there is often comparable variation among the exploration
agents as the variation among tasks.
                                                                          D
                                          re


                                                               D


                                                                         -RN
                                                  m
                                       wa


                                                               -D


                                                                                            M


                                                                                                   D
                                                                                     ICM
                                               ndo


                                                                               DD
                                    k-A


 Domain, Task
                                                           PC


                                                                                                 RN
                                                                                           NS
                                                                     PC
                                               Ra


                                                          IM
                                Tas


                                                                    IM


 Ball-in-Cup, Catch                984         943         973       973       975   901   972   922
 Ball-in-Cup, Catch Explore        974           0         886       939       963   882   955   927
 Finger, Turn Easy                 983         822         768       982       577   541   689   630
 Finger, Turn Easy Explore         969         916         636       944       850   170   920   948
 Finger, Turn hard                 977         544         486       975       513   366   510   567
 Finger, Turn hard Explore         966         691          86       595       152   235   953   863
 Reacher, Easy                     767         955         881       901       626   612   550   868
 Reacher, Easy Explore             974         613         254       741        98    89   235   814
 Reacher, Hard                     587         428         105       720       705   143   128   266
 Reacher, Hard Explore             974         261         407       411       931   542   773   148
 Walker, Stand                     992         298         504       302       411   242   535   519
 Walker, Stand Explore             983         244         259        81       188   232   179   256
 Walker, Walk                      978         147         446        97       103    60   107    84
 Walker, Walk Explore              975          48         426        79        76    79    91    37
                                                6
Table 4: The best performance with 5 × 10 transition datasets for all task-agnostic exploration
agents and the task-aware MPO agent to compliment Table 2. To complement the table in the main
text, bold represents the best reward among only task-agnostic agents across a task being within the
            th       th
range of 10 and 90 percentiles.


                                                     17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


 Domain                    Start state          Training       Easy Transfer         Medium Transfer       Hard Transfer
 Pointmass (x, y)            (0, 0)            (0.1, 0.1)      (−0.1, −0.1)            (0.3, 0.3)           (0.2, 0.2)
 Finger (θ)                   (0)                (0.5)             (1.0)                  (2.6)               (−2.6)
 Reacher (x, y)            (0.24, 0)            (0, 0.1)         (0, 0.2)               (0, −0.1)          (−0.1, 0.15)
 Cheetah (v)                  (0)                (2.5)            (−1.1)                  (1.1)                (4.3)
 Walker (v)                   (0)                (1.5)             (0.5)                 (−0.5)                (2.5)

Table 5: Starting and goal states for each of the multitask environments. For Finger, θ represents
the angle of a spinner which the finger can turn, and for Cheetah and Walker v represents forward
velocity.


                                     RAND           Plan-DD          React-DD           React-NS
                                     MPO            Plan-RND         React-ICM          React-RND
                 BiC-C                 BiC-C-X                    F-TE                   F-TE-X              F-TH
        103


        102


        101


        100
                 F-TH-X                  R-E                     R-E-X                    R-H                R-H-X
        103


        102
 OSL Reward


        101


        100
                  W-S                  W-S-X                      W-W                    W-W-X
        103


        102


        101


        1010
          0
             4    107     1010 104       107       1010 104      107      1010 104        107       1010
                                                  Exploration Reward - Cumulative

Figure 12: Correlation of final offline RL performance to cumulative reward in the training set. As
the dataset sizes we use span many orders of magnitude of samples, both axes are plotted on a log-
scale. Across all tasks, there is a trend of more reward in the training distribution relating to a better
performing CRR agent.


                                                                18
                Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                      1000   RAND   MPO   Plan-DD   Plan-RND   React-DD   React-ICM   React-NS   React-RND   Mean per Task
             BiC-C


                                       500
                                         0
                                      1000
             BiC-C-X


                                       500
                                         0
                                      1000
             F-TE


                                       500
                                         0
                                      1000
             F-TE-X


                                       500
                                         0
                                      1000
             F-TH


                                       500
                                         0
                                      1000
             F-TH-X


                                       500
                                         0
                                      1000
                                       500
             R-E


                                         0
                                      1000
OSL Reward
             R-E-X


                                       500
                                         0
                                      1000
                                       500
             R-H


                                         0
                                      1000
             R-H-X


                                       500
                                         0
                                      1000
                                       500
             W-S


                                         0
                                      1000
             W-S-X


                                       500
                                         0
                                      1000
             W-W


                                       500
                                         0
                                      1000
             Median per Agent W-W-X


                                       500
                                         0
                                      1000
                                       500
                                         0
                                        2e3
                                        1e4
                                        5e4
                                        1e5
                                        1e6
                                        5e6
                                        2e3
                                        1e4
                                        5e4
                                        1e5
                                        1e6
                                        5e6
                                        2e3
                                        1e4
                                        5e4
                                        1e5
                                        1e6
                                        5e6
                                        2e3
                                        1e4
                                        5e4
                                        1e5
                                        1e6
                                        5e6
                                        2e3
                                        1e4
                                        5e4
                                        1e5
                                        1e6
                                        5e6
                                        2e3
                                        1e4
                                        5e4
                                        1e5
                                        1e6
                                        5e6
                                        2e3
                                        1e4
                                        5e4
                                        1e5
                                        1e6
                                        5e6
                                        2e3
                                        1e4
                                        5e4
                                        1e5
                                        1e6
                                        5e6


                                             RAND   MPO   Plan-DD   Plan-RND   React-DD   React-ICM   React-NS   React-RND

                                                                 Dataset Size
                Figure 13: All agent-task pairings for final offline   reinforcement learning performance. All tasks in
                the Explore and Control Suite occupy the rows while the Agents occupy the columns. The average
                results highlight the increased variation across tasks when compared to agents.


                                                                               19
