Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


S ELF - CONDITIONED E MBEDDING D IFFUSION
FOR T EXT G ENERATION

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT
         Can continuous diffusion models bring the same performance breakthrough on
         natural language they did for image generation? To circumvent the discrete nature
         of text data, we can simply project tokens in a continuous space of embeddings, as
         is standard in language modeling. We propose Self-conditioned Embedding Diffu-
         sion (S ED), a continuous diffusion mechanism that operates on token embeddings
         and allows to learn flexible and scalable diffusion models for both conditional and
         unconditional text generation. Through qualitative and quantitative evaluation, we
         show that our text diffusion models generate samples comparable with those pro-
         duced by standard autoregressive language models — while being in theory more
         efficient on accelerator hardware at inference time. Our work paves the way for
         scaling up diffusion models for text, similarly to autoregressive models, and for
         improving performance with recent refinements to continuous diffusion.


1   I NTRODUCTION
Continuous diffusion models (Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2015) have taken the world of image generation
by storm, advancing the state of the art further than ever before (Rombach et al., 2021; Ramesh
et al., 2022). Can the same framework encounter as much success on the text modality? Diffusion
for language is indeed an attractive prospect. Compared to autoregressive (AR) models (Bengio
et al., 2000; Sutskever et al., 2011; Austin et al., 2021; Hoffmann et al., 2022), diffusion models can
predict all tokens in a sequence at once. This allows for bidirectional, rather than causal attention—
increasing interactions between tokens, potentially leading to more coherent samples. Diffusion
models can make a better usage of hardware accelerators during inference than AR models, since
computations are parallelizable over the sequence axis. Yet AR models remain the mainstream ap-
proach for modelling text. A major obstacle to text diffusion is that diffusion processes typically
operate in continuous space. While this naturally handle images, text is inherently discrete. Con-
sequently, most previous attempts to apply diffusion to text have focused on discrete diffusion-like
approaches. These methods do not benefit from the refinements made to continuous diffusion in
the image domain. Crucially, they cannot make use of guidance (Dhariwal & Nichol, 2021), which
drastically improves diffusion models sample quality.
We address this gap by making a simple observation: language models operate mostly in continuous
space, with discrete tokens only as inputs and outputs. A natural idea is then to conduct diffusion
directly in a continuous token embedding space. For simplicity, we use a fixed embedding space,
either random or stemming from a trained language model. Combined with the “self-conditioning”
(Chen et al., 2022) refinement, this forms the basis of the method we propose, Self-conditioned
Embedding Diffusion (S ED). S ED models rival mainstream AR models in both conditional and
unconditional text generation. We make the following contributions:

       • In section 3, we introduce S ED, the first continuous diffusion approach for text with good
         scaling properties (testing models up to 420M parameters). We analyze several continuous
         text diffusion settings, and identify self-conditioning and diffusion on small fixed embed-
         dings as key factors to make continuous text diffusion work.
       • In section 4, we apply classifier-free guidance (Ho & Salimans, 2022) to text data—an orig-
         inal achievement. We show that S ED can rival AR models on generic language tasks, for
         similar models sizes. S ED samples achieve a better likelihood-entropy trade-off compared
         to these models, and are deemed comparable (if slightly worse) by human raters.


                                                  1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


2   R ELATED WORK

We provide an overview of diffusion models with a focus on modeling discrete data, as well as AR
models and sample-based metrics for evaluating text generation.

Continuous diffusion on continuous image data. Continuous diffusion has recently established
itself as the method of choice for modeling continuous data such as images. While our main focus
in this paper is on discrete data, we review some key works in continuous data modeling as this
literature was the major source of inspiration for S ED. The first continuous diffusion formulation
was introduced in the seminal work by Sohl-Dickstein et al. (2015). Ho et al. (2020) improved and
simplified this formulation, relating it to denoising score matching, and creating a new method called
DDPM. Nichol & Dhariwal (2021) further improved upon DDPM, showcasing impressive diffusion
results compared to GANs. Rombach et al. (2021, Stable Diffusion) introduced diffusion in latent
space. Conceptually similar to S ED, it was specifically targeted at image modeling. Classifier-free
guidance was proposed by Ho & Salimans (2022) as a mean to improve image fidelity at the cost
of reduced diversity. GLIDE (Nichol et al., 2022) scaled up the ideas of guided diffusion, while
DALL-E 2 (Ramesh et al., 2022) and Imagen (Saharia et al., 2022) are the latest, most advanced
image generation systems to date, combining most of the improvements proposed in previous works.

Discrete diffusion on discrete data. One cannot simply reuse the methods that are successful
on continuous image data in the discrete text domain. A number of bespoke methods have been
explored instead, forming the family of discrete diffusion approaches. In discrete diffusion, the
data is corrupted by switching from one discrete value to another. This was first proposed in the
seminal work by Sohl-Dickstein et al. (2015), where it was tested on simplistic binary heartbeat
data. It was extended to multinomial text modeling (Hoogeboom et al., 2021) and further scaled
up in the D3PM work (Austin et al., 2021). Most recently, a similar discrete diffusion approach
was applied to image modeling in VQ-Diffusion (Gu et al., 2022). In parallel, a few diffusion-like
approaches were proposed in the denoising autoencoders literature. CMLM (Ghazvininejad et al.,
2019) tackled machine translation. SUNDAE (Savinov et al., 2022) was the first non-AR method to
show strong results both in machine translation and unconditional text generation. MaskGIT (Chang
et al., 2022) demonstrated excellent results in modeling VQ-discretized images. These approaches
rely on training models to predict masked tokens from their context, and iterating this reconstruction
step multiple times at sampling time. Despite those positive developments, the samples from discrete
diffusion methods for text modeling remains less coherent than those produced by AR methods.

Continuous diffusion on discrete data. Fewer works try to tackle diffusion on discrete data from
the same angle as S ED – starting by turning the data into continuous representations before mod-
eling it with continuous diffusion formulations. Mittal et al. (2021) used a VAE to generate such
representations for discrete music modeling, with exciting results. Closest to S ED, Diffusion-LM (Li
et al., 2022) trains a token embedding together with the diffusion model itself. Diffusion-LM meets
success on specific language applications, in low data regime and on constrained, very formatted
textual data. Most recently, Analog Bits (Chen et al., 2022) introduced self-conditioning, closely re-
lated to step-unrolls in SUNDAE (Savinov et al., 2022), together with bit-level modeling to improve
the generation of discretized images. While the qualitative results of those continuous methods on
text modeling show promise, they have not been shown to scale to large realistic text datasets like
C4 (Raffel et al., 2020) yet, or to compare with AR approaches on generic language tasks.

Auto-regressive modelling on discrete data. AR models remain the method of choice for mod-
eling discrete data. In combination with neural networks, they were first explored by Bengio et al.
(2000) and later combined with RNNs (Sutskever et al., 2011). Their breakthrough moment came
with the advent of the Transformer architecture, introduced by Vaswani et al. (2017) for machine
translation. Even more impressive results were shown with GPT-3 (Brown et al., 2020), which
trained a large AR language model unconditionally, and used few-shot prompting to adapt it to new
tasks. A few works later improved upon the results of GPT-3, including Hoffmann et al. (2022).

Sample-based evaluation of text generative models. There are traditionally two classes of met-
rics for generative modeling: likelihood-based and sample-based. While the likelihood-based way
is mathematically appealing, its usefulness for measuring progress is reduced by the fact that not


                                                  2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


all models readily provide likelihood computation. Just like the sampled-based FID metric was im-
portant for driving the progress of diffusion in image modeling, there is a need for a sample-based
metric which would be universally accepted for text modeling. Caccia et al. (2018) investigated
fidelity/variance metrics for evaluating text GANs. Semeniuta et al. (2018) suggested using FID for
texts. De Masson d’Autume et al. (2019) later used those previously proposed metrics to iterate on
ScratchGAN but did not provide conclusive guidance on which metric a practitioner should choose –
essentially finding serious vulnerabilities in all investigated metrics. We opted for a middle ground,
reporting both sample likelihood according to a strong AR model and human preferences.

3     M ETHOD
In this section, we outline the different components of S ED: continuous diffusion in the space of
token embeddings and self-conditioning, which form the basis of our approach for unconditional
text generation; span masking and guided diffusion to enable conditional generation.

3.1   D IFFUSION MODELS FOR UNCONDITIONAL TEXT GENERATION

Diffusion models in continuous space. We consider diffusion models as introduced by Sohl-
Dickstein et al. (2015) and improved by Ho et al. (2020). A diffusion model aims at modelling
a data distribution x0 ∈ Rn ∼ q ∈ D(Rn ) by estimating a sequence of latent variables xT , ..., x1 of
the same dimensionality as the data x0 . Starting from x0 , the latent variables are generated with a
Markov chain called the forward process: xt ∼ q(· |xt−1 , t). It is defined by gradually interpolating
the iterate with Gaussian noise according to noise levels defined by a schedule β1 , ..., βT :
                                                      p
                            xt ∼ q(· | xt−1 , t) = N ( 1 − βt xt−1 , βt I).                        (1)

This parametrization gives us a closed form to sample xt for any arbitrary t ≥ 1, given x0 :

                              √               √     √       √
                       xt =              1 − αt ϵt = αt x0 + 1 − αt ϵ,
                                  αt xt−1 +                                                        (2)
                          Qt
where αt := 1 − βt , αt := s=1 αs , ϵt ∼ N 0, I and ϵ ∼ N 0, I .
We define our generative model by approximately inverting the diffusion process of Eq. 1 to obtain
a reverse process. The reverse process starts from xT ∼ N (0, I) and is defined as a Markov chain
with learned Gaussian transitions  (parameterized by θ, the weights of a neural network): xt−1 ∼
pθ (· |xt ) = N µθ (xt , t), σ(t)2 I . We train a neural network to predict an estimate x̂0 (xt , t, θ)
of the data x0 and approximate the reverse process by using the following parametrization, with
learnable means but fixed variances, and a fixed schedule β1 , ..., βT :
                                    √
                                      αt−1 βt                           1 − αt−1
                    µθ (xt , t) =             x̂0 (xt , t, θ) + σ(t)2 =          βt ·              (3)
                                     1 − αt                              1 − αt

While there exists a tractable variational lower-bound (VLB) on log pθ (x0 ), Ho et al. (2020) showed
that better results are obtained by optimizing a simplified objective that re-weights the terms in the
VLB. We follow this approach, which simplifies the loss to a sum of mean-squared errors between
the ground truth data x0 and its estimates x̂0 (xt , t, θ):

                        Ldiffusion = Ex0 ∼q(x0 ), t∼U (1,T ) ∥x0 − x̂0 (xt , t, θ)∥2 ·             (4)

Though this framework works out of the box on images, which are close to continuous, we can-
not apply it directly to the discrete tokens of the text modality. To resolve this issue, we perform
continuous diffusion in a continuous space in which we embed text tokens.
Diffusion on word embeddings. We consider textual data w = (w1 , . . . , wN ), where each wi is
a one-hot representation in RV of a discrete
                                        √ token in {1, ..., V }. Each token w has an associated
embedding ew ∈ RD , with fixed norm D to match the norm of a random gaussian sample in
dimension D used to noise clean data. We denote by E ∈ RD×V the matrix of all embeddings.


                                                      3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


We define our diffusion process in embedding space, rather than in token space. To that end, we
define a forward discrete-to-continuous step qV (x0 |w) = N (Ew, σ02 I), where σ0 is a constant
scale factor with a similar order of magnitude as β1 . Conversely, we define a reverse continuous-
                               QN
to-discrete step pR (w|x0 ) = k=1 Cat(wk |E ′ (x0 )k ), where R ∈ RV ×D is a learnable readout
matrix initialized to E ⊤ and Cat(wk |l) is the softmax probability of token k with logits l ∈ RV .
To train the readout step, we add a reconstruction loss to Ldiffusion during training. Conveniently,
it naturally arises when deriving the VLB of pθ (w) with this discretization step (Li et al., 2022),
introducing a simple cross-entropy loss to maximise pθ (w|x0 ):
       Lrecon = Ew∼D,x0 ∼qV (w) [− log pR (w|x0 )],          with      Ltotal = Ldiffusion + Lrecon .   (5)
Contrary to what is done in Li et al. (2022), we do not learn the embedding matrix E, as we identified
that it was empirically unstable and could lead to drops in unigram entropy. The reconstruction loss
Lrecon therefore only depends on the trainable readout weights R.
At sampling time, we run the reverse process for T = 1000 steps, ultimately yielding a continuous
embedding x0 of size dembed . We multiply it by R to obtain logits in RV , and then use the index of
the maximum component to convert it to a token wi , with i = arg max1≤j≤V (R x0 ). This entails
running T full forward passes which is quite expensive compared to cached AR sampling; however
each forward pass computes all timesteps at once which is naturally parallelisable. Further, we hope
to benefit from many diffusion sampling improvements to get T down to low double-digits.
Self-conditioning (Chen et al., 2022). In standard diffusion sampling, at each timestep t the
denoising network generates an estimate x̃0 = x̂0 (xt , t, θ) of x0 given only xt as input. Self-
conditioning progressively refines x0 estimates by passing the estimate x̃t+1   0    obtained at the previ-
ous sampling step as input to the denoising network; the self-conditioned estimate is then defined as
x̃t0 = x̂t0 (xt , x̃t+1
                    0 , t, θ), and sets the diffusion direction. In practice conditioning is performed by
concatenating xt and x̃t+1  0     on the feature axis. To approximate the inference behavior at train time
while remaining computationally efficient, we compute a first estimate xt0 = x̂0 (xt , 0, t, θ) with
the self-conditioning set to zero, then perform a second forward pass using a stop gradient on xt0 to
obtain x̃t0 = x̂0 (xt , xt0 , t, θ). The denoising network is then optimized using the output from the
two forward passes in order to estimate x0 accurately with and without self-conditioning.
Equipped with these 3 components we can train models to generate text, though only uncondition-
ally. To add conditional generation to our system’s capabilities, we use two additional methods.

3.2   S PAN MASKING AND GUIDANCE FOR CONDITIONAL TEXT GENERATION

By design diffusion models for text generation are flexible and can handle a wide variety of infilling
tasks. This is a key advantage over the predominant auto-regressive language models that typically
generate text in a left-to-right fashion.
Span masking. We train our model on a rich set of infilling tasks with the following method.
We optimize the diffusion loss from Eq. 4 only over x while fixing the conditioning tokens c.
Conditioning tokens c are defined by a binary conditioning mask m set to one on conditioning
positions and zero on positions to be infilled.
We sample conditioning mask m randomly as follows. Given a sequence of length L and a max-
imum number of spans M , we sample a number of spans n uniformly in [1, M ]. Span starting
positions are defined by n − 1 integers (i1 , ..., in−1 ) sampled uniformly without replacement and
sorted in increasing order to satisfy 0 < i1 < ... < in−1 < L. The tuple (i1 , ..., in−1 ) partitions the
sequence of tokens in n spans satisfying E[ik |n] = nk L. The conditioning mask m is defined using
even spans for conditioning and odd spans for infilling, and then m is flipped with a 50% probability.
The case n = 1 corresponds to unconditional generation; we then set m to 0 everywhere.
This span masking strategy defines a collection of text generation tasks with a large variety of con-
ditioning which on average evenly splits the sequence between conditioning and infilling spans. It
enables conditional generation, and opens the door for additional diffusion improvements.
Guided diffusion. Guidance (Dhariwal & Nichol, 2021) often improves the sample quality of con-
ditional diffusion models. We use classifier-free guidance (Ho & Salimans, 2022), which alleviates
the need for a separately-trained guide model. In the conditional case, our estimator x̃0 is now


                                                    4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023



Table 1: S ED samples on unconditional generation, fill-in-the-middle and several spans in-filling.

 Task            Samples
 Unconditional We make use of the very best supplies and solutions to ensure that the work is going to stand up
               to the test of time, and we help you save money with techniques that do not change the quality
               of your mission. We’ll achieve this by offering you the best deals in the field and avoiding
               pricey mistakes. If you want to spend less, Refrigerator Unit Repair Guys is the company to
               contact.
 Fill-in-the-    A year ago in Paris, I had the opportunity to take a field trip to La Rite-en-Laurences Interna-
 middle          tional de France where I met David Nigel Johnson, a professor of social studies. What a great
                 trip and what a great day!
 Spans           There was no evidence, only fleeting glimpses of the killer and his fate. In fact, it seemed
 in-filling      that there was no evidence. It was all guesswork, and one of the most unusual murder cases
                 throughout history.

a function x̂0 (xt , c, x̃t0 , t, θ), where c are fixed conditioning tokens. During training, with fixed
probability the conditioning tokens c used in the estimator x̂0 are dropped and set to a null label ∅.
During sampling, the model prediction is extrapolated in the direction of x̂0 (xt , c, x̃t+1         0 , t, θ) and
away from x̂0 (xt , ∅, ∅, t, θ) as follows:

             x̃t0 = x̂0 xt , ∅, ∅, t, θ + s · x̂0 xt , c, x̃t+1

                                                              0  , t, θ   − x̂ 0 xt , ∅, ∅, t, θ    ,           (6)
where s ≥ 1 is the guidance scale. Remark that we jointly drop conditioning and the self-
conditioning x̃t+1
               0 , concretely setting both values to zero. Classifier-free guidance allows leveraging
both the unconditional and conditional abilities of a model to improve its conditional generations.

4     E XPERIMENTS
4.1     T RAINING DETAILS

We train all our models on the C4 dataset (Raffel et al., 2020), using a SentencePiece tokenizer (Kudo
& Richardson, 2018) composed of 32000 words. We use a non-causal transformer model (Vaswani
et al., 2017) as our diffusion model (see Appendix A for details). S ED models are trained with
sequence length 256, while for ablations models are trained with sequence length 128. We insert
uniformly, i.e. not necessarily at the end of the sequence, 10% of padding tokens in the training set
to allow S ED models to generate samples of varying size and provide more flexibility.
To generate word embeddings, we train a BERT model of fixed size (150m parameters) and feature
dimension dmodel = 896. The diffusion space is defined by the initial lookup table of this BERT
model. We bottleneck the dimension of the word embeddings dembed and add a linear projection layer
from dembed to dmodel at the beginning of the model. We found this helped diffusion (see section 4.4).
S ED models are trained with a cosine noise schedule (Dhariwal & Nichol, 2021), with β1 = 2.10−3 ,
σ0 = 10−2 and T = 1000. We use batches of 65.536 tokens, thus for sequence length 256 the batch
size is set to 256. We use a maximum span count of 5 for all runs except for its specific ablation. We
train S ED models at two different scales: S ED-S (135m parameters, 106 training steps) and S ED-L
(420m, 2.106 steps). Their detailed architectures can be found in Appendix A.

4.2     VALIDATION

While optimizing the perplexity of AR models for text leads to improved language models, directly
optimizing the ELBO of diffusion models for images does not correlate strongly with sample quality
as observed by Nichol & Dhariwal (2021); Kingma et al. (2021); Ho & Salimans (2022). For images,
the sample based metric FID (Heusel et al., 2017) has been introduced as a measure of sample
quality and is now widely adopted. Similarly, we need a sample-based metric for text generation
that is reliable and allows comparison between a large variety of generative models. To provide a
fair comparison to AR models, we rely on three metrics.
The first metric measures how likely the samples produced by a model are according to an AR
language model with 70B parameters, trained on 1.4B tokens (Hoffmann et al., 2022); we denote


                                                        5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


this metric AR NLL for auto-regressive negative log-likelihood. It provides a continuous measure
of sample quality that has proven useful when combined with a measure of sample diversity, e.g. in
the development of nucleus sampling (Holtzman et al., 2020) for improved AR model decoding.
To measure diversity we rely on a second metric, the unigram entropy of samples, which helps
balance the AR NLL that can be gamed by unnatural repetitive samples. For both these metrics, our
target is the score of the validation set data. Deviating from the data unigram entropy in particular
is a sign of degenerate modeling.
Though this initial combination has provided us with a reliable signal to iterate over our model
design, it remains imperfect; it too can be gamed, though it is harder to do so. To address this
limitation, we also report human preferences. We presented 6 colleagues with 20 pairs of samples
for each comparison, asking them to pick the best one. For all three metrics, we report results on two
tasks: unconditional language modeling and suffix in-filling, the later a heavily conditioned task.


4.3   R ESULTS

Samples. We present samples generated with
our S ED models in Table 10. We use a single
model to perform a wide variety of text gener-
ation tasks, such as unconditional generation,
filling-in-the-middle or filling several spans of
text. We show strong performance in the un-
conditional case, with samples that are syntac-
tically correct and stay coherent on long se-
quences. In the conditioned case, S ED models
are able to infill spans with coherent transitions
and links to the conditioning but also exhibit
a rich diversity. By design, S ED yields flexible
bi-directional masking models that can perform
text generation on a diverse set of conditioned
task. To compare S ED with AR baselines we
next restrict conditioning to a prefix and con-
sider a task of suffix in-filling.
Comparison to AR models. To assess the gen-
eration ability of S ED, we compare against AR
baselines of similar capacity and trained fol- Figure 1: Comparison of sample quality and
lowing optimal scaling laws from Hoffmann diversity of S ED versus AR models on suffix
et al. (2022) on suffix in-filling. We sample a in-filling. S ED uses guidance with scales in
batch of sequences from C4 and use the first {1, 2, 4, 8} and AR uses nucleus sampling with a
128 tokens as conditioning given to the model top-p in {1.00, 0.95, 0.90, 0.85}. Top-right points
to generate a suffix of 128 tokens. Figure 1 re- are S ED models with a guidance scale of 1 or AR
ports AR NLL and unigram entropy of the gen- models with a top-p of 1.
erated suffixes for AR and S ED models. As a
reference point, we compute the AR NLL and unigram entropy of the ground truth C4 suffixes and
report it on the plot. Several methods can be used to improve sampling quality at the cost of samples
diversity; we use nucleus sampling (Holtzman et al., 2020) for AR models and guidance (Dhariwal
& Nichol, 2021; Ho & Salimans, 2022) for S ED models. We show the impact of guidance on sam-
ples quality in Table 3. To our knowledge, we are the first to show sample quality improvement
when using guidance for text generation.
As shown in Figure 1, both S ED-S and S ED-L perform strongly when compared against AR base-
lines – even though we report a metric favoring AR models on a task AR models have been designed
to optimize. Similar to nucleus sampling for AR models, guidance has a strong positive impact on
sample quality that is both observed quantitatively with improved AR NLL in Figure 1 and quali-
tatively in Table 3. We observe that using a top-p nucleus sampling below 0.8 for AR models or a
guidance scale above 4 for S ED models leads to samples exhibiting a lot of repetitions, a degenerate
case reflected by a lower entropy of samples even though sample AR NLL improves.


                                                     6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Table 2: We compare S ED-L (guidance scale 2.5) and AR-L (nucleus sampling, p = 0.95) samples.
   S ED L                                                    AR-L
   You’re going to love wearing this traditional tee         A Koda Ram 25 is presented in sedan and a Max-
   from our latest Wilson collection. Designed in a          ima saloon. Based on the Acenta car, the power-
   scrapped floral styled knit with a sleeve of asym-        ful Koda 2014 hits Indian roads in the ”Maxima”
   metric lines across the round sole. Lightly fluffy,       body-con shape. Being powered by a Hyundai i20
   the square pleats will take you right to                  1.4 litre diesel engine, the Koda 2014 is coupled
   The beaver is an interesting animal that lives in         The beaver is an interesting animal that lives in
   rivers and lakes. He is not mainly concerned with         rivers and streams. It is usually seen in big num-
   finding wolves and dolphin but also has a great           bers in the fields or upstream, and is quite docile.
   hunger for fish. The beaver has sharp legs, large         On cold days when its pattern is perfect, the
   eyes, and a black coat                                    beaver will have some interesting, and sometimes
   Once upon a time in Spain, Leonardo Pueleva had           Once upon a time in Spain, which seems pretty
   the pleasure of meeting guests at Spanish restau-         much the same way now, the question that was
   rant, Buva Casinos. While driving, he got a chance        posed to each of us at the end of our interview was
   to get to know the people behind the restaurant           ”would you like to see Froome one day?” In ret-
   and, of course, how they made his experience very         rospect, after our interview, we have grown ever
   interesting. After his conversation, he got to            closer to that answer. As you will read in the arti-
                                                             cle, I know that


               Table 3: Impact of guidance on samples quality using our S ED model.

 Guidance 1.0                                   2.5                                 5.0
             In the cold, cold night sky, a     In the cold, cold night of          In the cold, cold night of
             fairy princess sits in a chair     November 2018, a little girl        December, my oldest daugh-
             and surrounded by tea leaves       sits in a chair hidden under        ter sits in a chair accentuated
             in a pond. Meanwhile, she          a light blanket on a patio.         in cotton fabrics and a pil-
             bies back into the cold, with      Meanwhile, she bends back           low. Meanwhile, she yearns
             bluish hair on her hips and el-    into the chair with bluish          straight in the cold air, her
             bows on her forehead - and         hair on her forehead, her           wrists covering her neck, her
             her fingers numbed by the          hands on her face, her fingers      eyes straight on her forehead,
             freezing temperature.              numbed by the freezing tem-         and her fingers numbed by the
                                                perature.                           freezing temperature.
             Barbara was one of our many        Barbara was one of the most         Barbara was one of the most
             wonderful women that really        gifted women in the world.          brilliant women in the world.
             helped so I am so blown off        She was creative and stood          She was amazing in her heart,
             by her purpose, civility; and      up by her integrity and ci-         her spirit, her mind and in the
             adversity. Once I started inter-   vility; against adversity. Al-      soul. She never turned people
             acting with her, it proved to      though she placed herself           off in her absence. It proved
             me that no matter how hard         higher than her peers, it           to me that no matter how hard
             this was, she always strove for    proved to me that no matter         this was, she always strove for
             excellence.                        how hard this was, she al-          excellence.
                                                ways strove for excellence.


Our human preference scores temper our observations in Table 4. They show that our NLL and
entropy metrics do not tell the whole story, as humans still prefer AR models at equivalent size.
While S ED-L performs slightly worse than AR-L (38% preference in suffix in-filling, 44% on un-
conditional generation), its scores remain comparable. S ED-L is roughly on par with AR-S.
Finally, we compare S ED and AR models’ qualitative examples with short prompts in Table 2.

Table 4: S ED-L vs other models human preference scores on conditional and unconditional tasks.
                   S ED-S (cond)   AR-S (cond)      AR-L (uncond)       AR-L (cond)
            S ED-L    63.4% ± 4.3%         51.0% ± 5.0%           43.8% ± 4.4%         37.7% ± 4.4%


                                                         7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


4.4   A BLATIONS
Table 5: Ablation of the proposed S ED approach on unconditional generation.                 Both self-
conditioning and embeddings pretraining play a key role in the model performance.
              Diffusion space            Self-conditioning   Unigram entropy    AR NLL
              Bits (Chen et al., 2022)          ✗                 6.97            7.01
                                                ✓                 7.47            6.05
              Random embeddings                 ✗                 6.90            6.80
                                                ✓                 6.86            5.31
              Pretrained embeddings             ✗                 6.75            5.66
                                                ✓                 6.77            4.57
              Data                                             6.70 ± 0.04     1.81 ± 0.15

Self-conditioning and embedding pretraining. Results from Table 5 and samples from Table 6
show the influence of both the diffusion space and self-conditioning. AR NLL decreases very
significantly when using self-conditioning, regardless of the rest of the setup. Diffusing at the
bit-level (Chen et al., 2022) yields very high NLLs. While using random embeddings performs
markedly better, using pretrained embeddings results in further improved numbers.
Samples from Table 6 highlight that models trained on random word embeddings exhibit topic mod-
elling abilities with the co-occurrence of words like child and mother even though the paragraph
remains globally incoherent and meaningless tokens like gluc are generated. Self-conditioning
dramatically improves sample quality; the diffusion model gets the low-level structure right and
generates syntactically correct sentences, even though the global text is not intelligible. Combining
self-conditioning and pretrained embeddings leads to globally coherent paragraphs that stay on topic
with proper sentence structure.
Embedding dimension. An important design choice for SED is the word embeddings space. We
study the influence of pretrained embedding size in Table 7. Surprisingly, there is a threshold af-
ter which performance degrades when increasing the dimension of embeddings. We visualize the
forward process for different embedding sizes by displaying the nearest neighbor of a noised token
while running the forward process. In high dimension we observe that the nearest neighbor of a
noised token remains the starting token itself until it switches to a completely random, unrelated
token. In low dimension, we often observe that the closest neighbor of a noised token goes through
several semantically related tokens (nearest neighbor of the starting token) before ultimately becom-
ing random. We hypothesize that the random walks defined by diffusion are more likely to drift
towards neighbors of the starting token in low dimension. As a result, when diffusing in low dimen-
sion information is destroyed in a more semantically meaningful fashion, which leads to an easier
learning problem for the denoising function.
Number of spans. In order to enable in-filling, we train the model not only to do unconditional
generation but also to conditionally fill spans of tokens. For each data point we sample a span
number uniformly at random and span delimiters to generate the span mask. Picking the maximum
allowable number of spans has a significant effect on model performance, as we can see in Table 8.
Somewhat counter-intuitively, adding span masking improves even unconditional generation NLLs.
It also appears that using a relatively high maximum span number is optimal. We hypothesize that
this results in a varied mix of task difficulty at training time, between ”easy”, very conditioned
problems on the one hand and ”harder”, unconditional ones on the other.
Scaling. We show encouraging results when scaling from S ED-S (150m) to S ED-L (420m). We
train both models on sequences of 256 tokens and report a AR NLL of 4.20 for S ED-S compared
to 3.68 for S ED-L. This improvement translates to improved sample quality, as is confirmed by our
human preference scores, which are much higher for the larger model (63%, see Table 4).


5     L IMITATIONS

While our results are promising and show that continuous diffusion for text can be an exciting
alternative to AR models, the current approach does present some significant limitations.


                                                     8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Table 6: On unconditional generation, self-conditioning results in better sentence modelling, pre-
trained embeddings enhances topic modelling.

 Random embeddings                      Random embeddings                     Pretrained embeddings
                                        with self-conditioning                with self-conditioning
 did the buildingroom granted a         Tree brings the sound, bearing        almost six decades ago - 72 per-
 lighter distance. On it though,        features and capabilities that we     cent of Americans didn’t feel
 salaries about clients that a child,   are set in. For the first time, she   they’d actually rent their own
 which dispersed gluc so many           uses a customizable framework         cars this year. Conversely, 90 per-
 events and certainly wanted the        to use that we help students pub-     cent of Americans feel that the
 Mother’s project, discovered by        licly solve the weather conditions    decision to rent a car is some-
 their child would keep                 that we only offer students           thing they feel it’s impossible


Table 7: Word embeddings with small di-                          Table 8: Span masking tasks improves un-
mension have higher AR likelihood.                               conditional text generation.
 Embed. dim. 16 32 64 128 256 896                                Max span count 1     3    5    7   9 11
 AR NLL      4.65 4.57 4.71 4.61 4.77 4.92                       AR NLL        4.99 4.82 4.82 4.67 4.48 4.56



First, much more could be done in terms of model tuning, including scaling to much bigger models
to better understand S ED’s limits, and to be able to compare it with state-of-the-art AR models. Our
training regime in particular would certainly benefit from more hyperparameter optimisation.
Second, one compelling reason we chose to explore continuous diffusion for text is to leverage the
improvements produced by the literature on image generation. While we have ported some (e.g. self-
conditioning), a lot more remains unexplored. The most obvious example is the sampling process
itself, where the number of required steps has been considerably reduced for images (e.g. Karras
et al. (2022) goes from 1000 to 35, and Salimans & Ho (2022) all the way down to 4 on simple
images). Our current sampling is very inefficient, and this direction is one of the first improvements
to make over S ED.
Third, S ED crucially relies on diffusing in a pretrained embedding space. This means relying on
a second model, and using embeddings that may not be optimal for diffusion. Ideally, we’d train
the full model end-to-end, which could yield even better results. While Li et al. (2022) found some
success with this approach, it was in a specific setting at a small scale; in practice we found it difficult
to avoid competition between the diffusion and reconstruction loss.
Finally, our work would benefit from improved metrics in the experimental section. Because the
current state of the art involves AR models, the field lacks established benchmarks for tasks diffusion
models are potentially better suited for, such as text in-filling. We opted for a reasonable mix,
evaluating the negative log-likelihood of generated samples according to a very strong AR model as
well as their token entropy and complementing it with a human evaluation. However, both NLL and
unigram entropy are gameable (e.g. AR models assign very low NLL to repetitive snippets, and long
enough repetitions can fool even entropy). Further, our NLL is inherently tied to its AR model and
could thus be providing an unfair advantage to AR models. All told, we still found both metrics quite
useful for measuring research progress, and our human evaluation confirmed our results. Moving
forward, defining a clean in-filling benchmark would help produce even more convincing results.


6    C ONCLUSION

We propose S ED, the first generally-capable continuous diffusion model for text generation. S ED
models can perform both conditional and unconditional generation, and their performance rivals
AR models while being more flexible in their use (e.g. enabling in-filling). We demonstrate their
performance and study the impact of the main design choices.
Despite its limitations, this work lays the foundation for more exciting research. Promising direc-
tions include speeding up the sampling following the lessons learnt in the image domain, devising
better embedding spaces for diffusion and investigating new in-filling capabilities.


                                                        9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


R EFERENCES
Jacob Austin, Daniel D. Johnson, Jonathan Ho, Daniel Tarlow, and Rianne van den Berg. Structured
  denoising diffusion models in discrete state-spaces. In NeurIPS, pp. 17981–17993, 2021.
Yoshua Bengio, Réjean Ducharme, and Pascal Vincent. A neural probabilistic language model.
  Advances in neural information processing systems, 13, 2000.
Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
  Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. Language models are
  few-shot learners. Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:1877–1901, 2020.
Massimo Caccia, Lucas Caccia, William Fedus, Hugo Larochelle, Joelle Pineau, and Laurent Char-
 lin. Language gans falling short. arXiv preprint arXiv:1811.02549, 2018.
Huiwen Chang, Han Zhang, Lu Jiang, Ce Liu, and William T Freeman. Maskgit: Masked generative
  image transformer. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
  Recognition, pp. 11315–11325, 2022.
Ting Chen, Ruixiang Zhang, and Geoffrey E. Hinton. Analog bits: Generating discrete data using
  diffusion models with self-conditioning. CoRR, abs/2208.04202, 2022.
Zihang Dai, Zhilin Yang, Yiming Yang, Jaime Carbonell, Quoc V. Le, and Ruslan Salakhutdinov.
  Transformer-xl: Attentive language models beyond a fixed-length context, 2019. URL https:
  //arxiv.org/abs/1901.02860.
Cyprien De Masson d’Autume, Shakir Mohamed, Mihaela Rosca, and Jack Rae. Training language
  gans from scratch. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 32, 2019.
Prafulla Dhariwal and Alexander Quinn Nichol. Diffusion models beat gans on image synthesis. In
  NeurIPS, pp. 8780–8794, 2021.
Marjan Ghazvininejad, Omer Levy, Yinhan Liu, and Luke Zettlemoyer. Mask-predict: Parallel
 decoding of conditional masked language models. In EMNLP/IJCNLP (1), pp. 6111–6120. As-
 sociation for Computational Linguistics, 2019.
Shuyang Gu, Dong Chen, Jianmin Bao, Fang Wen, Bo Zhang, Dongdong Chen, Lu Yuan, and
  Baining Guo. Vector quantized diffusion model for text-to-image synthesis. In Proceedings of
  the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 10696–10706, 2022.
Dan Hendrycks and Kevin Gimpel. Gaussian error linear units (gelus), 2016. URL https://
  arxiv.org/abs/1606.08415.
Martin Heusel, Hubert Ramsauer, Thomas Unterthiner, Bernhard Nessler, and Sepp Hochreiter.
 Gans trained by a two time-scale update rule converge to a local nash equilibrium. In NIPS, pp.
 6626–6637, 2017.
Jonathan Ho and Tim Salimans. Classifier-free diffusion guidance. CoRR, abs/2207.12598, 2022.
Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. Denoising diffusion probabilistic models. In NeurIPS,
  2020.
Jordan Hoffmann, Sebastian Borgeaud, Arthur Mensch, Elena Buchatskaya, Trevor Cai, Eliza
  Rutherford, Diego de Las Casas, Lisa Anne Hendricks, Johannes Welbl, Aidan Clark, et al. Train-
  ing compute-optimal large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.15556, 2022.
Ari Holtzman, Jan Buys, Li Du, Maxwell Forbes, and Yejin Choi. The curious case of neural text
  degeneration. In ICLR. OpenReview.net, 2020.
Emiel Hoogeboom, Didrik Nielsen, Priyank Jaini, Patrick Forré, and Max Welling. Argmax flows
  and multinomial diffusion: Learning categorical distributions. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 34:12454–12465, 2021.
Tero Karras, Miika Aittala, Timo Aila, and Samuli Laine. Elucidating the design space of diffusion-
  based generative models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.00364, 2022.


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Diederik P. Kingma, Tim Salimans, Ben Poole, and Jonathan Ho. Variational diffusion models.
  CoRR, abs/2107.00630, 2021.

Taku Kudo and John Richardson. Sentencepiece: A simple and language independent subword
  tokenizer and detokenizer for neural text processing. In EMNLP (Demonstration), pp. 66–71.
  Association for Computational Linguistics, 2018.

Xiang Lisa Li, John Thickstun, Ishaan Gulrajani, Percy Liang, and Tatsunori B. Hashimoto.
  Diffusion-lm improves controllable text generation. CoRR, abs/2205.14217, 2022.

Gautam Mittal, Jesse H. Engel, Curtis Hawthorne, and Ian Simon. Symbolic music generation with
  diffusion models. In ISMIR, pp. 468–475, 2021.

Alexander Quinn Nichol and Prafulla Dhariwal. Improved denoising diffusion probabilistic models.
  In ICML, volume 139 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 8162–8171. PMLR,
  2021.

Alexander Quinn Nichol, Prafulla Dhariwal, Aditya Ramesh, Pranav Shyam, Pamela Mishkin, Bob
  McGrew, Ilya Sutskever, and Mark Chen. GLIDE: towards photorealistic image generation and
  editing with text-guided diffusion models. In ICML, volume 162 of Proceedings of Machine
  Learning Research, pp. 16784–16804. PMLR, 2022.

Colin Raffel, Noam Shazeer, Adam Roberts, Katherine Lee, Sharan Narang, Michael Matena, Yanqi
  Zhou, Wei Li, and Peter J. Liu. Exploring the limits of transfer learning with a unified text-to-text
  transformer. J. Mach. Learn. Res., 21:140:1–140:67, 2020.

Aditya Ramesh, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alex Nichol, Casey Chu, and Mark Chen. Hierarchical text-
  conditional image generation with CLIP latents. CoRR, abs/2204.06125, 2022.

Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and Björn Ommer. High-
  resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models. CoRR, abs/2112.10752, 2021.

Chitwan Saharia, William Chan, Saurabh Saxena, Lala Li, Jay Whang, Emily Denton, Seyed Kam-
  yar Seyed Ghasemipour, Burcu Karagol Ayan, S. Sara Mahdavi, Rapha Gontijo Lopes, Tim Sali-
  mans, Jonathan Ho, David J. Fleet, and Mohammad Norouzi. Photorealistic text-to-image diffu-
  sion models with deep language understanding. CoRR, abs/2205.11487, 2022.

Tim Salimans and Jonathan Ho. Progressive distillation for fast sampling of diffusion models. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2202.00512, 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2202.00512.

Nikolay Savinov, Junyoung Chung, Mikolaj Binkowski, Erich Elsen, and Aäron van den Oord.
  Step-unrolled denoising autoencoders for text generation. In ICLR. OpenReview.net, 2022.

Stanislau Semeniuta, Aliaksei Severyn, and Sylvain Gelly. On accurate evaluation of gans for lan-
  guage generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1806.04936, 2018.

Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, Eric A. Weiss, Niru Maheswaranathan, and Surya Ganguli. Deep unsuper-
  vised learning using nonequilibrium thermodynamics. In ICML, volume 37 of JMLR Workshop
  and Conference Proceedings, pp. 2256–2265. JMLR.org, 2015.

Ilya Sutskever, James Martens, and Geoffrey E Hinton. Generating text with recurrent neural net-
   works. In ICML, 2011.

Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez,
  Łukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. Advances in neural informa-
  tion processing systems, 30, 2017.


                                                  11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A    M ODEL ARCHITECTURE
For both the AR and the S ED models, we use the same transformer (Vaswani et al., 2017) archi-
tecture, which are similar to those described in (Hoffmann et al., 2022), with relative positional
encoding as described in (Dai et al., 2019) in the attention blocks, and with a 4x expansion and
a Gelu (Hendrycks & Gimpel, 2016) non-linearity in the feed-forward blocks. The architecture
hyper-parameters are detailed in table 9. Noised word embeddings, x ∈ RN ×D , are first passed
through a linear projection that operates on each embedding independently to get a projected em-
bedding whose feature dimension matches the width of the transformer, dmodel . At diffusion step
t, we compute a time embedding as a sinusoidal position embedding (Vaswani et al., 2017) of size
dmodel , which is then passed into a dmodel × dmodel linear layer and added to the projected embedding.
We add a linear output projection layer E ′ which takes the output of the transformer y ∈ RN ×dmodel
and projects each element (yi )1≤i≤N back to the same size as the word embeddings. When using
self-conditionning, we modify the input to the model by concatenating x and x̂0 along the feature
axis before passing them to the input projection layer.

                          Table 9: Model hyper parameters.
           Model     number of layers dmodel number of heads           head size
           S                12             896            16               64
           L                12            1536            16              128


B    F ORWARD DIFFUSION PROCESS VISUALIZATION
To support the discussion on word embeddings dimension from Section 4.4, we present a visualiza-
tion of the forward diffusion process. Given starting tokens x0 , we project the noised tokens xt of
the forward process at step t to their nearest neighbor among word embeddings E to obtain wt . We
then store the 128 nearest neighbors N (w0 ) of starting tokens w0 = x0 and define the rank rt of
wt at its index in N (w0 ). We display wt and highlight it in green if rt is close to zero (meaning wt
is a close neighbor of w0 ) and in increasingly red colors otherwise. We present the first 16 nearest
neighbors of w0 in Figure 2 and provide an illustration of the color code used for highlighting. Fig-
ure 3 shows an instance of the forward diffusion process while diffusing on embeddings of with a
high dimension of 896 and Figure 4 shows diffusion on embeddings with a lower dimension of 32.
We observe that in high dimension, the noised token’s closest neighbour remains the original token
up until the point where any token could be its closest neighbour. The diffusion random walk does
not seem to pass through the neighbourhoods of semantically-related tokens. We hypothesize that
the root cause of this issue is that the embedding space is mostly empty (with only 32000 points in
R896 , as dembed = 896); and that embeddings are potentially concentrating in a lower-dimensional
space.
In contrast, in lower dimension we see meaningfully-related tokens appear as the corruption pro-
gresses (‘brown’ becomes ‘grey’, ‘quick’ becomes ‘swift’, ‘over’ becomes ‘underneath’ etc). We
believe this more gradual information destruction is beneficial for the diffusion model.

C    A DDITIONAL SAMPLES


                                                  12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 2: Nearest neighbors of tokens from the sentence ”the quick brown fox jumps over the lazy
dog”


Figure 3: Visualization of the forward diffusion process up to 300 steps when diffusing on embed-
dings with dimension 896.


Figure 4: Visualization of the forward diffusion process up to 300 steps when diffusing on embed-
dings with dimension 32.


                                               13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


             Figure 5: Reverse diffusion process of S ED-L with guidance scale 2.5.


                                   Table 10: Samples from S ED-L.
      This course is essential for the environment in which students choose the curriculum option
      study at JHD. Geographical Integration is at the heart of this department. Along with the ur-
      ban infrastructural innovations of the mid-1990’s and social issues in the 21st Century. People
      within the department regularly exemplify the concept of real integration.
      That did trigger some rewarding words or insights to begin preparing their kid for their future.
      Luckily, Mikaela has been nice enough to tolerate my questions about what parents can do to
      help, even during her summer vacation.
      I went to college at Boston University. After getting my degree, I decided to make a change!
      I enrolled in outdoor schools. After getting my degree, I loved jet skiing, offshore fishing, and
      Kitesurfing. The list became growing. More importantly, I started a career by fishing at sea.
      Now, I can’t get enough of the Pacific Ocean!
      The beaver is an interesting animal that lives in rivers and waterfalls across Puerto Rico. It
      loves kayaking, fishing, and swimming. But, you want to know what are the animals behind
      the beaver?
      A year ago in Paris, I had the opportunity to take a field trip to La Rite-en-Laurences Interna-
      tional de France where I met David Nigel Johnson, a professor of social studies. What a great
      trip and what a great day!
      A year ago in Paris, my friends and I went on a dirt road trip to the city. I remember walking
      through the church, its beautiful square, narrow streets lit with memorials and passing a terrible
      Catholic Bishop I am used to - what a sad day...
      There was no evidence, only fleeting glimpses of the existence of cognitive disability. There
      was no luck and no solid science. It was all guesswork, the blinding prospect of pneumonia
      could spur imagination at the possibility of brain damage.


                                                     14
