Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


W HERE TO D IFFUSE , H OW TO D IFFUSE , AND H OW TO
G ET BACK : AUTOMATED L EARNING FOR M ULTIVARI -
ATE D IFFUSIONS

 Raghav Singhal∗,1 , Mark Goldstein∗1 , Rajesh Ranganath1,2
 Courant Institute of Mathematical Sciences1 , New York University
 Center for Data Science2 , New York University



                                             A BSTRACT

          Diffusion-based generative models (DBGMs) perturb data to a target noise distri-
          bution and reverse this process to generate samples. The choice of noising process,
          or inference diffusion process, affects both likelihoods and sample quality. For ex-
          ample, extending the inference process with auxiliary variables leads to improved
          sample quality. While there are many such multivariate diffusions to explore,
          each new one requires significant model-specific analysis, hindering rapid pro-
          totyping and evaluation. In this work, we study Multivariate Diffusion Models
          (MDMs). For any number of auxiliary variables, we provide a recipe for maximiz-
          ing a lower-bound on the MDMs likelihood without requiring any model-specific
          analysis. We then demonstrate how to parameterize the diffusion for a specified
          target noise distribution; these two points together enable optimizing the infer-
          ence diffusion process. Optimizing the diffusion expands easy experimentation
          from just a few well-known processes to an automatic search over all linear dif-
          fusions. To demonstrate these ideas, we introduce two new specific diffusions
          as well as learn a diffusion process on the MNIST, CIFAR10, and IMAGENET32
          datasets. We show learned MDMs match or surpass bits-per-dims (BPDs) relative
          to fixed choices of diffusions for a given dataset and model architecture.


1   I NTRODUCTION
Diffusion-based generative models (DBGMs) perturb data to a target noise distribution and reverse
this process to generate samples. They have achieved impressive performance in image generation,
editing, translation (Dhariwal & Nichol, 2021; Nichol & Dhariwal, 2021; Sasaki et al., 2021; Ho
et al., 2022), conditional text-to-image tasks (Nichol et al., 2021; Ramesh et al., 2022; Saharia et al.,
2022) and music and audio generation (Chen et al., 2020; Kong et al., 2020; Mittal et al., 2021).
They are often trained by maximizing a lower bound on the log likelihood, featuring an inference
process interpreted as gradually “noising” the data (Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2015; Ho et al., 2020).
The choice of this inference process affects both likelihoods and sample quality. On different
datasets and models, different inference processes work better; there is no universal best choice
of inference, and the choice matters (Song et al., 2020b).
While some work has improved performance by designing score model architectures (Ho et al.,
2020; Kingma et al., 2021; Dhariwal & Nichol, 2021), Dockhorn et al. (2021) instead introduce
the critically-damped langevin diffusion (CLD), showing that significant improvements in sample
generation can be gained by carefully designing new processes. CLD pairs each data dimension with
an auxiliary “velocity” variable and diffuses them jointly using second-order Langevin dynamics.
A natural question: if introducing new diffusions results in dramatic performance gains, why are
there only a handful of diffusions (variance-preserving stochastic differential equation (VPSDE),
variance exploding (VE), CLD, sub-VPSDE) used in DBGMs? For instance, are there other auxiliary
variable diffusions that would lead to improvements like CLD? This avenue seems promising as
auxiliary variables have improved other generative models and inferences, such as normalizing flows
    ∗
        Equal Contribution. Correspondence to {rsinghal,goldstein} at nyu.edu.


                                                   1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


(Huang et al., 2020), neural ordinary differential equations (ODEs) (Dupont et al., 2019), hierarchical
variational models (Ranganath et al., 2016), ladder variational autoencoder (Sønderby et al., 2016),
among others.
Despite its success, CLD also provides evidence that each new process requires significant model-
specific analysis. Deriving the evidence lower bound (ELBO) and training algorithm for diffusions
is challenging (Huang et al., 2021; Kingma et al., 2021; Song et al., 2021) and is carried out in
a case-by-case manner for new diffusions (Campbell et al., 2022). Auxiliary variables seemingly
complicate this process further; computing conditionals of the inference process necessitates solving
matrix Lyupanov equations (section 3.3). Deriving the inference stationary distribution—which
helps the model and inference match—can be intractable. These challenges limit rapid prototyping
and evaluation of new inference processes.
Concretely, training a diffusion model requires:

  (R1): Selecting an inference and model process pair such that the inference process converges to
        the model prior
  (R2): Deriving the ELBO for this pair
  (R3): Estimating the ELBO and its gradients by deriving and computing the inference process’
        transition kernel

In this work, we introduce Multivariate Diffusion Models (MDMs) and a method for training and
evaluating them. MDMs are diffusion-based generative models trained with auxiliary variables. We
provide a recipe for training MDMs beyond specific instantiations–like VPSDE and CLD—to all linear
inference processes that have a stationary distribution, with any number of auxiliary variables.
First, we bring results from gradient-based MCMC (Ma et al., 2015) to diffusion modeling to con-
struct MDMs that converge to a chosen model prior (R1); this tightens the ELBO. Secondly, for any
number of auxiliary variables, we derive the MDM ELBO (R2). Finally, we show that the transition
kernel of linear MDMs, necessary for the ELBO, can be computed automatically and generically, for
higher-dimensional auxiliary systems (R3).
With these tools, we explore a variety of new inference processes for diffusion-based generative
models. We then note that the automatic transitions and fixed stationary distributions facilitate di-
rectly learning the inference to maximize the MDM ELBO. Learning turns diffusion model training
into a search not only over score models but also inference processes, at no extra derivational cost.

Methodological Contributions. In summary, our methodological contributions are:

      1. Deriving ELBOs for training and evaluating multivariate diffusion models (MDMs) with
         auxiliary variables.
      2. Showing that the diffusion transition covariance does not need to be manually derived for
         each new diffusion. We instead demonstrate that a matrix factorization technique, previ-
         ously unused in diffusion models, can automatically compute the covariance analytically
         for any linear MDM.
      3. Using results from gradient-based Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) to construct MDMs
         with a complete parameterization of inference processes whose stationary distribution
         matches the model prior.
      4. Combining the above into an algorithm called Automatic Multivariate Diffusion Training
         (AMDT) that enables training without diffusion-specific derivations. AMDT enables training
         score models for any linear diffusion, including optimizing the diffusion and score jointly.

To demonstrate these ideas, we develop MDMs with two specific diffusions as well as learned mul-
tivariate diffusions. The specific diffusions are accelerated Langevin diffusion (ALDA) (introduced
in Mou et al. (2019) as a higher-order scheme for gradient-based MCMC) and an alteration, mod-
ified accelerated Langevin diffusion (MALDA). Previously, using these diffusions for generative
modeling would require significant model-specific analysis. Instead, AMDT for these diffusions is
derivation-free.

                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Empirical contributions. We train MDMs on the MNIST, IMAGENET32 and CIFAR-10 datasets. In
the experiments, we show that:

      1. Training new and existing fixed diffusions, such as ALDA and MALDA, is easy with the
         proposed algorithm AMDT.
      2. Using AMDT to learn the choice of diffusion for the MDM matches or surpasses the perfor-
         mance of fixed choices of diffusion process; sometimes the learned diffusion and VPSDE
         do best; other times the learned diffusion and CLD do best.
      3. There are new and existing MDMs, trained and evaluated with the MDM ELBO, that account
         for as much performance improvement over VPSDE as a three-fold increase in score model
         size for a fixed univariate diffusion.

These findings affirm that the choice of diffusion affects the optimization problem, and that learning
the choice bypasses the process of choosing diffusions for each new dataset and score architecture.
We additionally show the utility of the MDM ELBO by showing on a dataset that CLD achieves better
bits-per-dims (BPDs) than previously reported with the probability flow ODE (Dockhorn et al., 2021).

2    S ETUP

We present diffusions by starting with the generative model and then describing its likelihood lower
bound (Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2015; Huang et al., 2021; Kingma et al., 2021). Diffusions sample
from a model prior z0 ∼ πθ and then evolve a continuous-time stochastic process zt ∈ Rd :
                                  dz = hθ (z, t)dt + βθ (t)dBt ,     t ∈ [0, T ]                            (1)
where Bt is a d-dimensionsal Brownian motion. The model is trained so that zT approximates the
data x ∼ qdata .1 Maximum likelihood training of diffusion models is intractable (Huang et al., 2021;
Song et al., 2021; Kingma et al., 2021). Instead, they are trained using a variational lower bound on
log pθ (zT = x). The bound requires an inference process qϕ (ys |x = x):2

                                 dy = fϕ (y, s)ds + gϕ (s)dB
                                                           b s,       s ∈ [0, T ]                           (2)

where B b s is another Brownian motion independent of Bt . The inference process is usually taken
to be specified rather than learned, and chosen to be i.i.d. for each ytj conditional on each xj . This
leads to the interpretation of the ytj as noisy versions of features xj (Ho et al., 2020). While the
diffusion ELBO is challenging to derive in general, Huang et al. (2021); Song et al. (2021) show that
when the model process takes the form:
                 dz = gϕ2 (T − t)sθ (z, T − t) − fϕ (z, T − t) dt + gϕ (T − t)dBt ,

                                                                                                    (3)
the ELBO is:
                                         "                  Z T                                  #
                     ism                                           1     2          2
    log pθ (x) ≥ L         (x) = Eqϕ (y|x) log πθ (yT ) +         − ∥sθ ∥g2 − ∇ · (gϕ sθ − fϕ )ds ,         (4)
                                                             0     2      ϕ



where fϕ , gϕ , sθ are evaluated at (ys , s), ∥x∥2A = x⊤ Ax and g 2 = gg ⊤ . Equation (4) features
the Implicit Score Matching (ISM) loss (Song et al., 2020a), and can be re-written as an ELBO Ldsm
featuring Denoising Score Matching (DSM) (Vincent, 2011; Song et al., 2020b), see appendix F.1.

3    A RECIPE FOR M ULTIVARIATE D IFFUSION M ODELS

As has been shown in prior work (Song et al., 2021; Dockhorn et al., 2021), the choice of diffusion
matters. Drawing on principles from previous generative models (section 6), we can consider a wide
class of diffusion inference processes by constructing them using auxiliary variables.
  1
    Following Huang et al. (2021); Dockhorn et al. (2021) we integrate all processes in forward time 0 to T . It
may be helpful to think of an additional variable x̂t ≜ zT −t so that x̂0 approximates x ∼ qdata .
  2
    We use y as the inference variable over the same space as the model’s z.


                                                       3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


At first glance, training such diffusions can seem challenging. First, one needs an ELBO that includes
auxiliary variables. This ELBO will require sampling from the transition kernel, and setting the
model prior to the specified inference stationary distribution. But doing such diffusion-specific
analysis manually is challenging and hinders rapid prototyping.
In this section we show how to address these challenges and introduce an algorithm, AMDT, to
simplify and automate modeling with MDMs. AMDT can be used to train new and existing diffu-
sions, including those with auxiliary variables, and including those that learn the inference process.
In appendix A we discuss how the presented methods can also be used to automate and improve
simplified score matching and noise prediction objectives used to train diffusion models.

3.1    M ULTIVARIATE M ODEL AND I NFERENCE

For the j th data coordinate at each time t, MDMs pair ztj ∈ R with a vector of auxiliary variables
vtj ∈ RK−1 into a joint vector ut and diffuse in the extended space:

                                                      z
                       u0 ∼ πθ ,       du = hθ (ut = t , t)dt + βθ (t)dBt .                     (5)
                                                      vt

MDM s model the data x with zT , a coordinate in uT ∼ pθ . For the j th feature xj , each utj ∈ RK
consists of a “data” dimension uztj and auxiliary variable uvtj . Therefore u ∈ RdK . We extend the
drift coefficient hθ from a function in Rd × R+ → Rd to the extended space RdK × R+ → RdK .
We likewise extend the diffusion coefficient to a matrix βθ acting on Brownian motion Bt ∈ RdK .
Because the MDM model is over the extended space, the inference distribution y must be too. We
then set q(yv0 |yz0 = x) to any chosen initial distribution, e.g. N (0, I) and discuss this choice in
section 4. Then ys evolves according to the auxiliary variable inference process:

                                      dy = fϕ (y, s)ds + gϕ (s)dB
                                                                b s,                               (6)
where the inference drift and diffusion coefficients fϕ , gϕ are now over the extended space y =
[yz , yv ]. The function fϕ lets the z and v coordinates of ytj interact in the inference process.

A SSUMPTIONS

This work demonstrates how to parameterize time-varying Itô processes, used for diffusion mod-
eling, to have a stationary distribution that matches the given model prior. To take advantage of
the automatic transition kernels also presented, the inferences considered for modeling are linear
time-varying processes and take the form:
                                      dy = Aϕ (s)yds + gϕ (s)dBs
where Aϕ (s) : R+ → dK × dK and gϕ (s) : R+ → dK × dK are matrix-valued functions.

3.2    ELBO FOR MDM s

We now show how to train MDMs to optimize a lower bound on the log likelihood of the data. Like
in the univariate case, we use the parameterization in eq. (3) to obtain a tractable ELBO.
Theorem 1. The MDM log marginal likelihood of the data is lower-bounded by:
                     "               Z T                                                  #
                                         1      2          2                        v
logpθ (x) ≥ Eqϕ (y|x) log πθ (yT ) −       ∥sθ ∥g2 + ∇ · (gϕ sθ − fϕ )ds − log qϕ (y0 |x)      (Lmism )
                                      0 2
                       | {z }                    ϕ                         |    {z      }
                               ℓT                                                      ℓq
                "        Z T                                                   #
                               1           1
      = Eqϕ (y|x) ℓT +           ∥sϕ ∥2g2 − ∥sθ − sϕ ∥2g2 + (∇ · fϕ )ds − ℓq       (Lmdsm ).
                          0    2        ϕ  2            ϕ


                                                                                                   (7)

where divergences and gradients are taken with respect to ys and sϕ = ∇ys log qϕ (ys |x).


                                                     4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Proof. The proof for the MDM ISM ELBO Lmism is in appendix F. In short, we introduce auxiliary
variables, apply Theorem 1 of Huang et al. (2021) (equivalently, Theorem 3 of Song et al. (2021)
or appendix E of Kingma et al. (2021)) to the joint space, and then apply an additional variational
bound to v0 . The MDM DSM ELBO Lmdsm is likewise derived in appendix F, similarly to Huang et al.
(2021); Song et al. (2021), but extended to multivariate diffusions.

We train MDM’s by estimating the gradients of Lmdsm , as estimates of Lmism can be computationally
prohibitive. For numerical stability, the integral in eq. (7) is computed on [ϵ, T ] rather than [0, T ].
One can regard this as a bound for a variable uϵ . To maintain a proper likelihood bound for the data,
one can choose a likelihood u0 |uϵ and compose bounds as we demonstrate in appendix I. We report
the ELBO with this likelihood term, which plays the same role as the discretized Gaussian in Nichol
& Dhariwal (2021) and Tweedie’s formula in Song et al. (2021).

3.3   I NGREDIENT 1: C OMPUTING THE TRANSITION qϕ (ys |x)

To estimate eq. (7) and its gradients, we need samples from q(ys |x) and to compute ∇ log q(ys |x).
While an intractable problem for MDMs in general, we provide two ingredients for tightening and
optimizing these bounds in a generic fashion for linear inference MDMs.
We first show how to automate computation of q(ys |y0 ) and then q(ys |x). For linear MDMs of the
form:
                                      dy = A(s)yds + g(s)dBs ,
the transition kernel q(ys |y0 ) is Gaussian (Särkkä & Solin, 2019). Let f (y, s) = A(s)y. Then, the
mean and covariance are solutions to the following ODEs:
                            dms|0 /ds = A(s)ms|0
                        dΣs|0 /ds = A(s)Σs|0 + Σs|0 A⊤ (s) + g 2 (s).                                (8)
The mean can be solved analytically:
                                    Z s
                     ms|0 = exp         A(ν)dν y0 = exp(sA)y0 .                                      (9)
                                     0              |    {z       }
                                                         no integration if A(ν) = A
The covariance equation does not have as simple a solution because eq. (9) as the unknown matrix
Σs|0 is being multiplied both from the left and the right.
Instead of solving eq. (8) for a specific diffusion manually, as done in previous work (e.g. pages 50-
54 of Dockhorn et al. (2021)), we show that a matrix factorization technique (Särkkä & Solin (2019),
sec. 6.3) previously unused in diffusion-based generative models can automatically compute Σs|0
generically for any linear MDM. Define Cs , Hs that evolve according to:
                                                        g 2 (s)

                               dCs /ds          A(s)                Cs
                                           =                              ,                       (10)
                               dHs /ds            0    −A⊤ (s)      Hs
then Σs|0 = Cs Hs −1 for C0 = Σ0 and H0 = I (Appendix D). These equations can be solved in
closed-form,
                     "                  #             "              #
                               [g 2 ]s                          g2

          Cs             [A]s             Σ0              A                Σ0
              = exp                            = exp s                           ,    (11)
          Hs              0   −[A⊤ ]s      I               0 −A⊤            I
                                               |           {z          }
                                                        no integration if A(ν) = A, g(ν) = g
               Rs
where [A]s =    0
                    A(ν)dν. To condition on y0 = (x, v), we set Σ0 = 0.

Computing qϕ (ys |x). For the covariance Σs|0 , to condition on x instead of y0 , we set Σ0 to

                                             0      0
                                     Σ0 =                ,
                                             0 Σv0
To compute the mean, it is the same expression as for q(ys |y0 ), but with a different initial condition:
                                           Z s
                                                                 x
                              ms|0 = exp       A(ν)dν              v                                 (12)
                                             0
                                                            Eq [y0 |x]
See appendix D for more details.


                                                   5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Algorithm 1 Automatic Multivariate Diffusion Training
  Input: Data {xi }, inference process matrices Qϕ , Dϕ , model prior πθ , initial distribution qϕ (y0v |
  x), and score model architecture sθ
  Returns: Trained score model sθ
  while sθ not converged do
                  PN
    Sample x ∼ i=1 N1 δxi , v0 ∼ qϕ (y0v | x)
    Sample s ∼ U[0, T ] and ys , yT ∼ qϕ (ys | x) using algorithm 2
    Estimate the stochastic gradient of the MDM ELBO, ∇θ L(θ, ϕ), using eq. (7)
    θ ← θ + α∇θ L(θ, ϕ).
    if learning inference then
        ϕ ← ϕ + α∇ϕ L(θ, ϕ)
    end if
  end while
  Output sθ


A fast and simple algorithm. We show in algorithm 2 Table 1: Runtime Comparison: we
(appendix H) that computing the transition kernel only compare the run time of sampling from
requires knowing f, g and requires no diffusion-specific the CLD diffusion analytically versus
analysis. For K − 1 auxiliary variables, A, g are K × K. using the automated algorithm.
Like for scalar diffusions, these parameters are shared
across data coordinates. This means matrix exponentials        Method          CIFAR -10   MNIST
and inverses are done on K ×K matrices, where K is only        Analytical 0.027            0.0062
2 or 3 in our experiments. In table 1, we compare the time     Automated 0.029             0.007
to sample a batch of size 256 from the transition kernel for
CIFAR 10 and MNIST . The table shows the extra computa-
tional cost of the automated algorithm is negligible. This automation likewise applies to simplified
score matching and noise prediction objectives, since all rely on qϕ (ys |x) (appendix A).

3.4   I NGREDIENT 2: MDM PARAMETERIZATION

The MDM ELBO (eq. (7)) is tighter when the inference yT tends toward the model’s prior πθ . Here
we construct inference processes with the model prior πθ as a specified stationary distribution q∞ .
Ma et al. (2015) provide a complete recipe for constructing gradient-based MCMC samplers; the
recipe constructs non-linear time-homogeneous Itô processes with a given stationary distribution,
and show that the parameterization spans all such Itô processes with that stationary distribution.
Diffusion models usually have time-varying drift and diffusion coefficients (e.g. use of the β(t)
function). To build diffusion models that match the model prior, we first extend Theorem 1 from
Ma et al. (2015) to construct non-linear Itô processes with time-varying drift and diffusion coef-
ficients with a given stationary distribution (Appendix C). Then, to keep transitions tractable (per
Section 3.3), we specialize this result to linear Itô diffusions.
We directly state the result for linear time-varying diffusions with stationary distributions. The pa-
rameterization requires a skew-symmetric matrix −Q(s) = Q(s)⊤ , a positive semi-definite matrix
D(s), and a function ∇H(y) such that the desired stationary distribution q∞ is proportional to
exp[−H(y)]. Linear Itô diffusions have Gaussian stationary distributions (Särkkä & Solin, 2019)√
meaning that ∇H is linear and can be expressed  √ as Sy for some matrix     S. For a matrix A, let A
refer to the matrix square root defined by a = A ⇐⇒ A = aa⊤ . Then, the Itô diffusion:
                                    h              i         p
                           dy = − Q(s) + D(s) Sy ds + 2D(s) dB           b s,                     (13)
                                  |        {z         }      |  {z   }
                                                                 g(s)
                                          f (y,s)

has Gaussian stationary distribution N (0, S−1 ) where Q(s), D(s) and S are parameters. For a
discussion of convergence to the stationary distribution, as well as skew-symmetric and positive
semi-definite parameterizations, see appendix C, where we also show that existing diffusion pro-
cesses such as VPSDE and CLD are included in Q/D parameterization. We display the ELBO in
terms of Q/D in appendix G and an algorithm in appendix H.


                                                    6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


For score matching and noise prediction losses and a given qϕ , achieving a minimizing value with
respect to sθ does not imply that the generative model score will match the inference score. Model-
ing the data also requires the marginal distribution of qϕ,T to approximate π. When qϕ is constant, it
is important to confirm the stationary distribution is appropriately set, and the tools used here for the
ELBO can be used to satisfy this requirement for score matching and noise prediction (appendix A).


3.5   L EARNING THE INFERENCE PROCESS

The choice of diffusion matters, and the ELBOs in eq. (7) have no requirement for fixed qϕ . We
therefore learn the inference process jointly with sθ . Under linear transitions (ingredient 1), no
algorithmic details change as the diffusion changes during training. Under stationary parameteriza-
tion (ingredient 2), we can learn without the stationary distribution going awry. In the experiments,
learning matches or surpasses BPDs of fixed diffusions for a given dataset and score architecture.
In Lmdsm or Lmism , qϕ,∞ may be set to equal πθ , but it is yT ∼ qϕ,T for the chosen T that is featured
in the ELBO. Learning qϕ can choose yT to reduce the cross-entropy:
                                        −Eqϕ (yT |x) [log πθ (yT )].                                    (14)
Minimizing eq. (14) will tighten the ELBO for any sθ . Next, qϕ is featured in the remaining terms
that feature sθ ; optimizing for qϕ will tighten and improve the ELBO alongside sθ . Finally, qϕ is
featured in the expectations and the − log qϕ term:
                                                  h                                    i
               log pθ (uzT = x) ≥= Eqϕ (yv0 =v|x) (Ldsm or Lism ) − log qϕ (yv0 = v|x)         (15)
                                    |     {z    }                 |        {z        }

The qϕ (yv0 |x) terms impose an optimality condition that pθ (uvT |uzT ) = qϕ (yv0 |yz0 ) (appendix E),
When it is satisfied, no looseness in the ELBO is due to the initial time zero auxiliary variables.
To learn, Q, D need to be specified with parameters ϕ that enable gradients. We keep S fixed
at inverse covariance of πθ . The transition kernel qϕ (ys |x) depends on Q, D through its mean
and covariance. Gaussian distributions permit gradient estimation with reparameterization or score-
function gradients (Kingma & Welling, 2013; Ranganath et al., 2014; Rezende & Mohamed, 2015;
Titsias & Lázaro-Gredilla, 2014). Reparameterization is accomplished via:
                                           ys = ms|0 + Ls|0 ϵ                                           (16)
where ϵ ∼ N (0, IdK ) and Ls|0 satisfies Ls|0 L⊤
                                               s|0 = Σs|0 , derived using coordinate-wise Cholesky
decomposition. Gradients flow through eq. (16) from ys to ms|0 and Σs|0 to Q, D to parameters ϕ.
Algorithm 1 displays Automatic Multivariate Diffusion Training (AMDT). A MDT provides a training
method for diffusion-based generative models for either fixed Q, D matrices or for learning the
Qϕ , Dϕ matrices, without requiring any diffusion-specific analysis.

Learning in other diffusion objectives. Like in the ELBO, learning in score matching or noise
prediction objectives can improve the match between the inference process and implied generative
model (appendix A).

4     I NSIGHTS INTO M ULTIVARIATE D IFFUSIONS
Scalar versus Multivariate Processes. Equation (13) clarifies what can change while preserving
q∞ . Recall that Q and D are K × K for K − 1 auxiliary variables. Because 0 is the only 1 × 1
skew-symmetric matrix, scalar processes must set Q = 0. With qϕ,∞ = N (0, I), the process is:
                                                  p
                               dy = −D(s)yds + 2D(s)dB      b s.                            (17)
What is left is the VPSDE process used widely in diffusion models where D(s) = 12 β(s) is 1 ×
1 (Song et al., 2020b). This reveals that the VPSDE process is the only scalar diffusion with a
stationary distribution.3 This also clarifies the role of Q: it accounts for mixing between dimensions
in multivariate processes, as do non-diagonal entries in D for K > 1.
   3
     There are processes such as sub-VPSDE (Song et al., 2020b) which are covered in the sense that they tend
to members of this parameterization as T grows: sub-VP converges to VPSDE.


                                                     7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


CLD optimizes a log-likelihood lower bound. Differentiating Lmdsm (eq. (7)) with respect to the
score model parameters, we show that the objective for CLD (Dockhorn et al., 2021) maximizes a
lower bound on log pθ (x), not just log pθ (u0 ), without appealing to the probability flow ODE.

Does my model use auxiliary variables? An example initial distribution is q(yv0 |x) = N (0, I).
It is also common to set πθ = N (0, I). Because the optimum for diffusions is pθ = q, the optimal
model has main and auxiliary dimensions independent at endpoints 0 and T . Does this mean that
the model does not use auxiliary variables? In appendix B, we show that in this case the model can
still use auxiliary variables at intermediate times. A sufficient condition is non-diagonal Q + D.

5   E XPERIMENTS

We test the MDM framework with handcrafted and learned diffusions. The handcrafted diffusions
are (a) A LDA, used in (Mou et al., 2019) for accelerated gradient-based MCMC sampling (eq. (32))
and (b) M ALDA: a modified version of ALDA (eq. (33)). Both have two auxiliary variables. We also
learn diffusions with 1 and 2 auxiliary variables. We compare with VPSDE and ELBO-trained CLD.

Table 2: B PD upper-bounds on image generation for a fixed architecture. CIFAR-10: learning
outperforms CLD, and both outperform the standard choice of VPSDE. MNIST: learning matches
VPSDE while the fixed auxiliary diffusions are worse. IMAGENET 32: all perform similarly. Learning
matches or surpasses the best fixed diffusion, while bypassing the need to choose a diffusion.

                        Model     K    CIFAR -10     IMAGENET 32      MNIST
                        VPSDE     1    3.20          3.70             1.26
                        Learned   2    3.07          3.71             1.28
                        Learned   3    3.08          3.72             1.33
                        CLD       2    3.11          3.70             1.35
                        MALDA     3    3.13          3.72             1.65
                        ALDA      3    29.43         33.08            124.60


Table 3: Parameter Efficiency. The first two rows display diffusions from previous work: VPSDE
and CLD, both using score models with 108 million parameters on CIFAR-10. We train the rest
using a score model with 35.7 million parameters. The learned diffusion matches the performance
of VPSDE-large; changes in the inference can account for as much improvement as a 3x increase in
score parameters. BPDs are upper-bounds.

                Model                                 K      Parameters   CIFAR -10
                VPSDE -large (Song et al., 2021)      1      108M         3.08
                CLD -large (Dockhorn et al., 2021)    2      108M         3.31
                Learned                               2      35.7M        3.07
                CLD                                   2      35.7M        3.11
                VPSDE                                 1      35.7M        3.20

Following prior work, we train DBGMs for image generation. We use the U-Net from Ho et al.
(2020). We input the auxiliary variables as extra channels, which only increases the score model
parameters in the input and output convolutions (CLD and Learned 2 have 7, 000 more parameters
than VPSDE on CIFAR-10 and IMAGENET32 and only 865 more for MNIST). We use simple uniform
dequantization. We report estimates of Lmdsm (which reduces to the standard Ldsm for K = 1). We
sample times using the importance sampling distribution from Song et al. (2021) with truncation set
to ϵ = 10−3 . To ensure the truncated bound is proper, we use a likelihood described in appendix I.

Results. Table 2 shows that the inference process matters and displays. It displays DBGMs that we
train and evaluate on CIFAR-10, IMAGENET32 and MNIST. This includes the existing VPSDE and
CLD , the new MALDA and ALDA , and the new learned inference processes. All are trained with the
35.7M parameter architecture. For CIFAR-10, learning outperforms CLD, and both outperform the
standard choice of VPSDE. For MNIST, learned diffusions match VPSDE while the three fixed aux-
iliary diffusions are worse. On IMAGENET32, all perform similarly. The take-away is that learning


                                                8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


matches or surpasses the best fixed diffusion performance and bypasses the choice of diffusion for
each new dataset or score architecture. In Figure 1 we plot the generated samples from CIFAR 10.
Table 3’s first two rows display diffusion models from previous work: VPSDE (Song et al., 2021) and
CLD (Dockhorn et al., 2021) both with the 108 million score model from Song et al. (2021) (labeled
“large”). The rest are DBGMs that we train using the U-Net with 35.7 million parameters for CIFAR-
10 and IMAGENET32 and 1.1 million for MNIST. Despite using significantly fewer parameters,
the learned diffusion achieves similar BPD compared to the larger models, showing that changes
in inference can account for as much improvement as a three-fold increase in parameters. While
the larger architecture requires two GPUs for batch size 128 on CIFAR -10 on A100s, the smaller
one only requires one; exploring inference processes can make diffusions more computationally
accessible. Table 3 also demonstrates a tighter bound for CLD trained and evaluated with the MDM
ELBO (≤ 3.11) relative to existing probability flow-based evaluations (3.31).


    Figure 1: CIFAR10 samples generated from the “learned 2” and MALDA generative models.

6   R ELATED W ORK
Evidence Lower Bounds. Song et al. (2021); Huang et al. (2021) derive the ISM and DSM lower-
bounds on the model log likelihood. Our work extends their analysis to the multivariate diffusion
setting to derive lower bounds on the log marginal of the data in the presence of auxiliary variables.

Auxiliary variables. Dupont et al. (2019) shows that augmented neural ODEs model a richer set
of functions and Huang et al. (2020) uses this principle for normalizing flows. Hierarchical vari-
ational models and auto-encoders marginalize auxiliary variables to build expressive distributions
(Ranganath et al., 2016; Sønderby et al., 2016; Maaløe et al., 2019; Vahdat & Kautz, 2020; Child,
2020). We apply this principle to DBGMs, including and extending CLD (Dockhorn et al., 2021).

Learning inference. Learning qϕ with pθ is motivated in previous work (Kingma & Welling,
2013; Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2015; Kingma et al., 2021). Kingma et al. (2021) learn the noise sched-
ule for VPSDE. For MDMs, there are parameters to learn beyond the noise schedule; Q can be
non-zero, D can diagonal or full, give Q and D different time-varying functions, and learn ∇H.

7   D ISCUSSION
We present an algorithm for training multivariate diffusions with linear time-varying inference pro-
cesses with a specified stationary distribution and any number of auxiliary variables. This includes
automating transition kernel computation and providing a parameterization of diffusions that have
a specified stationary distribution, which facilitate working with new diffusion processes, includ-
ing learning the diffusion. The experiments show that learning matches or surpasses the best fixed
diffusion performance, bypassing the need to choose a diffusion. MDMs achieve BPDs similar to
univariate diffusions, with as many as three times more score parameters. The proposed MDM ELBO
reports a tighter bound for the existing CLD relative to existing probability flow-based evaluations.
This work enables future directions including interactions across data coordinates and using new
stationary distributions.


                                                  9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


8   ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This work was generously funded by NIH/NHLBI Award R01HL148248, NSF Award 1922658
NRT-HDR: FUTURE Foundations, Translation, and Responsibility for Data Science, and NSF CA-
REER Award 2145542. The authors would additionally like to thank Chin-Wei Huang for helpful
discussing regarding Huang et al. (2021).

R EFERENCES
Andrew D Barbour. Stein’s method and poisson process convergence. Journal of Applied Probabil-
  ity, 25(A):175–184, 1988.
Andrew Campbell, Joe Benton, Valentin De Bortoli, Tom Rainforth, George Deligiannidis, and
  Arnaud Doucet. A continuous time framework for discrete denoising models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2205.14987, 2022.
Nanxin Chen, Yu Zhang, Heiga Zen, Ron J Weiss, Mohammad Norouzi, and William Chan. Wave-
  grad: Estimating gradients for waveform generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2009.00713, 2020.
Rewon Child. Very deep vaes generalize autoregressive models and can outperform them on images.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2011.10650, 2020.
Prafulla Dhariwal and Alexander Nichol. Diffusion models beat gans on image synthesis. Advances
  in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34, 2021.
Tim Dockhorn, Arash Vahdat, and Karsten Kreis. Score-based generative modeling with critically-
  damped langevin diffusion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.07068, 2021.
Emilien Dupont, Arnaud Doucet, and Yee Whye Teh. Augmented neural odes. Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 32, 2019.
Bradley Efron. Tweedie’s formula and selection bias. Journal of the American Statistical Associa-
  tion, 106(496):1602–1614, 2011.
Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. Denoising diffusion probabilistic models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2006.11239, 2020.
Jonathan Ho, Chitwan Saharia, William Chan, David J Fleet, Mohammad Norouzi, and Tim Sali-
  mans. Cascaded diffusion models for high fidelity image generation. J. Mach. Learn. Res., 23:
  47–1, 2022.
Chin-Wei Huang, Laurent Dinh, and Aaron Courville. Augmented normalizing flows: Bridging the
  gap between generative flows and latent variable models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.07101, 2020.
Chin-Wei Huang, Jae Hyun Lim, and Aaron C Courville. A variational perspective on diffusion-
  based generative models and score matching. Advances in Neural Information Processing Sys-
  tems, 34, 2021.
Diederik P Kingma and Max Welling.           Auto-encoding variational bayes.      arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1312.6114, 2013.
Diederik P Kingma, Tim Salimans, Ben Poole, and Jonathan Ho. Variational diffusion models.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.00630, 2021.
Zhifeng Kong, Wei Ping, Jiaji Huang, Kexin Zhao, and Bryan Catanzaro. Diffwave: A versatile
  diffusion model for audio synthesis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2009.09761, 2020.
Yi-An Ma, Tianqi Chen, and Emily Fox. A complete recipe for stochastic gradient mcmc. Advances
  in neural information processing systems, 28, 2015.
Lars Maaløe, Marco Fraccaro, Valentin Liévin, and Ole Winther. Biva: A very deep hierarchy of
  latent variables for generative modeling. Advances in neural information processing systems, 32,
  2019.


                                                10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Gautam Mittal, Jesse Engel, Curtis Hawthorne, and Ian Simon. Symbolic music generation with
  diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2103.16091, 2021.
Wenlong Mou, Yi-An Ma, Martin J Wainwright, Peter L Bartlett, and Michael I Jordan. High-order
 langevin diffusion yields an accelerated mcmc algorithm. arXiv preprint arXiv:1908.10859, 2019.
Alex Nichol and Prafulla Dhariwal. Improved denoising diffusion probabilistic models. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2102.09672, 2021.
Alex Nichol, Prafulla Dhariwal, Aditya Ramesh, Pranav Shyam, Pamela Mishkin, Bob McGrew,
  Ilya Sutskever, and Mark Chen. Glide: Towards photorealistic image generation and editing with
  text-guided diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.10741, 2021.
Aditya Ramesh, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alex Nichol, Casey Chu, and Mark Chen. Hierarchical text-
  conditional image generation with clip latents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.06125, 2022.
Rajesh Ranganath, Sean Gerrish, and David Blei. Black box variational inference. In Artificial
  intelligence and statistics, pp. 814–822. PMLR, 2014.
Rajesh Ranganath, Dustin Tran, and David Blei. Hierarchical variational models. In International
  conference on machine learning, pp. 324–333. PMLR, 2016.
Danilo Rezende and Shakir Mohamed. Variational inference with normalizing flows. In Interna-
  tional Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 1530–1538. PMLR, 2015.
Chitwan Saharia, William Chan, Saurabh Saxena, Lala Li, Jay Whang, Emily Denton, Seyed Kam-
  yar Seyed Ghasemipour, Burcu Karagol Ayan, S Sara Mahdavi, Rapha Gontijo Lopes, et al.
  Photorealistic text-to-image diffusion models with deep language understanding. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2205.11487, 2022.
Simo Särkkä and Arno Solin. Applied stochastic differential equations, volume 10. Cambridge
  University Press, 2019.
Hiroshi Sasaki, Chris G Willcocks, and Toby P Breckon. Unit-ddpm: Unpaired image translation
  with denoising diffusion probabilistic models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.05358, 2021.
Jianghong Shi, Tianqi Chen, Ruoshi Yuan, Bo Yuan, and Ping Ao. Relation of a new interpretation
   of stochastic differential equations to ito process. Journal of Statistical physics, 148:579–590,
   2012.
Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, Eric Weiss, Niru Maheswaranathan, and Surya Ganguli. Deep unsupervised
  learning using nonequilibrium thermodynamics. In International Conference on Machine Learn-
  ing, pp. 2256–2265. PMLR, 2015.
Casper Kaae Sønderby, Tapani Raiko, Lars Maaløe, Søren Kaae Sønderby, and Ole Winther. Ladder
  variational autoencoders. Advances in neural information processing systems, 29, 2016.
Yang Song, Sahaj Garg, Jiaxin Shi, and Stefano Ermon. Sliced score matching: A scalable approach
  to density and score estimation. In Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, pp. 574–584. PMLR,
  2020a.
Yang Song, Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, Diederik P Kingma, Abhishek Kumar, Stefano Ermon, and Ben
  Poole. Score-based generative modeling through stochastic differential equations. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2011.13456, 2020b.
Yang Song, Conor Durkan, Iain Murray, and Stefano Ermon. Maximum likelihood training of score-
  based diffusion models. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:1415–1428,
  2021.
Michalis Titsias and Miguel Lázaro-Gredilla. Doubly stochastic variational bayes for non-conjugate
 inference. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 1971–1979. PMLR, 2014.
Arash Vahdat and Jan Kautz. Nvae: A deep hierarchical variational autoencoder. Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 33:19667–19679, 2020.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Pascal Vincent. A connection between score matching and denoising autoencoders. Neural compu-
  tation, 23(7):1661–1674, 2011.
L Yin and P Ao. Existence and construction of dynamical potential in nonequilibrium processes
  without detailed balance. Journal of Physics A: Mathematical and General, 39(27):8593, 2006.
Zhenzhong Zhang and Dayue Chen. A new criterion on existence and uniqueness of stationary
  distribution for diffusion processes. Advances in Difference Equations, 2013(1):1–6, 2013.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A    AUTOMATED S CORE M ATCHING WITH L EARNED I NFERENCE
Like for the MDM ELBO, the methods in this work apply to training with the score matching loss:
                                                  h                                          i
                                                                                           2
           LSM (x, θ, ϕ) = T Et∼U [0,T ] Eqϕ (y|x) λ(t) ∥sθ (yt , t) − ∇yt log qϕ (yt | x)∥2 ,
where λ : [0, T ] → R+ is a weighing function. The score-matching loss is often optimized in its
simplified noise prediction form:
                                                              h                   i
                                                                                2
                       LNP (x, θ, ϕ) = T Et∼U [0,T ] Eqϕ (y|x) ∥ϵθ (yt , t) − ϵ∥2

where sθ = −L−⊤    t ϵθ and yt = µt + Lt ϵ and ϵ is the noise used in sampling yt . We describe
here how the improvements to the ELBO studied in this work carry over to LSM and LNP . In the
following let q0 be the data distribution, let p(θ,ϕ),0 be the model’s distribution of the data, and recall
that the model is defined by (sθ , fϕ , gϕ ) and prior π via a continuous-time stochastic process with
drift coefficient gϕ2 sθ − fϕ and and diffusion coefficient gϕ .
First, minimizing LSM or LNP so that ∇yt log qϕ (yt ) = sθ (yt , t) does not alone imply that p(θ,ϕ),0
will equal q0 ; it must also be that qϕ,T ≈ π. Foregoing this requirement means π will produce
samples that the generative model may not be able to push onto the path the model was trained
on (formally, the score of the generative model would not equal the time-reversal of the forward
score even if sθ equals the forward score). This condition can be satisfied if qϕ can be chosen with
stationary distribution π. Section 3.4 describes how to accomplish this.
Next, for any fixed qϕ , automatic transitions from section 3.3 streamline the computation of the score
matching loss, allowing for simple score computation for a wide class of diffusions beyond VP.
Finally, for a fixed qϕ with qϕ,T ≈ π and a score architecture sθ , minimizing LSM or LNP w.r.t θ
may be suboptimal. Optimization, like for the elbo, carries over to score matching and can close this
gap; learning w.r.t. both θ, ϕ increases the ability to successfully minimize the loss at each t (section
3.5). In other words, since the generative model is defined by (sθ , fϕ , gϕ ), learning qϕ means the
loss trains all three components of the generative model rather than just one. In summary, score
matching is automatic and can learn over the space of linear diffusions that tend to the model prior.

B    D OES MY MODEL USE AUXILIARY VARIABLES ?
In section 3 we gave the example choice of q(yv0 |x) = N (0, I) coordinate-wise. It is also a common
choice to set πθ = N (0, I). Because the optimum in diffusion models is pθ = q for all t, we see a
peculiar phenomenon under this choice: the model has main and auxiliary dimensions independent
at both endpoints 0 and T . Does this mean that the model does not use auxiliary variables? We show
that even when qϕ (y0 ) and πθ have main and auxiliary variables independent, the model can use the
auxiliary variables. A sufficient condition is Q + D is non-diagonal.
To make this precise, we recall that we model with pθ (uzT = x). To show the model is using auxil-
iary variables, we just need to show that uzT (main coordinate at T ) depends on uvt (aux. coordinate
at t) for T > t. At optimum, pθ (uzT , uvt ) = qϕ (yz0 , yvT −t ). Therefore it is sufficient to show that
for some time s, qϕ (yvs |yz0 ) ̸= qϕ (yvs ). Because yz0 , is determined by x we need to show that
qϕ (yvs |x) ̸= qϕ (yvs ). To do that, we first derive q(ys |x) and then marginalize to get q(yvs |x) from it.
Since the former is 2D Gaussian, the latter is available in terms of the former’s mean and covariance.
Suppose E[yv0 ] = 0, Q = [[0, −1], [1, 0]] and D = [[1, 0], [0, 1]] and we have s = .1 We have:
                                             i              h             i
                                                 x             −.1 .1         x        0.9003x
                            h
          E[ys |x] = exp − s(Q + D)                  = exp                        =                     (18)
                                                 0             −.1 −.1        0        −0.090x
Regardless of the covariance any 1D of this 2D gaussian will have mean that is a function of x,
meaning that q(yvs |x) does not equal q(yvs ) (which is also a Gaussian but with mean depending
on x′ s mean rather than x itself. Therefore, even under the setup with independent endpoints, the
optimal model makes use of the intermediate auxiliary variables in its final modeling distribution
pθ (uzT = x).
Are there choices of Q and D that lead to learning models that don’t make use of the extra dimen-
sions? As mentioned, in the inference process, Q is responsible for mixing information among the


                                                     13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


coordinates, and is the only source of this when D is diagonal. Then, if Q = 0 and D is diago-
                                                                                       v
nal, none of the coordinates for a given feature xj (including uztj , uvtj1 , . . . , utjK−1 ) interact for any t.
Then, since pθ = q at optimum, independence of the coodinates at all t in q imply the same in pθ and
the model will not make use of any auxiliary variables when modeling the marginal log pθ (uzT = x).

C     S TATIONARY PARAMETERIZATION

The non-linear time-homogeneous Itô process family is:
                                          dy = f (y)dt + g(y)Bt .                                            (19)
This family can be restricted to those with stationary distributions. Ma et al. (2015) show a complete
recipe to span the subset of this family with a desired stationary distribution. Let Q be skew-
symmetric (−Q = Q⊤ ) and D√is positive semi-definite. Suppose the desired stationary  √ distribution
is q∞ (y). For a matrix A, let A refer to the matrix square root defined by ap= A ⇐⇒ A =
aa⊤ . Then, Ma et al. (2015) show that, setting H(y) = − log q∞ (y), g(y) = 2D(y), and
                                                                        d
                                                                       X    ∂
      f (y) = −[D(y) + Q(y)]∇H(y) + Γ(y),                   Γi (y) =           (Dij (y) + Qij (y)),          (20)
                                                                       j=1
                                                                           ∂zj

yields a process yt with stationary distribution q∞ .             We extend it to time-varying (time in-
homogeneous) processes.

Theorem 2. q∞ (y) ∝ exp[−H(y)] is a stationary distribution of
                                                           !
                                                                                p
               dy =      − [D(y, t) + Q(y, t)]∇H(y) + Γ(y, t) dt +                  2D(y, t)Bt ,             (21)

for
                                              d
                                             X    ∂
                               Γi (y, t) =           (Dij (y, t) + Qij (y, t)).                              (22)
                                             j=1
                                                 ∂yj


Proof. The Fokker Planck equation is:
                           X ∂ h                   i X ∂2 h                        i
            ∂t q(y, t) = −         fi (y, t)q(y, t) +             Dij (y, t)q(y, t)                          (23)
                           i
                             ∂yi                      i,j
                                                          ∂yi ∂yj

A stationary distribution is one where the Fokker-Planck right hand side is equal to 0. To show
that the stationary characterization also holds of time-inhomogenous processes with D(y, t) and
Q(y, t), we take two steps, closely following Yin & Ao (2006); Shi et al. (2012); Ma et al. (2015),
but noting that there is no requirement for Q, D to be free of t. First, we show that the Fokker-Plack
equation can be re-written as:
                                                                                      !
                                   h                  ih                            i
                ∂t q(y, t) = ∇ · D(y, t) + Q(y, t) q(y, t)∇H(y) + ∇q(y, t)                        (24)

Second, because the whole expression is set to 0 when the inside expression equals 0
                                      q(y, t)∇H(y) + ∇q(y, t) = 0,                                           (25)
we just need to show that this holds when q(y, t) = exp[−H(y)]/Z. The second step is concluded
because
         h                           i   1h                                    i
           q(y, t)∇H(y) + ∇q(y, t) =        exp[−H(y)]∇H(y) + ∇ exp[−H(y)] = 0,
                                         Z
where Z is the normalization constant of exp(−H(y)).


                                                       14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


It only remains to show that Fokker-Plack can be re-written in divergence form with time-dependent
                                                                                         ∂
Q, D. In the following let Qijt denote Qij (y, t) and likewise for Dijt . Let ∂i denote ∂y   and let it
                                                                                           i
          d
                                                      P
denote dy for scalar functions. We will use [Ax]i = j Aij xj .
            i

        ∂t qt = ∇ · [D(y, t) + Q(y, t)][q∇H + ∇q]
                X  h                                      i
              =     ∂i [D(y, t) + Q(y, t)][q∇H + ∇q]
                                                                                                 i
                      i
                  X              X
             =                ∂i  [Dijt + Qijt ][q∇H + ∇q]j
                      i                j
                  X              X
             =                ∂i  [Dijt + Qijt ][q∂j H + ∂j q]
                      i                j
                  X              X                        X X
             =                ∂i  [Dijt + Qijt ][q∂j H] +  ∂i [Dijt + Qijt ][∂j q]
                      i                j                                     i               j
                  X              X                        X X               X X
             =                ∂i  [Dijt + Qijt ][q∂j H] +  ∂i Dijt [∂j q] +  ∂i Qijt [∂j q]
                      i                j                                     i               j                           i           j
We re-write the 2nd
P                 P and 3rd term. P  Holding i fixed and noting q is scalar, we get the product rule
 j Dijt (∂j q) =   j ∂j [Dijt q] − q   j ∂j Dijt for each i, and likewise for q:
          X X                                 X X                      X X
               ∂i    [Dijt + Qijt ][q∂j H] +       ∂i    Dijt [∂j q] +     ∂i    Qijt [∂j q]
             i                j                                        i             j                           i               j
                  X                X                                       X             X                             X
             =                ∂i           [Dijt + Qijt ][q∂j H] +               ∂i                  ∂j [Dijt q] − q             ∂j Dijt
                      i                j                                     i               j                               j
                              X             X                      X
                          +            ∂i        ∂j [Qijt q] − q           ∂j Qijt
                                   i         j                     j
                                               P     P
Because Q(y, t) is skew-symmetric, we have that i ∂i j ∂j [Qijt q] = 0, leaving
             "                          #        "                                           #
        X      X                           X       X                 X             X
∂t qt =   ∂i       [Dijt + Qijt ][q∂j H] +    ∂i     ∂j [Dijt q] − q   ∂j Dijt − q   ∂j Qijt
         i                j                                            i                 j                           j                     j
                  "                                         #                    "                                                             #
         X            X                                            X                 X                               X
     =       ∂i                [Dijt + Qijt ][∂j H]q +                      ∂i               ∂j [Dijt q] − q                 ∂j (Dijt + Qijt )
         i                j                                            i                 j                           j
                  "                                                                           #
         X             X                                           X                             X X ∂2
     =       ∂i                    [Dijt + Qijt ][∂j H] −                  ∂j (Dijt + Qijt ) q +           (Dijt q)
         i                    j                                    j                             i j
                                                                                                     yi yj

                                                                          P
Recalling that fi (y, t) = −[D +Q]∇H +Γ and again that [Ax]i = j Aij xj , we have equality
                                                  i
with the original Fokker-Planck
                   "                                                     #
           X          X                          X                          X ∂2
        =      ∂i         [Dijt + Qijt ][∂j H] −      ∂j (Dijt + Qijt ) q +          (Dijt q)
             i          j                           j                       ij
                                                                               yi yj
              X ∂ h                 i X ∂2 h                      i
         =−         fi (y, t)q(y, t) +          Dij (y, t)q(y, t)
              i
                ∂yi                    ij
                                          yi yj
         = ∂t q(y, t)


We have shown exp[−H(y)]/Z is a stationary distribution of the time-varying non-linear Itô pro-
cess:                                                      !
                                                                  p
            dy = − [D(y, t) + Q(y, t)]∇H(y) + Γ(y, t) dt + 2D(y, t)Bt .                     (26)



                                                                           15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


However, for some choices of Q, D, exp[−H(y)]/Z is not necessarily the unique stationary distri-
bution. One problematic case can occur as follows. Suppose that row i of (Q + D) is all-zero; in
this case, dyi = 0 which implies that (yi )t = (yi )0 for all t > 0. Then, the initial distribution is
also a stationary distribution. To rule out such pathological diffusions, we make the assumption that
Q + D is full rank. Then, for uniqueness, recall that stationary distributions are the zeros of
                                                                                     !
                                   h                   ih                           i
                ∂t q(y, t) = ∇ · D(y, t) + Q(y, t) q(y, t)∇H(y) + ∇q(y, t)

where the expression is of the form Av for A = D(y, t) + Q(y, t) and
                                     h                      i
                                 v = q(y, t)∇H(y) + ∇q(y, t) .

Under the assumption that Q + D is full rank, the expression can only be zero when v is zero. To
show uniqueness under the full rank assumption, one must then show that
                                      ∇q(y, t) = −q(y, t)∇H(y).
holds only if q(y, t) = exp[−H(y)]/Z. Even if exp[−H(y)]/Z is the unique stationary distribu-
tion, convergence to that distribution is a question. See Zhang & Chen (2013) for more details.
Learning Qϕ , Dϕ in the MDM ELBO helps push yT to the model prior πθ and avoid issues like those
discussed.

C.1   L INEAR P ROCESSES

Next, we specialize this general family to linear Itô processes to maintain tractable transition distri-
butions. A linear process is one where the drift f (y, t) and diffusion g(y, t) are linear functions of
y. We express the drift function of a non-linear time-varying Itô process with stationary distribution
proportional to exp[−H(y)] as
                              −(Q(y, t) + D(y, t))∇H(y) + Γ(y, t).
Next, linear Itô processes have Gaussian stationary distributions (Särkkä & Solin, 2019) so H(y)
must be quadratic and ∇H(y) is linear, and neither are constant in y. Because ∇H(y) is linear, it
can be expressed as Sy for some matrix S where S is the inverse of the covariance matrix. Because
∇H is multiplied by Q, D, this means that Q, D must be free of y. Recalling that Γ is expressed
as a sum of derivatives w.r.t y of Q + D,p this means that Γ must satisfy Γ = 0. Next, because of
the stationary requirement that g(t) = 2D(y, t), we can also conclude by the restriction on D
that the diffusion coefficient function must be independent of the state y. Our final form for linear
time-varying processes with stationary distributions N (0, S−1 ) is:
                                     h            i         p
                            dy = − Q(t) + D(t) Sy dt + 2D(t) dBt                                 (27)
                                  |        {z        }      | {z }
                                                                 g(t)
                                          f (y,t)


C.2   PARAMETERIZING Qϕ

Suppose bq (s) is a positive scalar function defined on the time domain with known integral. Suppose
                                  ⊤
Q̃ϕ is any matrix. Then Q̃ϕ − Q̃ϕ is skew-symmetric with Q̃ϕ,ij = −Q̃ϕ,ji . We can set Qϕ to
                                                            ⊤
                                                   h          i
                                  Qϕ (s) = bq (s) · Q̃ϕ − Q̃ϕ                               (28)

This is a general parameterization of time-independent skew-symmetric matrices, which have num-
ber of degrees of freedom equal to the number of entries in one of the triangles of the matrix,
excluding the diagonal.

C.3   PARAMETERIZING Dϕ

Suppose bd (s) is a positive scalar function defined on the time domain with known integral. Suppose
                                 ⊤
D̃ϕ is any matrix. Then D̃ϕ D̃ϕ is positive semi-definite and spans all time-independent positive


                                                    16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


semi-definite matrices. We can set Dϕ to
                                                             ⊤
                                                      h        i
                                     Dϕ (s) = bd (s) · D̃ϕ D̃ϕ                                  (29)
              ⊤
To show D̃D̃ spans all positive semi-definite matrices: suppose M is positive semi-definite. Then
it is square. Then
                 √it can be eigen-decomposed into M = VΣV⊤ The degrees of freedom in VΣV⊤
                                  ⊤      ⊤
are just R = V Σ since VΣV = RR and the square root is taken element-wise because Σ is
diagonal and is real because each Σij ≥ 0, which is true because M is positive semi-definite. Take
D = R.
In our experiments we parameterize D as a diagonal-only matrix.

C.4     I NTEGRALS

The known integral requirement comes from the integrals required in the transition kernel, and can
be relaxed two possible ways:
        • numerical integration of function with unknown integral. This is expected to have low error
          given that the function is scalar-in scalar-out.
        • Directly parameterize the integral and use auto-grad when needing the functions not-
          integrated.
We stick with the known integrals. In conclusion, the underlying parameters are positive scalar
functions bq (s), bd (s) defined on the time domain and with known integral, and general matrices
Q̃ϕ , D̃ϕ .

C.5     I NSTANCES

VPSDE . VPSDE has K = 1. Consequently, Q, D are K × K. The only 1 × 1 skew-symmetric
matrix is 0, so Q = 0. Setting D(t) = 12 β(t) recovers VPSDE:
                                          β(t)        p
                                 dy = −         ydt + β(t)dBt                  (30)
                                            2
∇H(y) = y so H(y) = 21 ∥y∥22 . The stationary distribution is N (0, I).

CLD .    The CLD process (eq 5 in Dockhorn et al. (2021)) is defined as
                                                β

                      dzt                0     M
                                                              0 √0
                             = dyt =                  yt +                dBt .
                      dvr               −β − Γβ  M
                                                              0     2Γβ
In Q/D parameterization, we have

                            1    2    1    2                 z
                   H(y) = ∥z∥2 +        ∥v∥2 ,    ∇u H(y) = 1
                            2        2M                      Mv

                              0 −β               0 0
                      Q=              ,   D=
                              β   0              0 Γβ

The stationary distribution of this process is:
                         qϕ,∞ ∝ exp(−H(y)) = N (z; 0, Id )N (v; 0, M Id )                       (31)

ALDA . Mou et al. (2019) define a third-order diffusion process for the purpose of gradient-based
MCMC sampling. The ALDA diffusion process can be specified as
                                                                       
                               0     − L1 I    0             0     0    0
                       Q =  L1 I      0      −γI  ,   D = 0     0    0 .                    (32)
                                                                       ξ
                               0      γI       0             0     0   LI
Note that Q is skew-symmetric and D is positive semi-definite, therefore we have that qt (u) →
qϕ,∞ . In this case,
                                                    1              1
                      qϕ,∞ = N (z; 0, Id )N (v1 ; 0, Id )N (v2 ; 0, Id )
                                                    L              L

                                                 17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


MALDA .     Similar to ALDA, we specify a diffusion process we term MALDA which we specify as
                               0 − L1 I − L1
                                                                       
                                                             0 0       0
                       Q =  L1 I    0     −γI  , D = 0 L1 I 0  .                       (33)
                               1                                      1
                              L     γI       0               0    0   L I
Note that Q is skew-symmetric and D is positive semi-definite. In this case this is
                                                           1               1
                          qϕ,∞ = N (z; 0, Id )N (v1 ; 0,     Id )N (v2 ; 0, Id )
                                                           L               L

D     T RANSITIONS FOR LINEAR PROCESSES

For time variable s and Brownian motion B
                                        b s driving diffusions of the form

                                      dy = f (y, s)ds + g(s)dB
                                                             b s,                                     (34)
when fϕ (ys , s), gϕ (s) are linear, the transition kernel qϕ (ys |y0 ) is always normal (Särkkä & Solin,
2019). Therefore, we just find the mean ms|0 and covariance Σs|0 of q(ys |y0 ). Let f (y, s) =
A(s)y. The un-conditional time s mean and covariance are solutions to
                               dms /ds = A(s)ms
                                                                                                      (35)
                               dΣs /ds = A(s)Σs + Σs A⊤ (s) + g 2 (s)
By (6.6) in Särkkä & Solin (2019), for computing conditionals q(ys |y0 ), we can take the marginal
distribution ODEs and compute conditionals by simply setting the time 0 mean and covariance initial
                                       R s to 0 respectively. We take (6.36-6.39) and set m0 = u0
conditions to the conditioning value and
and Σ0 = 0 to condition. Let [A]s = 0 A(ν)dν. The mean is
                               Z s                      h i
                 ms|0 = exp        A(ν)dν y0 = exp A              = exp(sA)y0 ,                 (36)
                                0                            s    |     {z      }
                                                                    no integration if A(ν) = A

where exp denotes matrix exponential. (6.36-6.39) state the covariance q(ys |y0 ) as a matrix factor-
ization, for which a derivation is provided below Σs = Cs (Hs )−1 for Cs , Hs being the solutions
of:
                                                     g 2 (s)
                               d
                                 ds Cs
                                             A(s)               Cs
                                 d       =               ⊤                                      (37)
                                ds sH          0   −A      (s)  H  s

To condition and get Σs|0 from Σs , we set Σ0 = 0, and initialize Cs , Hs by C0 = 0 and H0 = I.
                          "                    #             "                #
                                      [g 2 ]s                            g2

             Cs              [A]s                0                A              0
                   = exp                             = exp s                         .     (38)
             Hs               0     −[A⊤ ]s      I                0 −A⊤          I
                                                     |               {z            }
                                                             no integration if A(ν) = A, g(ν) = g

Finally, Σs|0 = Cs (Hs )−1 .

D.1    D ERIVATION OF THE C OVARIANCE MATRIX SOLUTION

Equation (35) gives an expression for dΣs /ds. To derive the matrix factorization technique used in
eq. (37), we use eq. (35) and the desired condition Σs = Cs H−1  s to derive expressions for dCs /ds
and dHs /ds and suitable intial conditions so that the factorization also starts at the desired Σ0 . Let
Σs = Cs H−1 s , then note that Cs , Hs satisfies

                                d       d
                                   Σs =    Cs H−1
                                               s
                                ds      ds
                                           d −1     d
                                      = Cs Hs +        Cs H−1
                                                           s
                                           ds       ds


                                                    18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


And using the fact that
                                      d
                                         Hs H−1
                                              s =0
                                      ds
                            d      d
                          Hs H−1      Hs H−1

                               s +          s    =0
                            ds     ds
                                          d −1        d
                                            Hs = −H−1    Hs H−1

                                                    s        s
                                         ds           ds
we get that

               d −1        d                  −1 d               d
                              Cs H−1                    −1               −1

              Cs  Hs +              s  = −C  H
                                            s s    Hs H s    +      C s Hs
               ds          ds                   ds               ds

        d                  d
−Cs H−1           −1
                                   H−1           −1       −1 ⊤         2

     s     H s  H s    +      Cs    s = A(s)Cs Hs + Cs Hs A (s) + g (s)
        ds                 ds
                                                = A(s)Cs H−1      −1 ⊤        −1  2       −1
                                                          s + Cs Hs A (s)Hs Hs + g (s)Hs Hs

                    d          d
           −Cs H−1                          H−1                −1 ⊤         2
                                                                                   −1
                s      Hs + Cs               s = A(s)Cs + Cs Hs A (s)Hs + g (s)Hs Hs
                   ds          ds
                            d        d
                 −Cs H−1s      Hs + Cs = A(s)Cs + Cs H−1      ⊤           2
                                                          s A (s)Hs + g (s)Hs
                          ds         ds

                                                               −A⊤ (s)Hs

                               ⊤ d Hs                   ⊤
                Cs H−1                          −1

                          I d           =   C H
                                             s s   I d
                     s
                                  ds Cs                     A(s)Cs + g 2 (s)Hs

Now, we note Cs , Hs satisfy the following
                                       d
                                          Hs = −A⊤ (s)Hs
                                       ds
                                        d
                                          Cs = A(s)Cs + g 2 (s)Hs
                                       ds
which implies that

                                                           g 2 (s)

                              d        Cs            A(s)            Cs
                                                =                                                 (39)
                              ds       Hs             0   −A⊤ (s)    Hs

with C0 = Σ0 and H0 = Id , as C0 H−1
                                  0 = Σ0 .


D.2   H YBRID S CORE M ATCHING

Instead of computing q(ys |y0 ), we can apply the hybrid score matching principle (Dockhorn et al.,
2021) to reduce variance by compute objectives using q(ys |x) instead of q(ys |y0 ), which amounts
to integrating out v0 . To accomplish this, following Särkkä & Solin (2019), we simply replace y0
with [x, E[v0 ]] in the expression for ms|0 , i.e. replace the conditioning value of v0 with the mean
of its chosen initial distribution:
                                                "Z             #
                                                      s
                                                                    x
                                 E[ys |x] = exp         A(ν)dν                                    (40)
                                                    0
                                                                  E[v0 ]


For the convariance, instead of using C0 = Σ0 = 0, we use a block matrix to condition on x but
not v0 . We decompose Σ0 into its blocks Σ0,xx , Σ0,vv ,Σ0,xv . As before, to condition on x we set
Σ0,xx = 0. Because q(v0 ) is set to be independent of x, Σ0,xv is also set to 0. Finally, instead of 0,
to marginalize out v0 , Σ0,vv is set to the covariance of the chosen initial time zero distribution for
v0 . E.g. if v0,j ∼ N (0, γ) for each dimension, then Σ0,vv = N (0, γI).
We operationalize this in a simple piece of code, which makes the ELBO tractable and easy, i.e. skips
both analytic derivations and numerical forward integration during training.


                                                       19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


D.3    T RANSITIONS IN S TATIONARY PARAMETERIZATION

In terms of Q, D, the transitions q(ys |y0 ) for time s are normal with mean ms|0 and Σs|0 equal to:

                                                                 "                                #
                    h i
                                             Cs                       −[Q + D]s      [2D]s          0
    ms|0 = exp − Q + D y0 ,                             = exp
                              s              Hs                           0       [(Q + D)⊤ ]s      I
                                                                                                     (41)


where Σs|0 = Cs (Hs )−1 . For the time invariant case, this simplifies to

                                                             "                            #
                                          Cs                −(Q + D)    2D                  0
    ms|0 = exp[−s(Q + D)]y0 ,                       = exp s                                          (42)
                                          Hs                   0     (Q + D)⊤               I



E     G ENERIC CHANGE OF MEASURE AND J ENSEN ’ S FOR APPROXIMATE
      MARGINALIZATION


Suppose u = [z, v] and we have an expression for p(u = [z, v]) = p(z = z, v = v). By marginal-
ization, we can get p(z = z), and we can introduce another distribution q to pick a sampling distri-
bution of our choice:
                                  Z
                    p(z = z) =        p(z = z, v = v)dv
                                  v
                                  Z
                              =       p(z = z|v = v)p(v = v)dv
                                  v
                                  Z                                                                  (43)
                                   q(v = v|z = z)
                              =                    p(z = z|v = v)p(v = v)dv
                                 v q(v = v|z = z)
                                            h p(z = z, v = v) i
                              = Eq(v=v|z=z)
                                              q(v = v|z = z)

We often work with these expressions in log space, and need to pull the expectation outside to use
Monte Carlo. Jensen’s bound allows this:

                                                                 h p(z = z, v = v) i
                        log p(z = z) = log Eq(v=v|z=z)
                                                         q(v = v|z = z)
                                                         p(z = z, v = v) i
                                                             h
                                       ≥ Eq(v=v|z=z) log
                                                         q(v = v|z = z)

The following shows that the bound is tight when q(v = v|z = z) = p(v = v|z = z):

               h    p(z = z, v = v) i                    h    p(z = z, v = v) i
    Eq(v=v|z=z) log                   =assume Ep(v=v|z=z) log
                    q(v = v|z = z)                             p(v = v|z = z)
                                                    h      p(z = z, v = v)             i
                                      = Ep(v=v|z=z) log                    · p(z = z)                (44)
                                                           p(v = v, z = z)
                                                    h             i
                                      = Ep(v=v|z=z) log p(z = z)
                                          = log p(z = z)

                                                        20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


F     ELBO FOR MDM s
                         Z
      log pθ (x) = log           pθ (x0 , v0 )dv0                                                                  (45)
                         Zv0
                 = log           pθ (u0 = [x, v0 ])                                                                (46)
                            v
                         Z0
                           q(v0 |x)
                 = log                pθ (u0 = [x, v0 ])                                                           (47)
                        v0 q(v0 |x)
                                 "                    #
                                   pθ (u0 = [x, v0 ])
                 = log Eq(v0 |x)                                                                                   (48)
                                        q(v0 |x)
                           "                                                      #
                 ≥ Eq(v0 |x) log pθ (u0 = [x, v0 ]) − log q(v0 |x)                                                 (49)
                                 "                         Z T                                                 #
                 ≥ Eq(y|x) log πθ (yT ) +                        −∥sθ ∥2g2 − ∇ · (g 2 sθ − f )ds − log q(y0v |x)   (50)
                                                            0

The first inequality holds due to Jensen’s inequality and the second due to an application of Theorem
1 from Huang et al. (2021) or Theorem 3 from Song et al. (2021) applied to the joint variable u0 .

F.1     ISM TO DSM

F.1.1     L EMMA : EXPECTATION BY PARTS
We will need a form of multivariate integration by parts which gives us for some f and some q(x),
Eq(x) [∇x · f (x)] = −Eq(x) [f (x)⊤ ∇x log q(x)]

                             Z              d
                                            X
    Eq(x) [∇x · fi (x)] =            q(x)          [∇xi fi (x)]dx
                                            i=1
                               d
                             Z X
                       =                   q(x)∇xi fi (x)dx
                                     i=1
                             d Z
                             X                 Z
                       =                               q(x)∇xi fi (x)dxi dx−i
                             i=1       x−i      xi
                             d Z
                                           "                                                    #
                             X                 h    Z              i∞  Z        Z
                       =                        q(x) ∇xi fi (x)dxi    − ∇xi q(x) ∇xi fi (x)dxi ] dx−i
                                                                           −∞
                             i=1
                             d Z
                                 "                 Z                       #
                             X
                       =                       −        ∇xi q(x)fi (x)dxi dx−i
                             i=1
                             d Z
                                           "       Z                                  #
                             X
                       =                       −        q(x)∇xi log q(x)fi (x)dxi dx−i
                             i=1
                             d
                             X             Z Z
                       =             −             q(x)∇xi log q(x)fi (x)dxi dx−i
                             i=1
                             d
                             X             h                   i
                       =             −Eq(x) ∇xi log q(x)fi (x)
                             i=1
                       = −Eq(x) [f (x)⊤ ∇x log q(x)]
This equality also follows directly from the Stein operator using the generator method to the
Langevin diffusion (Barbour, 1988).


                                                                    21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


F.1.2    DSM E LBO
Using the “expectation by parts”, we have:
            Eq(ut |x) [∇ut · g 2 (t)sθ (ut , t)] = −Eq(ut |x) [(g 2 (t)sθ (ut , t))⊤ ∇ut log q(ut |x)]
Also we have, for sθ evaluated at (ut , t), by completing the square,
    1                                          1
 − ||sθ ||g2 (t) + s⊤   2                                              2                           2
                    θ g (t)∇ log q(ut |x) = − ||sθ − ∇ log q(ut |x)||g 2 (t) + .5||∇ log q(ut |x)||g 2 (t)
    2                                          2
The two together give us:
                      "     # Z "                                                       #
                                   T            h                                    i
                                                        2              2
log p(x) ≥ Eq(uT |x) log π +           Eq(ut |x) − ∇ · g sθ − .5||sθ ||g2 (t) + ∇ · f dt
                                      0
                      "        #    Z T"                                                                            #
                                                    h                                                            i
                                                        2      ⊤
          = Eq(uT |x) log π +              Eq(ut |x) (g sθ )       ∇ut log q(ut |x) − .5||sθ ||2g2 (t) + ∇ · f    dt
                                      0
                      "        #    Z T"            h 1
          = Eq(uT |x) log π +              Eq(ut |x) − ||sθ − ∇ log q(ut |x)||2g2 (t)
                                      0               2
                                                                                                             #
                                                                                                         i
                                                               + .5||∇ log q(ut |x)||2g2 (t) + ∇ut · f       dt

                                                                                                                  (51)

F.2     N OISE PREDICTION

We have that for normal N (ys ; ms|0 , Σs|0 ), we can sample ys with normal noise ϵ ∼ N (0, I) and
ys = ms|0 + Lϵ where L is the cholesky decomposition of Σs|0 Then, the score is

                             ∇ys log q(ys |y0 )
                                                  ys =ms|0 +Lϵ

                                   = −Σ−1
                                       s|0   ys − ms|0
                                             h           i
                                   = −Σ−1
                                        s|0    ms|0 + Lϵ − ms|0

                                   = −Σ−1
                                        s|0 Lϵ
                                              −1
                                   = − LL⊤         Lϵ
                                         −1
                                   = − L⊤       L−1 Lϵ
                                         −1                 ⊤
                                   = − L⊤       ϵ = − L−1 ϵ = −L⊤,−1 ϵ

Parameterize sθ (ys , s) as sθ (ys , s) = −L⊤,−1 ϵθ (y, s). This gives
           1
             ∥ − L⊤,−1 ϵθ (y, s) − −L⊤,−1 ϵ∥2g2 (s)
           2                                          ϕ

               1 ⊤,−1              ⊤,−1           2
           = ∥L        ϵ − L            ϵθ (y, s)∥g2 (s)
               2                                   ϕ
                                                  !⊤                                        !
               1   ⊤,−1             ⊤,−1                2       ⊤,−1          ⊤,−1
           =      L     ϵ − L            ϵθ (y, s) gϕ (s) L           ϵ − L        ϵθ (y, s)
               2
                                       i ⊤
                                        !                                   !
               1   ⊤,−1
                        h
                                             2         ⊤,−1
                                                            h             i
           =      L       ϵ − ϵθ (y, s)     gϕ (s) L         ϵ − ϵθ (y, s)
               2


                                                        22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


We can also use this insight to analytically compute the quadratic score term (following is computed
per data-dimension, so must be multiplied by D when computing the ELBO):
           "                              #                "                                              #
             1                                                                   ⊤
                                     2                                              2
Ey0 Eys |y0 ∥∇ys log qϕ (ys |y0 )∥g2 (s) = Ey0 Eys |y0 ∇ys log qϕ (ys |y0 ) gϕ (s) ∇ys log qϕ (ys |y0 )
             2                        ϕ

                                                           "                                   #
                                                                        ⊤
                                                                 ⊤,−1       2         ⊤,−1
                                             = Ey0 Eys |y0     −L     ϵ gϕ (s) − L          ϵ
                                                                        "                                                        #
                                                                                         −1
                                                  = Ey0 Eys |y0 ϵ (−L       ⊤
                                                                                              )gϕ2 (s)(−L⊤,−1 )ϵ
                                                                        "                                                    #

                                                  = Ey0 Eys |y0 ϵ           ⊤
                                                                                    L−1 gϕ2 (s)L⊤,−1                     ϵ
                                                             "                                                   #

                                                  = Ey0 Eϵ ϵ        ⊤
                                                                            L−1 gϕ2 (s)L⊤,−1                 ϵ
                                                       "                                                #

                                                  = Eϵ ϵ    ⊤
                                                                    L−1 gϕ2 (s)L⊤,−1                ϵ
                                                                                               !
                                                  = Trace       L−1 gϕ2 (s)L⊤,−1


G    ELBOS IN STATIONARY PARAMETERIZATION

We use the stationary parmeterization described in appendix C. We now specialize the ELBO to the
linear stationary parameterization.
                                                         p
Recall fϕ (y, s) = −[Qϕ (s) + Dϕ (s)]y. Recall gϕ (s) = 2Dϕ (s) We have gϕ2 (s) = 2Dϕ (s). We
can write the MDM ISM ELBO as
                                       "                                 #
                                                     h       i
                           mism                        (ism)
                         L      = Ev∼qγ Es∼Unif(0,T ) ℓs       + ℓT + ℓq                    (52)

where
                             1
                      ℓsθ = − ∥sθ (ys , s)∥22D (s)
                             2                 ϕ
                                            | {z }
                                                       g2
                                                        ϕ
                                      h                                                                              i
                    ℓdiv-fgs = ∇ys · −[Qϕ (s) + Dϕ (s)]ys − 2Dϕ (s) sθ (ys , s)
                                     |        {z        } | {z }
                                                                                         2
                                                                                        gϕ
                                                      fϕ
                                            h          i                                                                             (53)
                      ℓism
                       s = E qϕ,s,(x,v) ℓsθ + ℓdiv-fgs
                             | {z }
                             depends on Q,D
                                              h          i
                       ℓT = Eq , (x, v) log πθ (yT )
                               ϕ,T
                             | {z }
                                 depends on Q,D

                       ℓq = − log qγ (v|x)

For the DSM form,
                                              "                                                         #
                                                                    h               i
                         Lmdsm
                                 = Ev∼qγ          Es∼Unif(0,T ) ℓ(dsm)
                                                                 s                      + ℓT + ℓq                                    (54)



                                                        23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


where
                         ℓdiv-f = ∇ys · −[Qϕ (s) + Dϕ (s)]ys
                                        |        {z        }
                                                              fϕ
                                    1
                     ℓfwd-score =     ∇y log qϕ (ys |y0 ) ∥22D (s)
                                    2 | s    {z        } | {z ϕ
                                             depends on Q,D
                                                                 }
                                                                            g2
                                                                             ϕ

                                    1
                  ℓneg-scorediff = − ∥sθ (ys , s) − ∇ys log qϕ (ys |y0 ) ∥22D (s)
                                    2               |       {z        } | {z ϕ
                                                      depends on Q,D
                                                                                }
                                                                                            g2
                                                                                             ϕ
                                                      "                                          #
                      ℓ(dsm)
                       s     = E qϕ,s,(x,v)               ℓneg-scorediff + ℓfwd-score + ℓdiv-f
                                     | {z }
                                     depends on Q,D


                                                            24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


H      A LGORITHMS
H.1     G ENERIC T RANSITION K ERNEL

Algorithm 2 Get transition distribution ys |x
  Input: data x. time s. A, g.
  compute: A(s) and R s g(s)
  compute: Ms = 0 A(t)dt (integrated drift)
                   Rs
  compute: Ns = 0 g 2 (t)dt (integrated diffusions squared)
    compute: γs|0 = exp Ms (mean coefficient)
    set: y0 = [x, 01 , . . . , 0K−1 ] , Σ0,zz = 0, and Σ0,zv , Σ0,vv to chosen initial distribution
    compute: ms|0 = γs|0 y0 (mean)
    compute:
                                        "               #
                       Cs                  Ms      Ns         Σ0
                                = exp                                 (ingredients for cov.)          (55)
                       Hs                   0 −M⊤    s         I

    compute: Σs|0 = Cs (Hs )−1         (cov.)
    Output: N (ms|0 , Σs|0 )


H.2     T RANSITIONS WITH Q, D

Current param matrices Q̃ϕ , D̃ϕ and along with fixed time-in scalar-out functions bq (s), bd (s) and
their known integrals Bq (s), Bd (s). qγ (v0 |z0 = x) taken to be parameterless so that v0 ∼ N (0, I).
Model params are sθ fixed πθ .

Algorithm 3 Get Q, D and their integrated terms M, N
  Input: time s and current
                    Rs      params ϕ
  compute: [bq ]s = 0 bq (ν)dν using known integral Bq (s) − Bq (0)
                    Rs
  compute: [bd ]s = 0 bd (ν)dν using known integral Bd (s) − Bd (0).
                                      ⊤
                            h           i
  compute: [Qϕ ]s = [bq ]s · Q̃ϕ − Q̃ϕ for current params Q̃ϕ .
                                   ⊤
                            h        i
  compute: [Dϕ ]s = [bd ]s · D̃ϕ D̃ϕ for current params D̃ϕ .
    compute: Ms = −([Qϕ ]s + [Dϕ ]s ) (M just a variable name)
    compute: Ns = [2Dϕ ]sh= 2 · [Dϕ ]si (N just a variable name)
                                         ⊤
    compute: Qs = bq (s) · Q̃ϕ − Q̃ϕ (not integrated)
                                 ⊤
                          h        i
    compute: Ds = bd (s) · D̃ϕ D̃ϕ (not integrated)
    compute: As = −[Qs + Ds ] (drift coef.)
    compute: gs2 = 2Ds (diffusion coef. squared)
    Output: As , gs2 , Ms , Ns


H.3     ELBO ALGORITHMS


                                                     25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Algorithm 4 Get transition distributions
  Input: Sample y0 = (x, v) and time s. Current params ϕ
  set: As , gs2 , Ms , Ns ← algorithm
                                      3
  compute: ms|0 = exp Ms y0 (transition mean)
  compute: ingredients for transition cov. matrix:
                                             "             #
                                  Cs            Ms   Ns      0
                                       = exp                                                         (56)
                                  Hs              0 −M⊤ s    I

    compute: Σs|0 = Cs (Hs )−1 (transition cov).
    instantiate: qϕ,s,(x,v) = qϕ (ys |y0 ) = N (ms|0 , Σs|0 ).
    Output: qϕ,s,(x,v) , As , gs2


Algorithm 5 Compute ELBO with ism or dsm
  input: Data point x and current params θ, ϕ, γ
  draw: an aux. sample v ∼ qγ (v|x)
  draw: a sample s ∼ Unif(0, T )
  set: y0 = (x, v)
  set: qϕ,s,y0 , As , gs2 ← algorithm 4 called on y0 , s, ϕ
  draw: ys ∼ qϕ,s,y0
  compute: ℓs with dsm(s) (algorithm 6) or ism(s) (algorithm 7) on ys , θ, As , gs2 , qϕ,s,y0
  set: qϕ,T,y0 , , ← algorithm 4 called on y0 , T, ϕ
  draw: yT ∼ qϕ,T,y0
  output: ℓs + log πθ (yT ) − log qγ (v)


Algorithm 6 Compute dsm(s)
    input: ys , θ, As , gs2 , qϕ,s,y0 .
    compute: fwd-score = ∇ys log qϕ (ys |y0 )
    compute: model-score = sθ (ys , s)
    compute: fwd-score-term = 21 (fwd-score)⊤ gs2 (fwd-score)
    compute: score-diff = model-score − fwd-score
    compute: diff-term = − 12 score-diff⊤ gs2 score-diff
    compute: div-f = ∇ys · As ys
    output: dsm(s) = fwd-score-term + diff-term + div-f


Algorithm 7 Compute ism(s)
    input: ys , θ, As , gs2 , qϕ,s,y0 .
    compute: model-score = sθ (ys , s)
    compute: score-term = − 12 model-score⊤ gs2 model-score
    compute: div-gs = ∇ys · gs2 sθ (ys , s)
    compute: div-f = ∇ys · As ys
    compute: div-term = −div-gs + div-f
    output: ism(s) = score-term + div-term


I    VALID ELBO WITH TRUNCATION

The integrand in the ELBO and its gradients is not bounded at time 0. Therefore, following Sohl-
Dickstein et al. (2015) and Song et al. (2021) the integrand in eq. (7) is integrated from [ϵ, T ], rather
than [0, T ]. However, that integral is not a valid lower bound on log pθ (x). Instead, it can be viewed
as a proper lower bound on the prior for a latent variable yϵ . Therefore, to provide a bound for the
data, one can introduce a likelihood and substitute the prior lower bound into a standard variational
bound that integrates out the latent.


                                                    26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


To provide a valid lower bound for multivariate diffusions, we extend theorem 6 in Song et al. (2021)
from univariate to multivariate diffusions.
Theorem 3. For transition kernel qϕ (ys | y0 ), we can compute upper bound the model likelihood
at time 0 as follows, for any ϵ > 0

                                                  pθ (y0 | yϵ )                            v
      log pθ (x) ≥ Eqϕ (y0v |x) Eqϕ (yϵ |y0 ) log               + Lmdm (yϵ , ϵ) − log qϕ (y0 | x) , (57)
                                                  qϕ (yϵ | y0 )
where Lmdm (yϵ , ϵ) is defined as
                                      "                   Z T                                    #
                                                                1      2   1          2
      Lmdm (yϵ , ϵ) = Eqϕ (y>ϵ |yϵ ) log πθ (yT ) −               ∥sϕ ∥gϕ − ∥sθ − sϕ ∥gϕ + ∇ · fϕ .
                                                           ϵ    2          2

Proof. For transition kernel qϕ (ys | y0 ), we can compute upper bound the model likelihood at time
0 following an application of the variational bound
                           Z
          log pθ (x) = log     pθ (y0 = [x, v0 ])dv0
                            v0
                           Z
                     = log        pθ (y0 , yϵ )dv0 dyϵ
                             v0 ,yϵ
                                                      q(v0 | x) pθ (y0 , yϵ )
                             Z
                     = log            qϕ (yϵ | y0 )                           dv0 dyϵ
                             v0 ,yϵ                   q(v0 | x) qϕ (yϵ | y0 )
                                                 q(v0 | x) pθ (y0 | yϵ )pθ (yϵ )
                             Z
                     = log         qϕ (yϵ | y0 )                                 dv0 dyϵ
                            v0 ,yϵ               q(v 0 | x)    qϕ (yϵ | y0 )

                                                 pθ (y0 | yϵ )             v
                     ≥ Eq(v0 |x)qϕ (yϵ |y0 ) log               − log qϕ (y0 | x) + log pθ (yϵ )
                                                 qϕ (yϵ | y0 )

A lower bound for log pθ (yϵ ) can be derived in a similar manner to eq. (7), such that
                                             "               Z T                                  #
                                                                 1      2   1           2
log pθ (yϵ ) ≥ Lmdm (yϵ , ϵ) = Eqϕ (y>ϵ |yϵ ) log πθ (yT ) −       ∥sϕ ∥gϕ − ∥sθ − sϕ ∥gϕ + ∇ · fϕ .
                                                              ϵ 2           2
The choice of pθ (y0 | yϵ ) is arbitrary, however following Sohl-Dickstein et al. (2015); Song et al.
(2021) we let pθ (y0 | yϵ ) be Gaussian with mean µpθ ,ϵ and covariance Σpθ ,ϵ . Suppose qϕ (yϵ |
y0 ) = N (yϵ | Ay0 , Σ), then we select the following mean µpθ ,ϵ and covariance Σpθ ,ϵ for pθ (y0 |
yϵ )
                                      µpθ ,ϵ = A−1 Σsθ (yϵ , ϵ) + A−1 yϵ
                                    Σpθ ,ϵ = A−1 ΣA−⊤
where µpθ ,ϵ , Σpθ ,ϵ are derived using Tweedie’s formula (Efron, 2011) by setting µϵ = E[y0 | yϵ ]
and Σϵ = Var (y0 | yϵ ).

We next derive this choice as an approximation of the optimal Gaussian likelihood.

I.1   L IKELIHOOD DERIVATION

Suppose y0 ∼ q0 (y0 ) and yϵ ∼ N (yϵ | Ay0 , Σ). Here, A, Σ are the mean coefficient and covari-
ance derived from the transition kernel at time ϵ. We use Tweedie’s formula to get the mean and
covariance of y0 given yϵ under q. This mean and covariance feature the true score ∇yϵ log q(yϵ ).
We replace the score with the score model sθ and then set pθ (y0 |yϵ ) to have the resulting approx-
imate mean and covariance. We make this choice because the optimal pθ (y0 |yϵ ) equals the true
q(y0 |yϵ ) as discussed throughout the work.
Here y0 = [x0 , v0 ] where x0 ∼ qdata .
Let η be the natural parameter for the multivariate Gaussian likelihood N (yϵ | Ay0 , Σ). Then,
Tweedie’s formula (Efron, 2011) states that:
                                    E[η | uϵ ] = ∇yϵ l(yϵ ) − ∇yϵ l0 (yϵ )


                                                         27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


      • l(yϵ ) = log q(yϵ )
      • sθ (yϵ , ϵ) is taken to be the true score ∇yϵ log q(yϵ ) so that ∇yϵ l(yϵ ) = sθ (yϵ , ϵ)
      • l0 is the log of the base distribution defined in the exponential family parameterization.

The base distribution is a multivariate Gaussian with mean 0 and covariance Σ, therefore
∇yϵ l0 (yϵ ) = −Σ−1 yϵ ,
                                   E[η | yϵ ] = sθ (yϵ , ϵ) + Σ−1 yϵ .
However, Tweedie’s formula is not directly applicable since our yϵ is not directly normal with mean
y0 . Instead, to derive the conditional mean of y0 given yϵ , we use the relation η = Σ−1 Ay0 and
the linearity of conditional expectation to get
                              E[y0 | yϵ ] = E[A−1 Ση|yϵ ]
                                          = A−1 ΣE[η | yϵ ]
                                          = A−1 Σ sθ (yϵ , ϵ) + Σ−1 yϵ


                                          = A−1 Σsθ (yϵ , ϵ) + A−1 yϵ .
                                                                √
For the variance, we use the following relation yϵ = Ay0 +   Σϵ, which implies that
                                                             √
                                            y0 = A−1 yϵ − A−1 Σϵ
                                 Var (y0 | yϵ ) = A−1 ΣA−T .

Therefore, for the model posterior distribution pθ (y0 | yϵ ) we choose a Normal with mean and
covariance
                                  µpθ ,ϵ = A−1 Σsθ (yϵ , ϵ) + A−1 yϵ
                                  Σpθ ,ϵ = A−1 ΣA−T


                                                   28
