Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


G ENERATIVE M ULTI -F LOW N ETWORKS : C ENTRAL -
IZED , I NDEPENDENT AND C ONSERVATION

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                           A BSTRACT
         Generative flow networks utilize the flow matching loss to learn a stochastic pol-
         icy for generating objects from a sequence of actions, such that the probability of
         generating a pattern can be proportional to the corresponding given reward. How-
         ever, existing works can only handle single flow model tasks and cannot directly
         generalize to multi-agent flow networks due to limitations such as flow estimation
         complexity and independent sampling. In this paper, we propose the framework
         of generative multi-flow networks (GMFlowNets) that can be applied to multiple
         agents to generate objects collaboratively through a series of joint actions. Then,
         the centralized flow network algorithm is proposed for centralized training GM-
         FlowNets, while the independent flow network algorithm is proposed to achieve
         decentralized execution of GMFlowNets. Based on the independent global con-
         servation condition, the flow conservation network algorithm is then proposed
         to realize centralized training with decentralized execution paradigm. Theoretical
         analysis proves that using the multi-flow matching loss function can train a unique
         Markovian flow, and the flow conservation network can ensure independent poli-
         cies can generate samples with probability proportional to the reward function.
         Experimental results demonstrate the performance superiority of the proposed al-
         gorithms compared to reinforcement learning and MCMC-based methods.


1   I NTRODUCTION
Generative flow networks (GFlowNets) Bengio et al. (2021b) can sample a diverse set of candidates
in an active learning setting, where the training objective is to approximate sample them proportion-
ally to a given reward function. Compared to reinforcement learning (RL), where the learned policy
is more inclined to sample action sequences with higher rewards, GFlowNets can perform better
on exploration tasks. Since the goal of GFlowNets is not to generate a single highest-reward action
sequence, but to sample a sequence of actions from the leading modes of the reward function Bengio
et al. (2021a). Unfortunately, currently GFlowNets cannot support multi-agent systems.
A multi-agent system is a set of autonomous, interacting entities that share a typical environment,
perceive through sensors and act in conjunction with actuators Busoniu et al. (2008). Multi-agent
reinforcement learning (MARL), especially cooperative MARL, are widely used in robotics teams,
distributed control, resource management, data mining, etc Zhang et al. (2021); Canese et al. (2021);
Feriani & Hossain (2021). Two major challenges for cooperative MARL are scalability and partial
observability Yang et al. (2019); Spaan (2012). Since the joint state-action space grows exponen-
tially with the number of agents, coupled with the environment’s partial observability and commu-
nication constraints, each agent needs to make individual decisions based on local action observa-
tion history with guaranteed performance Sunehag et al. (2017); Wang et al. (2020); Rashid et al.
(2018). In MARL, to address these challenges, a popular centralized training with decentralized ex-
ecution (CTDE) Oliehoek et al. (2008); Oliehoek & Amato (2016) paradigm is proposed, in which
the agent’s policy is trained in a centralized manner by accessing global information and executed
in a decentralized manner based only on local history. However, extending these techniques to
GFlowNets is not straightforward, especially in constructing CTDE-architecture flow networks and
finding IGM conditions for flow networks worth investigating.
In this paper, we propose Generative Multi-Flow Networks (GMFlowNets) framework for cooper-
ative decision-making tasks, which can generate more diverse patterns through sequential joint ac-


                                                 1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


tions with probabilities proportional to the reward function. Unlike vanilla GFlowNets, our method
analyzes the interaction of multiple agent actions and shows how to sample actions from multi-flow
functions. We propose the Centralized Flow Networks (CFN), Independent Flow Networks (IFN)
and Flow Conservation Networks (FCN) algorithms based on the flow matching condition to solve
GMFlowNets. CFN regards multi-agent dynamics as a whole for policy optimization, regardless
of combinatorial complexity and the demand for independent execution, while IFN suffers from
the flow non-stationary problem. In contrast, FCN takes full advantage of CFN and IFN, which is
trained based on the independent global conservation (IGC) condition. Since FCN has the CTDE
paradigm, it can reduce the complexity of flow estimation and support decentralized execution,
which is beneficial to solving practical cooperative decision-making problems.
Main Contributions: 1) We are the first to propose the concept of generative multi-flow networks
for cooperative decision-making tasks; 2) We propose three algorithms, CFN, IFN, and FCN, for
training GMFlowNets, which are respectively based on centralized training, independent execution,
and CTDE paradigm; 3) We propose the IGC condition and then prove that the joint state-action flow
function can be decomposed into the product form of multiple independent flows, and that a unique
Markovian flow can be trained based on the flow matching condition; 4) We conduct experiments
based on cooperative control tasks to demonstrate that the proposed algorithms can outperform
current cooperative MARL algorithms, especially in terms of exploration capabilities.


2     GMF LOW N ETS : P ROBLEM F ORMULATION

2.1   P RELIMINARY

Let F : T 7→ R+ be a trajectory flow Bengio et al. (2021b), such that F (τ ) can be interpreted as
the probability mass Passociated with trajectory τ . Then, we have
                                                                P the corresponding defined edge
flow F (s → s′ ) =          ′
                        s→s ∈τ  F (τ ) and  state flow F (s) =     s∈τ F (τ ). The forward transition
probabilities PF for each step of a trajectory can then be defined as Bengio et al. (2021b)
                                                            F (s → s′ )
                                           PF (s | s′ ) =               .
                                                               F (s)
GFlowNets aims to train a neural network to approximate the trajectory flow function with the output
proportional to the reward function based on the flow matching condition Bengio et al. (2021b):
                             X                        X
                                    F (s′ → s) =              F (s → s′′ ) ,
                           s′ ∈Parent(s)                    s′′ ∈Child(s)

where Parent(s) and Child(s) denote the parent set and child set of state s, respectively. In this way,
for any consistent flow F with the terminating flow as the reward, i.e., F (s → sf ) = R(s) with sf
being the final state and s being the terminating state (can be transferred directly to the final state),
a policy π defined by the forward transition probability satisfies π (s′ | s) = PF (s′ | s) ∝ R(x).

2.2   P ROBLEM F ORMULATION

A multi-agent directed graph is defined as a tuple (S, A) with S being a set of state and A =
A1 ×· · ·×Ak denoting the set of joint edges (also called actions or transitions), which consists of all
possible combinations of the actions available to each agent. A trajectory in such a graph is defined
as a sequence (s1 , ..., sn ) of elements of S. A corresponding multi-agent directed acyclic graph
(MADAG) is defined as a multi-agent directed graph with unequal pairs of states in the trajectory.
Given an initial state s0 and final state sf , we name a trajectory τ = (s0 , ..., sf ) ∈ T starting from
s0 and ending in sf as the complete trajectory, where T denotes the set of complete trajectories.
We consider a partially observable scenario, where the state s ∈ S is shared by all agents, but it is
not necessarily fully observed. Hence, each agent i ∈ I selects an action ai ∈ Ai based only on
local observations oi made of a shared state s ∈ S. In this way, we define the individual edge/action
flow F (oit , ait ) = F (oit → oit+1 ) as the flow through an edge oit → oit+1 , and the joint edge/action
                                                                 1         k T
flow is defined by F (sP   t , at ) = F (st → st+1 ) with at = [at , ..., at ] . The state flow F (s) : S 7→ R
is defined as F (s) = τ ∈T 1s∈τ F (τ ). Based on the flow matching condition Bengio et al. (2021b),


                                                        2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


we have the state flow equal to the inflows or outflows, i.e.,
                           X                                               X
                   F (s) =      ′  ′    ′ ′
                                               F (s′ , a′ ) =                          F (s′ → s)               (1)
                                   s ,a :T (s ,a )=s
                                                                       s′ ∈Parent(s)
                              X                            X
                    F (s) =              F (s, a) =                    F (s → s′′ ) ,                           (2)
                                   a∈A
                                                       s′′ ∈Child(s)

where T (s′ , a′ ) = s denotes an action a′ that can transfer state s′ to attain s. To this end, generative
multi-flow networks (GMFlowNets) are defined as learning machines that can approximate trajec-
tory flow functions in MADAG, with outputs proportional to the predefined reward function, trained
based on flow matching conditions in equation 1 and equation 2.

3     GMF LOW N ETS : A LGORITHMS
3.1   C ENTRALIZED F LOW N ETWORK

Given such a MADAG, to train a GMFlowNet, a straightforward approach is to use a centralized
training approach to estimate joint-flows, named Centralized Flow Network (CFN) algorithm, where
multiple flows are trained together based on the flow matching conditions. In particular, for any state
s in the trajectory, we require that the inflows equal the outflows. In addition, the boundary condition
is given by the flow passing through the terminating state s based on the reward R(s). Assuming we
have a sparse reward setting, i.e., the internal states satisfy R(s) = 0 while the final state satisfies
A = ∅, then we have the flow consistency equation:
                              X                                 X
                                        F (s, a) = R (s′ ) +          F (s′ , a′ ) .                 (3)
                          s,a:T (s,a)=s′                           a′ ∈A(s′ )


Lemma 1 Define a joint policy π that generates trajectories starting in state s0 by sampling actions
a ∈ A(s) according to
                                                    F (s, a)
                                      π(a|s) =               ,                                      (4)
                                                      F (s)
where F (s, a) > 0 is the flow through allowed edge (s, a), which satisfies the flow consistency
equation in equation 3. Let π(s) be the probability of visiting state s when starting at s0 and
                                                                                        R(sf )
following π. Then we have (a) π(s) = FF(s(s)
                                                              P
                                          0)
                                             ; (b) F (s0 ) = sf R(sf ); (c) π(sf ) = P ′ R(s   ′ ).
                                                                                                    s       f
                                                                                                        f


Proof: The proof is trivial by following the proof of Proposition 2 in Bengio et al. (2021a).
We have Lemma 1, which shows that a joint flow function can produce π(sf ) = R(sf )/Z correctly
when the flow consistency equation is satisfied. Then we can use a TD-like objective to optimize
the joint flow function parameter θ:
                                                                                  2
                        X            X                           X
             Lθ (τ ) =                    Fθ (s, a) − R (s′ ) −      Fθ (s′ , a′ ) .       (5)
                      s′ ∈τ ̸=s0   s,a:T (s,a)=s′                             a′ ∈A(s′ )

Note that optimizing equation 5 is not straightforward. On the one hand, in each iteration, we need
to estimate the flow in the order of O(|Ai |N )1 , which leads to exponential complexity. The joint
flow estimation method may get stuck in local optima and can hardly scale beyond dozens of agents.
On the other hand, joint flow networks require all agents to sample jointly, which is impractical since
in many applications the agents only have access to their own observations.

3.2   I NDEPENDENT F LOW N ETWORK

To reduce the complexity and achieve the independent sampling of each agent, a simple way is to
treat each agent as an independent agent, so that each agent can learn its flow function in the order of
   1
     For simplicity, here we consider homogeneous agents, i.e., Ai = Aj , ∀i, j ∈ N . Moreover, heterogeneous
agents also face the problem of combinatorial complexity.


                                                          3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


      root                                                                                                  Terminal State


             Observation


             ...                                            MADAG                                                Flow Match


                            Sampling Process                                  Training Process

Figure 2: Framework of GMFlowNets. For each state, each agent obtains its own observation and
computes its independent flow to sample actions. During training, the agent seeks the parent nodes
for computing inflows and outflows, and performs policy optimization through flow matching.


O(|Ai |). We call this approach the Independent Flow Network (IFN) algorithm, which reduces the
exponential complexity to linear. However, due to the non-stationarity of the flow (see Definition 1),
it is difficult for this algorithm to train a high-performance GMFlowNet.

Definition 1 (Flow Non-Stationary) Define the independent policy πi as
                                                                   Fi (oi , ai )
                                                  πi (ai |oi ) =                 ,                                                      (6)
                                                                    F (oi )
where ai ∈ Ai (oi ) and Fi (oi , ai ) is the independent flow of agent i. The flow consistent equation
can be rewritten as
                         X                                             X
                                         Fi (oi , ai ) = R(oi , ai ) +     Fi (o′i , a′i ),        (7)
                   oi ,ai :T (oi ,ai ,a−i )=o′i                                      a′i ∈A(o′i )

where −i represents other agents except agent i, and R(oi , ai ) represents the reward with respect to
state s and action ai .

Note that the transition function T (oi , ai , a−i ) = o′i in equation 7 is also related to the actions of
other agents, which makes estimating parent nodes difficult. In addition, the reward of many multi-
agent systems is the node reward R(s), that is, we cannot accurately estimate the action reward
R(oi , ai ) of each node. This transition uncertainty and spurious rewards can cause the flow non-
stationary property. This makes it difficult to assign accurate rewards to each action, and thus, it is
difficult to train independent flow network with a TD-like objective function.
As shown in Figure 1, compared to the centralized training                                     100
method, it is almost difficult for the independent method to                                       80
                                                                                      Mode Found


learn a better sampling policy. One way to improve the per-                                        60                            Centralized
                                                                                                                                 Independent
formance of independent flow networks is to design individual
                                                                                                   40
reward functions that are more directly related to the behavior
                                                                                                   20
of individual agents. However, this approach is difficult to im-
                                                                                                        0    5       10     15           20
plement in many environments because it is difficult to deter-                                                     Epochs
mine the direct relationship between individual performance
and overall system performance. Even in the case of a sin-                             Figure 1: The performance of the
gle agent, only a small fraction of the shaped reward function                         centralized training and indepen-
aligns with the true objective.                                                        dent learning on Hyper-grid task.

3.3   F LOW C ONSERVATION N ETWORK

In this subsection, we propose the Flow Conservation Network (FCN) algorithm to reduce the com-
plexity and simultaneously solve the flow non-stationary problem. FCN aims to learn the optimal


                                                               4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


value decomposition from the final reward by back-propagating the gradients of the joint flow func-
tion F through deep neural networks representing the individual flow function Fi , ∀i ∈ N . The
specific motivation for FCN is to avoid flow non-stationarity problems and reduce complexity. To
start with, we have the following Definition 2, which shows the Individual Global Conservation
(IGC) condition between joint and individual edge flows.

Definition 2 (Individual Global Conservation) The joint edge flow is a product of individual edge
flows, i.e.,                                     Y
                                  F (st , at ) =   Fi (oit , ait ).
                                                                 i

Then, we propose the following flow decomposition theorem.

Theorem 1 Let the joint policy be the product of the individual policy {πi }ki=1 , where πi with
respect to the individual flow function Fi (oi , ai ), i.e.,
                                                     Fi (oi , ai )
                                    πi (ai |oi ) =                 , ∀i = 1, · · · , k.                  (8)
                                                      Fi (oi )
Assume that the individual flow Fi (oi , ai ) satisfies the condition in Definition 2. Define a flow
function F̂ , if all agents generate trajectories using independent policies πi , i = 1, ..., k and the
matching conditions
                               X                                            X
       ∀s′ > s0 , F̂ (s′ ) =         F̂ (s → s′ ) and ∀s′ < sf , F̂ (s′ ) =        F̂ (s′ → s′′ )   (9)
                             s∈P(s′ )                                                     s′′ ∈C(s′ )

are satisfied. Then, we have:
1) π(sf ) ∝ R(sf );
2) F̂ uniquely defines a Markovian flow F matching F̂ such that
                                          Qn+1
                                                F̂ (st−1 → st )
                                 F (τ ) = t=1Qn                 .                                       (10)
                                                t=1 F̂ (st )


Theorem 1 states two facts. First, the joint state-action flow function F (s, a) can be decomposed
into the product form of multiple independent flows. Second, if any non-negative function satisfies
the flow matching conditions, a unique flow is determined. On this basis, we can design algorithms
for flow decomposition based on conservation properties. Each agent maintains a neural network to
estimate the flow of its actions, then calculates the joint flow function through the flow conservation
condition, and trains the model with the relevant reward function. In this case, each agent maintains a
flow estimation network with the above architecture, which only estimates (|Ai |) flows. Compared
with the centralized flow estimation network, we can reduce the complexity to O(N (|Ai |)). By
combining Fi (oi , ai ), we can get an unbiased estimate of F (s, a) to calculate a TD-like objective
function. Next, we illustrate the overall training process.
During the individual sampling process, each agent samples trajectories using its own policy and
composes a batch of data for joint training. During the joint training process, the system allows to
call of the independent flow functions of each agent and uses the joint reward function to train the
flow network. After training, each agent gets a trained independent flow network to meet the needs
of independent sampling. In particular, for each sampled state, we first seek their parent nodes and
corresponding observations and independent actions. Then, we compute the estimated joint flow
F̂ (s, a) by the flow consistency equation:
                                                k
                                                                           !
                                               X
                               F̂ (s, a) = exp      log F̂i (oi , ai ; θi ) ,                   (11)
                                                          i=1

where θi is the model parameter of the i-th agent, which can be trained based on equation 5 as:
                                                                                      2
                        X           X                               X
            L̃(τ ; θ) =                      F̂ (s, a) − R (s′ ) −       F̂ (s′ , a′ ) .      (12)
                       s′ ∈τ ̸=s0     s,a:T (s,a)=s′                             a′ ∈A(s′ )



                                                             5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Note that the above loss may encounter the problem that the magnitude of the flow on each node in
the trajectory does not match, for example, the flow of the root node is large, while the flow of the
leaf node is very small. To solve this problem, we here adopt the idea of log-scale loss introduced
in Bengio et al. (2021a), and modify equation 12 as
                                  X
                    L̃(τ, ϵ; θ) =       (log [ϵ + Inflows] − log [ϵ + Outflows]) ,               (13)
                                        s′ ∈τ ̸=s0

where
                                                                                    " k                                  #
                      X               h               i           X                  X
    Inflows :=                    exp log F̂ (s, a; θ) =                      exp              log F̂i (oi , ai ; θi )
                 s,a:T (s,a)=s′                              s,a:T (s,a)=s′              i=1
                                                                                " k                        #
                              X              h                i           X      X
                      ′                              ′   ′           ′                        ′    ′
Outflows := R (s ) +                    exp log F̂ (s , a ; θ) = R (s ) +   exp     log F̂i (oi , ai ; θi ) ,
                           a′ ∈A(s′ )                                               a′             i=1

and ϵ is a hyper-parameter that helps to trade-off large and small flows, which also avoids the nu-
merical problem of taking the logarithm of tiny flows.

3.4    D ISCUSSION : R ELATIONSHIP WITH MARL

Interestingly, there are similar independent execution algorithms in the multi-agent reinforcement
learning scheme. Therefore, in this subsection, we discuss the relationship between flow conser-
vation networks and multi-agent RL. The value decomposition approach has been widely used in
multi-agent RL based on IGM conditions, such as VDN and QMIX. For a given global state s and
joint action a, the IGM condition asserts the consistency between joint and local greedy action
selections in the joint action-value Qtot (s, a) and individual action values [Qi (oi , ai )]ki=1 :

      arg max Qtot (s, a) = arg max Q1 (o1 , a1 ), · · · , arg max Qk (ok , ak ) , ∀s ∈ S.          (14)
           a∈A                            a1 ∈A1                         ak ∈Ak


Assumption 1 For any complete trajectory Q         in an MADAG τ = (s0 , ..., sf ), we assume that
                                                     n
Qµtot (sf −1 , a) = R(sf )f (sf −1 ) with f (sn ) = t=0 µ(a|s
                                                           1
                                                             t)
                                                                .

Remark 1 Although Assumption 1 is a strong assumption that does not always hold in practical
environments. Here we only use this assumption for discussion analysis, which does not affect the
performance of the proposed algorithms. A scenario where the assumption directly holds is that we
sample actions according to a uniform distribution in a tree structure, i.e., µ(a|s) = 1/|A(s)|. The
uniform policy is also used as an assumption in Bengio et al. (2021a).

Lemma 2 Suppose Assumption 1 holds and the environment has a tree structure, based on the IGC
and IGM conditions we have:
1) Qµtot (s, a) = F (s, a)f (s);
2) (arg maxai Qi (oi , ai ))ki=1 = (arg maxai Fi (oi , ai ))ki=1 .

Based on Assumption1, we have Lemma 2, which shows the connection between the IGC condition
and the IGM condition. This action-value function equivalence property helps us better understand
the multi-flow network algorithms, especially showing the rationality of the IGC condition.

4     R ELATED W ORKS
Generative Flow Networks: GFlowNets is an emerging generative model that could learn a pol-
icy to generate the objects with a probability proportional to a given reward function. Nowadays,
GFlowNets has achieved promising performance in many fields, such as molecule generation Ben-
gio et al. (2021a); Malkin et al. (2022); Jain et al. (2022), discrete probabilistic modeling Zhang
et al. (2022) and structure learning Deleu et al. (2022). This network could sample the distribution
of trajectories with high rewards and can be useful in tasks when the reward distribution is more
diverse. This learning method is similar to reinforcement learning (RL) Sutton & Barto (2018), but


                                                             6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Algorithm 1 Flow Conservation Network (FCN) Algorithm
Input: MADAG ⟨S, A, P, R, N ⟩, Number of iteration T , Sample size B, Initial flow function Fi0 , ∀i =
   1, · · · , k, Parameters.
1: for iteration t = 1, · · · , T do
2:    \\ Individual sampling process
3:    Sample observations {(obi , a′,b    b B
                                     i , R )}b=1 based on the individual flow function Fi for all agents
4:    \\ Joint training process
5:    Seek all parent nodes {pb } of the global         b B                                b    b
                                              P state {s }b=1 and calculate the inflow F (s , a )
                                  b    b
6:    Calculate the outflow Y = R (s) + a∈A(s) F (s, a) by the flow conservation condition
7:   Update the individual flow function: {F̃i } ← arg min{Fi }k B1 [Y b − F (sb , ab )]2
                                                                  i=1
8: end for
9: Define the joint sampling policy as the product of the individual policies {πi }ki=1 w.r.t. {Fi }ki=1
Output: flow function F̃T and individual sampling policy {πi }ki=1



RL aims to maximize the expected reward and usually only generates the single action sequence
with the highest reward. Conversely, the learned policies of GFlowNets can achieve that the sam-
pled actions are proportional to the reward and are more suitable for exploration. This exploration
ability makes GFNs promising as a new paradigm for policy optimization in the RL field, but there
are many problems, such as solving multi-agent collaborative tasks.
Cooperative Multi-agent Reinforcement Learning: There are already many MARL algorithms
to solve collaborative tasks, two extreme algorithms are independent learning Tan (1993) and cen-
tralized training. Independent training methods regard the influence of other agents as part of the
environment, but the team reward function is usually difficult to measure the contribution of each
agent, resulting in the agent facing a non-stationary environment Sunehag et al. (2017); Yang et al.
(2020). On the contrary, centralized training treats the multi-agent problem as a single-agent coun-
terpart. Unfortunately, this method exhibits combinatorial complexity and is difficult to scale beyond
dozens of agents Yang et al. (2019). Therefore, the most popular paradigm is centralized training
and decentralized execution (CTDE), including value-based Sunehag et al. (2017); Rashid et al.
(2018); Son et al. (2019); Wang et al. (2020) and policy-based Lowe et al. (2017); Yu et al. (2021);
Kuba et al. (2021) methods. The goal of value-based methods is to decompose the joint value
function among agents for decentralized execution, which requires satisfying the condition that the
local maximum of each agent’s value function should be equal to the global maximum of the joint
value function. VDN Sunehag et al. (2017) and QMIX Rashid et al. (2018) propose two classic and
efficient factorization structures, additivity and monotonicity, respectively, despite the strict factor-
ization method. QTRAN Son et al. (2019) and QPLEX Wang et al. (2020) introduce extra design
for descomposition, such as factorization structure and advantage function. The policy-based meth-
ods extend the single-agent TRPO Schulman et al. (2015) and PPO Schulman et al. (2017) into the
multi-agent setting, such as MAPPO Yu et al. (2021), which has shown the surprising effectiveness
in cooperative, multi-agent games. The goal of these algorithms is to find the policy that maximizes
the long-term reward, however, it is difficult for them to learn more diverse policies, which can
generate more promising results.

5     E XPERIMENTS
We first verify the performance of CFN on a multi-agent hyper-grid domain where partition func-
tions can be accurately computed. We then compare the performance of IFN and FCN with standard
MCMC and some RL methods to show that their sampling distributions better match normalized
rewards. All our code is implemented by the PyTorch Paszke et al. (2019) library. We reimplement
the multi-agent RL algorithms and other baselines.

5.1   H YPER - GRID E NVIRONMENT

We consider a multi-agent MDP where states are the cells of a N -dimensional hypercubic grid of
side length H. In this environment, all agents start from the initialization point x = (0, 0, · · · ), and
is only allowed to increase coordinate i with action ai . In addition, each agent has a stop action.
When all agents choose the stop action or reach the maximum H of the episode length, the entire


                                                        7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


         100          MAPPO                                                      MAPPO                                           400          MAPPO
                      MASAC                                         250          MASAC                                                        MASAC
                      MCMC
                      CFN
                                                                                 MCMC
                                                                                 CFN
                                                                                                                                 350          MCMC
                                                                                                                                              JFN
             80       FCN v1                                                     FCN v1                                                       FDN v1
                      FCN v2                                        200          FCN v2                                          300          FDN v2
Mode Found


                                                           Mode Found


                                                                                                                        Mode Found
             60                                                                                                                  250
                                                                    150                                                          200
             40                                                                                                                  150
                                                                    100
             20                                                                                                                  100
                                                                        50                                                           50
             0                                                                                                                       0
                  0            5     10         15    20                     0            5        10       15    20                      0            5       10     15      20
                                   Epochs                                                     Epochs                                                         Epochs

                                                                    1.98
         1.9                                                        1.96
                                                                                                                                 1.95
         1.8                                                        1.94
                                                                    1.92                                                         1.90
L1 Error


         1.7                                               L1 Error


                                                                                                                        L1 Error
                                                                    1.90                                                         1.85
         1.6
                      MAPPO
                                                                    1.88
                                                                                 MAPPO                                                        MAPPO
         1.5          MASAC                                                      MASAC                                           1.80         MASAC
                      MCMC                                          1.86         MCMC                                                         MCMC
                      CFN                                                        CFN                                                          CFN
         1.4          FCN v1                                        1.84         FCN v1                                          1.75         FCN v1
                      FCN v2                                                     FCN v2                                                       FCN v2
                  0            5     10         15    20                     0            5         10      15    20                      0            5       10     15      20
                                   Epochs                                                         Epochs                                                     Epochs

Figure 3: L1 error and Mode Found performance of different algorithms on various Hyper-grid
environments. Top and bottom are respectively Mode Found (higher is better) and L1 Error (lower
is better). Left: Hyper-Grid v1, Middle: Hyper-Grid v2, Right: Hyper-Grid v3.


system resets for the next round of sampling. The reward function is designed as
                       Y                                Y
    R(x) = R0 + R1        I (0.25 < |xj /H − 0.5|) + R2    I (0.3 < |xj /H − 0.5| < 0.4) ,                                                                                 (15)
                                            j                                                               j

where x = [x1 , · · · , xk ] includes all agent states, the reward term 0 < R0 ≪ R1 < R2 leads a
distribution of modes. By changing R0 and setting it closer to 0, this environment becomes harder
to solve, creating an unexplored region of state space due to the sparse reward setting. We conducted
experiments in Hyper-grid environments with different numbers of agents and different dimensions,
and we use different version numbers to differentiate these environments, the higher the number, the
more the number of dimensions and proxies. Moreover, the specific details about the environments
and experiments can be found in the appendix.
We compare CFN and FCN with a modified MCMC and RL methods. In the modified MCMC
method Xie et al. (2021), we allow iterative reduction of coordinates on the basis of joint action
space, and cancel the setting of stop actions to form a ergodic chain. As for RL methods, we con-
sider the maximum entropy algorithm, i.e., multi-agent SAC Haarnoja et al. (2018), and a previous
cooperative multi-agent algorithm, i.e., MAPPO, Yu et al. (2021). Note that the maximum entropy
method uses the Softmax policy of the value function to make decision, so as to explore the state
of other reward, which is related to our proposed algorithm. To measure the performance of these
methods, we define the empirical L1 error as E[p(sf ) − π(sf )] with p(sf ) = R(sf )/Z being the
sample distribution computed by the true reward function. Moreover, we can consider the mode
found theme to demonstrate the superiority of the algorithm.

                               Environment           MAPPO                   MASAC                 MCMC          CFN                 FCN v1                FCN v2
                           Hyper-Grid v1               2.0                       1.84                1.78         2.0                  2.0                   2.0
                           Hyper-Grid v2              1.90                       1.76                1.70        1.85                 1.85                  1.82
                           Hyper-Grid v3              1.84                       1.66                1.62        1.82                 1.82                  1.78

                                            Table 1: The best reward found of different methods.

Figure 3 illustrates the performance superiority of our proposed algorithm compared to other meth-
ods in the L1 error and mode found. For FCN, we consider two different decision-making methods,


                                                                                              8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


the first is to sample actions independently, called FCN v1, and the other is to combine these poli-
cies for sampling, named FCN v2. We find that on small-scale environments shown in Figure 3-Left,
CFN can achieve the best performance, because CFN can accurately estimate the flow of joint ac-
tions when the joint action space dimension is small. However, as the complexity of the joint action
flow that needs to be estimated increases, we find that the performance of CFN degrades, but the
independently executed method still achieves good estimation and maintains the speed of conver-
gence, as shown in Figure 3-Middle. Note that RL-based methods do not achieve the expected
performance, their performance curves first rise and then fall, because as training progresses, these
methods tend to find the highest rewarding nodes rather than finding more patterns. In addition, as
shown in Table 1, both the reinforcement learning method and our proposed method can achieve
the highest reward, but the average reward of reinforcement learning is slightly better for all found
modes. Our algorithms do not always have higher rewards than RL, which is reasonable since the
goal of GMFlowNets is not to maximize rewards.

5.2   S MALL M OLECULES G ENERATION

Similar to Jin et al. (2018); Bengio et al. (2021a); Xie         MAPPO
                                                            50   FCN
et al. (2021), we consider the task of molecular generation
to evaluate the performance of FCN. For any given molec-    40


                                                           Mode Found
ular and chemical validity constraints, we can choose an
atom to attach a block. The action space is to choose       30
the location of the additional block and selecting the ad-  20
ditional block. And the reward function is calculated by
a pretrained model. We modify the environment to meets      10
the multi-agent demand, where the task allows two agents     0
to perform actions simultaneously depending on the state.      0       100   200     300    400
Although this approach is not as refined as single-agent                   Epochs
decision making, we only use it to verify the performance
of FCN. Figure 4 shows that the number of molecules Figure 4: Performance of FCN and
with the reward value greater than a threshold τ = 8 MAPPO on molecules generation task.
found by different algorithms, we can see that FCN can generate more molecules with high reward
functions over three independent runs.

6     C ONCLUSION
In this paper, we discuss the policy optimization problem when GFlowNets meet the multi-agent
systems. Different from RL, the goal of GMFlowNets is to find diverse samples with probability
proportional to the reward function. Since the joint flow is equivalent to the product of independent
flow of each agent, we design a CTDE method to avoid the flow estimation complexity problem in
fully centralized algorithm and the non-stationary environment in the independent learning process,
simultaneously. Experimental results on Hyper-grid environments and small molecules generation
task demonstrate the performance superiority of the proposed algorithms.
Limitation and Future Work: Unlike multi-agent RL algorithms that typically use RNNs as the
value estimation network Hochreiter & Schmidhuber (1997); Rashid et al. (2018), RNNs are not
suitable for our algorithms for flow estimation. The reason is that the need to compute the par-
ent nodes of each historical state introduces additional overhead. Another limitation is that, like
the original GFlowNets, GMFlowNets are constrained by DAGs and discrete environments, which
makes GMFlowNets temporarily unavailable for multi-agent continuous control tasks. Therefore,
our future work is to design multi-agent continuous algorithms to overcome the above problems.

R EFERENCES
Emmanuel Bengio, Moksh Jain, Maksym Korablyov, Doina Precup, and Yoshua Bengio. Flow
  network based generative models for non-iterative diverse candidate generation. Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:27381–27394, 2021a.
Yoshua Bengio, Tristan Deleu, Edward J Hu, Salem Lahlou, Mo Tiwari, and Emmanuel Bengio.
  Gflownet foundations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2111.09266, 2021b.


                                                 9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Lucian Busoniu, Robert Babuska, and Bart De Schutter. A comprehensive survey of multiagent rein-
  forcement learning. IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics, Part C (Applications
  and Reviews), 38(2):156–172, 2008.

Lorenzo Canese, Gian Carlo Cardarilli, Luca Di Nunzio, Rocco Fazzolari, Daniele Giardino, Marco
  Re, and Sergio Spanò. Multi-agent reinforcement learning: A review of challenges and applica-
  tions. Applied Sciences, 11(11):4948, 2021.

Tristan Deleu, António Góis, Chris Emezue, Mansi Rankawat, Simon Lacoste-Julien, Stefan Bauer,
  and Yoshua Bengio. Bayesian structure learning with generative flow networks. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2202.13903, 2022.

Amal Feriani and Ekram Hossain. Single and multi-agent deep reinforcement learning for ai-enabled
 wireless networks: A tutorial. IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials, 23(2):1226–1252,
 2021.

Tuomas Haarnoja, Aurick Zhou, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. Soft actor-critic: Off-policy
  maximum entropy deep reinforcement learning with a stochastic actor. In International confer-
  ence on machine learning, pp. 1861–1870. PMLR, 2018.

Sepp Hochreiter and Jurgen Schmidhuber. Long short-term memory. Neural computation, 9(8):
  1735–1780, 1997.

Moksh Jain, Emmanuel Bengio, Alex Hernandez-Garcia, Jarrid Rector-Brooks, Bonaventure FP
 Dossou, Chanakya Ajit Ekbote, Jie Fu, Tianyu Zhang, Michael Kilgour, Dinghuai Zhang, et al.
 Biological sequence design with gflownets. In International Conference on Machine Learning,
 pp. 9786–9801. PMLR, 2022.

Wengong Jin, Regina Barzilay, and Tommi Jaakkola. Junction tree variational autoencoder for
 molecular graph generation. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 2323–2332.
 PMLR, 2018.

Jakub Grudzien Kuba, Ruiqing Chen, Munning Wen, Ying Wen, Fanglei Sun, Jun Wang, and
  Yaodong Yang. Trust region policy optimisation in multi-agent reinforcement learning. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2109.11251, 2021.

Ryan Lowe, Yi I Wu, Aviv Tamar, Jean Harb, OpenAI Pieter Abbeel, and Igor Mordatch. Multi-
  agent actor-critic for mixed cooperative-competitive environments. Advances in neural informa-
  tion processing systems, 30, 2017.

Nikolay Malkin, Moksh Jain, Emmanuel Bengio, Chen Sun, and Yoshua Bengio. Trajectory balance:
  Improved credit assignment in gflownets. arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.13259, 2022.

Frans A Oliehoek and Christopher Amato. A concise introduction to decentralized POMDPs.
  Springer, 2016.

Frans A Oliehoek, Matthijs TJ Spaan, and Nikos Vlassis. Optimal and approximate q-value func-
  tions for decentralized pomdps. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research, 32:289–353, 2008.

Adam Paszke, Sam Gross, Francisco Massa, Adam Lerer, James Bradbury, Gregory Chanan, Trevor
  Killeen, Zeming Lin, Natalia Gimelshein, Luca Antiga, et al. Pytorch: An imperative style, high-
  performance deep learning library. Advances in neural information processing systems, 32, 2019.

Tabish Rashid, Mikayel Samvelyan, Christian Schroeder, Gregory Farquhar, Jakob Foerster, and
  Shimon Whiteson. Qmix: Monotonic value function factorisation for deep multi-agent reinforce-
  ment learning. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 4295–4304. PMLR, 2018.

Martin Riedmiller, Roland Hafner, Thomas Lampe, Michael Neunert, Jonas Degrave, Tom Wiele,
 Vlad Mnih, Nicolas Heess, and Jost Tobias Springenberg. Learning by playing solving sparse
 reward tasks from scratch. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 4344–4353.
 PMLR, 2018.


                                               10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


John Schulman, Sergey Levine, Pieter Abbeel, Michael Jordan, and Philipp Moritz. Trust region
  policy optimization. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 1889–1897. PMLR,
  2015.
John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy
  optimization algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347, 2017.
Kyunghwan Son, Daewoo Kim, Wan Ju Kang, David Earl Hostallero, and Yung Yi. Qtran: Learning
  to factorize with transformation for cooperative multi-agent reinforcement learning. In Interna-
  tional Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 5887–5896. PMLR, 2019.
Matthijs TJ Spaan. Partially observable markov decision processes. In Reinforcement Learning, pp.
 387–414. Springer, 2012.
Peter Sunehag, Guy Lever, Audrunas Gruslys, Wojciech Marian Czarnecki, Vinicius Zambaldi, Max
  Jaderberg, Marc Lanctot, Nicolas Sonnerat, Joel Z Leibo, Karl Tuyls, et al. Value-decomposition
  networks for cooperative multi-agent learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1706.05296, 2017.
Richard S Sutton and Andrew G Barto. Reinforcement learning: An introduction. MIT press, 2018.
Ming Tan. Multi-agent reinforcement learning: Independent vs. cooperative agents. In Proceedings
 of the tenth international conference on machine learning, pp. 330–337, 1993.
Alexander Trott, Stephan Zheng, Caiming Xiong, and Richard Socher. Keeping your distance:
  Solving sparse reward tasks using self-balancing shaped rewards. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 32, 2019.
Jianhao Wang, Zhizhou Ren, Terry Liu, Yang Yu, and Chongjie Zhang. Qplex: Duplex dueling
   multi-agent q-learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2008.01062, 2020.
Yutong Xie, Chence Shi, Hao Zhou, Yuwei Yang, Weinan Zhang, Yong Yu, and Lei Li. Mars:
  Markov molecular sampling for multi-objective drug discovery. arXiv preprint arXiv:2103.10432,
  2021.
Yaodong Yang, Rasul Tutunov, Phu Sakulwongtana, Haitham Bou Ammar, and Jun Wang. αα -rank:
  Scalable multi-agent evaluation through evolution. 2019.
Yaodong Yang, Ying Wen, Jun Wang, Liheng Chen, Kun Shao, David Mguni, and Weinan Zhang.
  Multi-agent determinantal q-learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp.
  10757–10766. PMLR, 2020.
Chao Yu, Akash Velu, Eugene Vinitsky, Yu Wang, Alexandre Bayen, and Yi Wu. The surprising
  effectiveness of ppo in cooperative, multi-agent games. arXiv preprint arXiv:2103.01955, 2021.
Dinghuai Zhang, Nikolay Malkin, Zhen Liu, Alexandra Volokhova, Aaron Courville, and Yoshua
  Bengio. Generative flow networks for discrete probabilistic modeling. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2202.01361, 2022.
Kaiqing Zhang, Zhuoran Yang, and Tamer Başar. Multi-agent reinforcement learning: A selective
  overview of theories and algorithms. Handbook of Reinforcement Learning and Control, pp.
  321–384, 2021.


                                               11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A     P ROOF OF M AIN R ESULTS
A.1   P ROOF OF T HEOREM 1

Theorem 1. Let the joint policy be the product of the individual policy {πi }ki=1 , where πi with
respect to the individual flow function Fi (oi , ai ), i.e.,
                                                    Fi (oi , ai )
                                   πi (ai |oi ) =                 , ∀i = 1, · · · , k.                          (16)
                                                     Fi (oi )
Assume that the individual flow Fi (oi , ai ) satisfies the condition in Definition 2. Define a flow
function F̂ , if all agents generate trajectories using independent policies πi , i = 1, ..., k and the
matching conditions
                             X                                           X
     ∀s′ > s0 , F̂ (s′ ) =        F̂ (s → s′ ) and ∀s′ < sf , F̂ (s′ ) =         F̂ (s′ → s′′ )    (17)
                             s∈P(s′ )                                                          s′′ ∈C(s′ )

are satisfied. Then, we have:
1) π(sf ) ∝ R(sf );
2) F̂ uniquely defines a Markovian flow F matching F̂ such that
                                          Qn+1
                                                F̂ (st−1 → st )
                                 F (τ ) = t=1Qn                 .                                               (18)
                                                t=1 F̂ (st )


Proof: We first prove the part 1). Since
                                                             Y
                                           F (st , at ) =          Fi (oit , ait ),
                                                               i

then we have the global state flow as
                                     X                X Y
                          F (st ) =    F (st , at ) =     Fi (oit , ait ).                                      (19)
                                          at ∈A                     at ∈A i

According to the flow definitions, the observation flow Fi (oit ) and individual observation flows have
the relationship:                                 X
                                      Fi (oit ) =     Fi (oit , ait ).                             (20)
                                                         ait ∈Ai

Hence, we have
                                                                   
                         k
                         Y               k  X
                                         Y                          
                             Fi (oit ) =             Fi (oit , ait )                                            (21)
                                              i i                  
                         i=1             i=1  at ∈A
                                          X                         X
                                       =      Fi (o1t , a1t ) · · ·   Fi (okt , akt )                           (22)
                                         a1t ∈A1                         ak
                                                                          t ∈A
                                                                               k

                                                    X
                                     =                                  Fi (o1t , a1t ) · · · Fi (okt , akt )   (23)
                                         a1t ,··· ,ak   1
                                                    t ∈A ×···×A
                                                               k

                                           k
                                         X Y
                                     =               Fi (oit , ait ),                                           (24)
                                         at ∈A i=1

                            i
                     Q
yielding F (st ) =   i Fi (ot ). Therefore, the joint policy

                                                               Fi (oit , ait )
                                                             Q
                                           F (st , at )
                                  π(a|s) =                = i
                                             F (st )           F (st )
                                           Q          i i                                                       (25)
                                               F   (o
                                             i i t t   , a )   Y
                                         = Q             i
                                                             =     πi (ai |oi ).
                                               i Fi (ot )       i


                                                            12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Equation 25 indicates that if the conditions in Definition 2 is satisfied, we can establish the consis-
tency of joint and individual policies. Based on Lemma 1, we can conclude that the reward of the
generated state satisfies π(sf ) ∝ R(sf ) using the individual policy πi (ai |oi ) of each agent.
Next, we prove the part 2). We first prove the necessity part. According to Definition 2 and Bengio
et al. (2021b) we have
                   Y              Y X                           X Y
         F (s′ ) =   Fi (oi,′ ) =            Fi (oi → oi,′ ) =           Fi (oi → oi,′ ),
                   i                   i oi ∈P(oi,′ )                        o∈P(o′ ) i
                   Y                  Y         X                                   X       Y
       F (s′ ) =       Fi (oi,′ ) =                        Fi (oi,′ → oi,′′ ) =                   Fi (oi,′ → oi,′′ ).
                   i                   i oi,′′ ∈C(oi,′ )                          o′′ ∈C(o′ ) i


Then we prove the sufficiency part. We first present Lemma 3, which shows that
                         X               X         Y
                              PB (τ ) =                 PB (st |st+1 ) = 1.
                           τ ∈T0,s                τ ∈T0,s st →st+1 ∈τ


Lemma 3 (Independent Transition Probability) Define the independent forward and backward
transition respectively as

                           i    i
                                         i    i     i
                                                        Fi oit → oit+1
                      PF ot+1 |ot := Pi ot → ot+1 |ot =                  ,           (26)
                                                           Fi oit

and

                                                               Fi oit+1 → oit
                       PB oit |oit+1 := Pi oit+1 → oit |oit+1 =

                                                                                .                                       (27)
                                                                 Fi oit+1
Then we have
                                          X
                                                  PF (τ ) = 1, ∀s ∈ S\{sf },
                                        τ ∈Ts,f
                                          X                                                                             (28)
                                                  PB (τ ) = 1, ∀s ∈ S\{s0 },
                                        τ ∈T0,s

where Ts,f is the set of trajectories starting in s and ending in sf and T0,s is the set of trajectories
starting in s0 and ending in s.

Define Ẑ = F̂ (s0 ) as the partition function and P̂F as the forward probability function. Then,
according to Proposition 18 in Bengio et al. (2021b), we have there exists a unique Markovian flow
F with forward transition probability function PF = P̂F and partition function Z, and such that
                                         n+1                         Qn+1
                                                                         t=1 F̂ (st−1 → st )
                                         Y
                          F (τ ) = Ẑ           P̂F (st |st−1 ) =          Qn                ,                          (29)
                                          t=1                                t=1 F̂ (st )

where sn+1 = sf . Thus, we have for s′ ̸= s0 :
                                X         Y
                   F (s′ ) = Ẑ                                 P̂F (st+1 |st )
                                      τ ∈T0,s′ (st →st+1 )∈τ

                                      F̂ (s′ ) X               Y
                              = Ẑ                                       P̂B (st |st+1 ) = F̂ (s′ ).                    (30)
                                      F̂ (s0 ) τ ∈T
                                                    0,s′ (st →st+1 )∈τ



Combining equation 30 with PF = P̂F , we have ∀s → s′ ∈ A, F (s → s′ ). Finally, for any Marko-
vian flow F ′ matching F̂ on states and edges, we have F ′ (τ ) = F (τ ) according to Proposition 16
in Bengio et al. (2021b), which shows the uniqueness property. Then we complete the proof.


                                                              13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A.2    P ROOF OF L EMMA 2

Lemma 2. Suppose Assumption 1 holds and the environment has a tree structure, based on the IGC
and IGM conditions we have:
1) Qµtot (s, a) = F (s, a)f (s);
2) (arg maxai Qi (oi , ai ))ki=1 = (arg maxai Fi (oi , ai ))ki=1 .
Proof: The proof is an extension of that of Proposition 4 in Bengio et al. (2021a). For any (s, a)
satisfies sf = T (s, a), we have Qµtot (s, a) = R(sf )f (s) and F (s, a) = R(sf ). Therefore, we have
Qµtot (s, a) = F (s, a)f (s). Then, for each non-final node s′ , based on the action-value function in
terms of the action-value at the next step, we have by induction:
                                                            X
                          Qµtot (s, a) = R̂(s′ ) + µ(a|s′ )      Qµtot (s′ , a′ ; R̂)
                                                              a′ ∈A(s′ )
                                     (a)                     X                                               (31)
                                       = 0 + µ(a|s′ )                  F (s′ , a′ ; R)f (s′ ),
                                                          a′ ∈A(s′ )

where R̂(s′ ) is the reward of Qµtot (s, a) and (a) is due to that R̂(s′ ) = 0 if s′ is not a final state.
Since the environment has a tree structure, we have
                                                   X
                                      F (s, a) =         F (s′ , a′ ),                               (32)
                                                      a′ ∈A(s′ )

which yields
                                                                                   1
         Qµtot (s, a) = µ(a|s′ )F (s, a)f (s′ ) = µ(a|s′ )F (s, a)f (s)                   = F (s, a)f (s).
                                                                                 µ(a|s′ )
                                                                          i i
                                                               Q
According to the IGC condition we have F (st , at ) =              i Fi (ot , at ), yielding
                                 (a)
            arg max Qtot (s, a) = arg max log F (s, a)f (s)
                  a                          a
                                                 k
                                 (b)             X
                                 = arg max             log Fi (oi , ai )                                     (33)
                                             a
                                                 i=1

                                 (c)
                                 =      arg max F1 (o1 , a1 ), · · · , arg max Fk (ok , ak ) ,
                                             a1 ∈Ai                                ak ∈Ak

where (a) is based on the fact F and f (s) are positive, (b) is due to the IGC condition. Combining
with the IGM condition

      arg max Qtot (s, a) = arg max Q1 (o1 , a1 ), · · · , arg max Qk (ok , ak ) , ∀s ∈ S.     (34)
          a∈A                       a1 ∈A1                                ak ∈Ak

we can conclude that
                                            k                                       k
                     arg max Fi (oi , ai )              =    arg max Qi (oi , ai )                .
                           ai ∈Ai                                  a1 ∈A1
                                                 i=1                                        i=1

Then we complete the proof.

A.3    P ROOF OF L EMMA 3

Lemma 3 [Independent Transition Probability]. Define the independent forward and backward
transition respectively as

                           i    i
                                         i    i     i
                                                        Fi oit → oit+1
                      PF ot+1 |ot := Pi ot → ot+1 |ot =                  ,            (35)
                                                           Fi oit
and
                                                              Fi oit+1 → oit
                      PB oit |oit+1 := Pi oit+1 → oit |oit+1 =

                                                                               .                             (36)
                                                                Fi oit+1

                                                        14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Then we have
                                           X
                                                    PF (τ ) = 1, ∀s ∈ S\{sf },
                                          τ ∈Ts,f
                                           X                                                                              (37)
                                                    PB (τ ) = 1, ∀s ∈ S\{s0 },
                                          τ ∈T0,s

where Ts,f is the set of trajectories starting in s and ending in sf and T0,s is the set of trajectories
starting in s0 and ending in s.
Proof: When the maximum length of trajectories is not more than 1, we have
                                      X
                                            PF (τ ) = 1.                                                                  (38)
                                                     τ ∈Ts,f

Then we have the following results by induction:
            X                X        X                X            X
                  PF (τ ) =                  PF (τ ) =   PF (o′ |o)   PF (τ )
              τ ∈Ts,f               s′ ∈C(s) τ ∈Ts→s′ ,f                    o′ ∈C(o)              τ ∈Ts′ ,f
                                    X X                                 X                                                 (39)
                                =                    PF (o′i |oi )                PF (τ ) = 1,
                                     k o′i ∈C(oi )                    τ ∈Ts′ ,f


    PC(·) is the children set of the current state or observation and the last equation is based on the
where
fact o′ ∈C(oi ) PF (o′i |oi ) = 1. Since the proof process of PB is similar to that of PF , it is omitted
      i
here.

B     E XPERIMENTAL D ETAILS
B.1   H YPER -G RID E NVIRONMENT

Here we present the experimental details on the Hyper-Grid environments. Figure 5 shows the curve
of the flow matching loss function with the number of training steps. The loss of our proposed
algorithm gradually decreases, ensuring the stability of the learning process. For some RL algo-
rithms based on the state-action value function estimation, the loss usually oscillates. This may be
because RL-based methods use experience replay buffer and the transition data distribution is not
stable enough. The method we propose uses an on-policy based optimization method, and the data
distribution changes with the current sampling policy, hence the loss function is relatively stable.
We set the same number of training steps for all algorithms for a fair comparison. Moreover, we list
the key hyperparameters of the different algorithms in Tables 2 3 4 5.

          8                                                CFN
                                                           FCN         10                                           CFN
                                                                                                                    FCN
          7
          6                                                             8
          5
                                                                        6
       Loss


          4
                                                                 Loss


          3                                                             4
          2
          1                                                             2
          0
              0     50    100       150    200      250    300              0       50   100     150    200   250   300
                           Training Steps                                                 Training Steps
                         Figure 5: The flow matching loss of different algorithm.

We study the effect of different reward in Figure 6. In particular, we set R0 = {10−1 , 10−2 , 10−4 }
for different task challenge. A smaller value of R0 makes the reward function distribution more


                                                                 15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                                                         CFN R0 = 10 1
                                                                        1.9                              CFN R0 = 10 2
               80                                                                                        CFN R0 = 10 4
                                                                                                         FCN R0 = 10 1
                                                                        1.8                              FCN R0 = 10 2
                                                                                                         FCN R0 = 10 4
      Mode Found
               60


                                                                 L1 Error
                                                                        1.7
               40                                                       1.6
                                                 CFN R0 = 10 1
                                                 CFN R0 = 10 2
                                                 CFN R0 = 10 4
               20                                FCN R0 = 10 1          1.5
                                                 FCN R0 = 10 2
                                                 FCN R0 = 10 4
                                                                        1.4
                    0        5      10      15             20                 0       5      10     15             20
                                  Epochs                                                   Epochs
Figure 6: The effect of different reward R0 on different algorithm according to L1 error and mode
found.


sparse, which makes policy optimization more difficult Bengio et al. (2021a); Riedmiller et al.
(2018); Trott et al. (2019). As shown in Figure 6, we found that our proposed method is robust
with the cases R0 = 10−1 and R0 = 10−2 . When the reward distribution becomes sparse, the
performance of the proposed algorithm degrades slightly.

                        Table 2: Hyper-parameter of MAPPO under different environments

                                            Hyper-Grid-v1                         Hyper-Grid-v2     Hyper-Grid-v3

         Train Steps                               20000                              20000                  20000
           Agent                                      2                                  2                      3
          Grid Dim                                    2                                  3                      3
          Grid Size                                 [8,8]                              [8,8]                  [8,8]
Actor Network Hidden Layers                      [256,256]                          [256,256]              [256,256]
         Optimizer                                 Adam                               Adam                   Adam
       Learning Rate                              0.0001                             0.0001                 0.0001
          Batchsize                                  64                                 64                     64
       Discount Factor                              0.99                               0.99                   0.99
        PPO Entropy                                 1e-1                               1e-1                   1e-1


                        Table 3: Hyper-parameter of MASAC under different environments

                                            Hyper-Grid-v1                         Hyper-Grid-v2     Hyper-Grid-v3

          Train Steps                              20000                              20000                  20000
           Grid Dim                                   2                                  3                      3
           Grid Size                                [8,8]                              [8,8]                  [8,8]
Actor Network Hidden Layers                      [256,256]                          [256,256]              [256,256]
Critic Network Hidden Layers                     [256,256]                          [256,256]              [256,256]
          Optimizer                                Adam                               Adam                   Adam
        Learning Rate                             0.0001                             0.0001                 0.0001
           Batchsize                                 64                                 64                     64
        Discount Factor                             0.99                               0.99                   0.99
          SAC Alpha                                 0.98                               0.98                   0.98
   Target Network Update                           0.001                              0.001                  0.001



                                                                 16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                Table 4: Hyper-parameter of FCN under different environments

                                   Hyper-Grid-v1      Hyper-Grid-v2        Hyper-Grid-v3

         Train Steps                   20000               20000                 20000
             R2                           2                   2                     2
             R1                          0.5                 0.5                   0.5
          Grid Dim                        2                   3                     3
          Grid Size                     [8,8]               [8,8]                 [8,8]
    Trajectories per steps               16                  16                    16
Flow Network Hidden Layers           [256,256]           [256,256]             [256,256]
         Optimizer                     Adam                Adam                  Adam
       Learning Rate                  0.0001              0.0001                0.0001
              ϵ                       0.0005              0.0005                0.0005


                Table 5: Hyper-parameter of CFN under different environments

                                   Hyper-Grid-v1      Hyper-Grid-v2        Hyper-Grid-v3

         Train Steps                   20000               20000                 20000
    Trajectories per steps               16                  16                    16
             R2                           2                   2                     2
             R1                          0.5                 0.5                   0.5
          Grid Dim                        2                   3                     3
          Grid Size                     [8,8]               [8,8]                 [8,8]
Flow Network Hidden Layers           [256,256]           [256,256]             [256,256]
         Optimizer                     Adam                Adam                  Adam
       Learning Rate                  0.0001              0.0001                0.0001
              ϵ                       0.0005              0.0005                0.0005


                                             17
