Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


I NITIAL VALUE P ROBLEM E NHANCED S AMPLING FOR
C LOSED -L OOP O PTIMAL C ONTROL D ESIGN WITH
D EEP N EURAL N ETWORKS
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                             A BSTRACT

         Closed-loop optimal control design for high-dimensional nonlinear systems has
         been a long-standing challenge. Traditional methods, such as solving the associ-
         ated Hamilton-Jacobi-Bellman equation, suffer from the curse of dimensionality.
         Recent literature proposed a new promising approach based on supervised learn-
         ing, by leveraging powerful open-loop optimal control solvers to generate training
         data and neural networks as efficient high-dimensional function approximators
         to fit the closed-loop optimal control. This approach successfully handles certain
         high-dimensional optimal control problems but still performs poorly on more chal-
         lenging problems. One of the crucial reasons for the failure is the so-called distri-
         bution mismatch phenomenon brought by the controlled dynamics. In this paper,
         we investigate this phenomenon and propose the initial value problem enhanced
         sampling method to mitigate this problem. We theoretically prove that this sam-
         pling strategy improves over the vanilla strategy on the classical linear-quadratic
         regulator by a factor proportional to the total time duration. We further numeri-
         cally demonstrate that the proposed sampling strategy significantly improves the
         performance on tested control problems, including the optimal landing problem
         of a quadrotor and the optimal reaching problem of a 7 DoF manipulator.


1    I NTRODUCTION

Optimal control aims to find a control for a dynamical system over a period of time such that a
specified loss function is minimized. Generally speaking, there are two types of optimal controls:
open-loop optimal control and closed-loop (feedback) optimal control. Open-loop optimal control
deals with the problem with a given initial state, and its solution is a function of time for the specific
initial data, independent of the other states of the system. In contrast, closed-loop optimal control
aims to find the optimal control policy as a function of the state that gives us optimal control for
general initial states.
By the nature of the problem, solving the open-loop control problem is relatively easy and various
open-loop control solvers can handle nonlinear problems even when the state lives in high dimen-
sions (Betts, 1998; Rao, 2009). Closed-loop control is much more powerful than open-loop control
since it can cope with different initial states, and it is more robust to the disturbance of dynam-
ics. The classical approach to obtaining a closed-loop optimal control function is by solving the
associated Hamilton-Jacobi-Bellman (HJB) equation. However, traditional numerical algorithms
for HJB equations such as the finite difference method or finite element method face the curse of
dimensionality (Bellman, 1957) and hence can not deal with high-dimensional problems.
Since the work Han & E (2016) for stochastic optimal control problems, there have been growing
interest on making use of the capacity of neural networks (NNs) in approximating high-dimensional
functions to solve the closed-loop optimal control problems (Nakamura-Zimmerer et al., 2021a;b;
2020; Böttcher et al., 2022; E et al., 2022). Generally speaking, there are two categories of methods
in this promising direction. One is policy search approach (Han & E, 2016; Ainsworth et al., 2021;
Böttcher et al., 2022; Zhao et al., 2022), which directly parameterizes the policy function by neural
networks, computes the total cost with various initial points, and minimizes the average total cost.
When solving problems with a long time span and high nonlinearity, the corresponding optimization


                                                    1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


problems can be extremely hard and may get stuck in local minima (Levine & Koltun, 2014). The
other category of methods is based on supervised learning (Nakamura-Zimmerer et al., 2021a;b;
2020; 2022). Combining various techniques for open-loop control, one can solve complex high-
dimensional open-loop optimal control problems; see Betts (1998); Rao (2009); Kang et al. (2021)
for detailed surveys. Consequently, we can collect optimal trajectories for different initial points
as training data, parameterize the control function (or value function) using NNs, and train the NN
models to fit the closed-loop optimal controls (or optimal values). This work focuses on the second
approach and aims to improve its performance through adaptive sampling.
As demonstrated in Nakamura-Zimmerer et al. (2021b); Zang et al. (2022), NN controllers trained by
the vanilla supervised-learning-based approach can perform poorly even when both the training error
and test error on collected datasets are fairly small. Some existing works attribute this phenomenon
to the fact that the learned controller may deteriorate badly at some difficult initial states even though
the error is small in the average sense. Several adaptive sampling methods regarding the initial points
are hence proposed (see Section 4 for a detailed discussion). However, these methods all focus on
choosing optimal paths according to different initial points and ignore the effect of dynamics. This is
an issue since the paths controlled by the NN will deviate from the optimal paths further and further
over time due to the accumulation of errors. As shown in Section 6, applying adaptive sampling
only on initial points is insufficient to solve challenging problems.
This work is concerned with the so-called distribution mismatch phenomenon brought by the dy-
namics in the supervised-learning-based approach. This phenomenon refers to the fact that the
discrepancy between the state distribution of the training data and the state distribution generated
by the NN controller typically increases over time and the training data fails to represent the states
encountered when the trained NN controller is used. Such phenomenon has also been identified
in reinforcement learning (Kakade & Langford, 2002; Long & Han, 2022) and imitation learning
(Ross & Bagnell, 2010). To mitigate this phenomenon, we propose the initial value problem (IVP)
enhanced sampling method to make the states in the training dataset more closely match the states
that the controller reaches. In the IVP enhanced sampling method, we iteratively re-evaluate the
states that the NN controller reaches by solving IVPs and recalculate new training data by solving
the open-loop control problems starting at these states. Our sampling method is very versatile to
be combined with other techniques like a faster open-loop control solver or better neural network
structures. The resulting supervised-learning-based approach empowered by the IVP enhanced sam-
pling can be interpreted as an instance of the exploration-labeling-training (ELT) algorithms (Zhang
et al., 2018; E et al., 2021) for closed-loop optimal control problems (see Appendix A for more
discussions). At a high level, the ELT algorithm proceeds iteratively with the following three steps:
(1) exploring the state space and examining which states need to be labeled; (2) solving the control
problem to label these states and adding them to the training data; (3) training the machine learning
model.
The main contributions of the paper can be summarized as follows. (1) We investigate the distri-
bution mismatch phenomenon brought by the controlled dynamics in the supervised-learning-based
approach, which explains the failure of this approach for challenging problems. We propose the
IVP enhanced sampling method to update the training data, which significantly alleviates the distri-
bution mismatch problem. (2) We show that the IVP enhanced sampling method can significantly
improve the performance of the learned closed-loop controller on a uni-dimensional linear quadratic
control problem (theoretically and numerically) and two high-dimensional problems (numerically),
the quadrotor landing problem and the reaching problem of a 7-DoF manipulator. (3) We compare
the IVP enhanced sampling method with other adaptive sampling methods and show that the IVP
enhanced method gives the best performance.


2     P RELIMINARY

2.1   O PEN - LOOP AND C LOSED - LOOP O PTIMAL C ONTROL

We consider the following deterministic controlled dynamical system:
                              (
                                ẋ(t) = f (t, x(t), u(t)), t ∈ [t0 , T ]
                                                                                                      (1)
                                x(t0 ) = x0


                                                    2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


where x(t) ∈ Rn denotes the state, u(t) ∈ U ⊂ Rm denotes the control with U being the set
of admissible controls, f : [0, T ] × Rn × U → Rn is a smooth function describing the dynamics,
t0 ∈ [0, T ] denotes the initial time, and x0 ∈ Rn denotes the initial state. Given a fixed t0 ∈
[0, T ] and x0 ∈ Rn , solving the open-loop optimal control problem means to find a control path
u∗ : [t0 , T ] → U to minimize
                          Z T
         J(u; t0 , x0 ) =     L(t, x(t), u(t))dt + M (x(T )) s.t. (x, u) satisfy the system (1),
                             t0

where L : [0, T ] × R × U → R and M : Rn → R are the running cost and terminal cost, re-
                         n

spectively. We use x∗ (t; t0 , x0 ) and u∗ (t; t0 , x0 ) to denote the optimal state and control with the
specified initial time t0 and initial state x0 , which emphasizes the dependence of the open-loop op-
timal solutions on the initial time and state. We assume the open-loop optimal control problem is
well-posed, i.e., the solution always exists and is unique.
In contrast to the open-loop control being a function of time only, closed-loop control is a function
of the time-state pair (t, x). Given a closed-loop control u : [0, T ] × Rn → U, we can induce a
family of the open-loop controls with all possible initial time-state pairs (t0 , x0 ):
                                          u(t; t0 , x0 ) = u(t, xu (t; t0 , x0 )),
where xu (t; t0 , x0 ) is defined by the following initial value problem (IVP):
                           (
                             ẋu (t; t0 , x0 ) = f (t, xu (t; t0 , x0 ), u(t, xu (t; t0 , x0 )), t ∈ [t0 , T ]
   IVP(x0 , t0 , T, u) :                                                                                         (2)
                             xu (t0 ; t0 , x0 ) = x0 .

To ease the notation, we always use the same character to denote the closed-loop control function
and the induced family of the open-loop controls. The context of closed-loop or open-loop control
can be inferred from the arguments and will not be confusing. It is well known in the classical
optimal control theory (see, e.g. Liberzon (2011)) that there exists a closed-loop optimal control
function u∗ : [0, T ] × Rn → U such that for any t0 ∈ [0, T ] and x0 ∈ Rn ,
                                         u∗ (t; t0 , x0 ) = u∗ (t, x∗ (t; t0 , x0 )),
which means the family of the open-loop optimal controls with all possible initial time-state pairs
can be induced from the closed-loop optimal control function. Since IVPs can be easily solved, one
can handle the open-loop control problems with all possible initial time-state pairs if a good closed-
loop control solution is available. Moreover, the closed-loop control is more robust to dynamic
disturbance and model misspecification, and hence it is much more powerful in applications.
In this paper, our goal is to find a near-optimal closed-loop control û such that for x0 ∈ X ⊂ Rn
with X being the set of initial states of interest, the associated total cost is near-optimal, i.e.,
                         |J(û( · ; 0, x0 ); 0, x0 ) − J(u∗ ( · ; 0, x0 ); 0, x0 )| is small.

2.2    S UPERVISED - LEARNING - BASED A PPROACH FOR C LOSED - LOOP O PTIMAL C ONTROL
       P ROBLEM

Here we briefly explain the idea of the supervised-learning-based approach for the closed-loop op-
timal control problem. The first step is to generate training data by solving the open-loop optimal
control problems with zero initial time and initial states randomly sampled in X. Then, the training
data is collected by evenly choosing points in every optimal path:
                                        D = {(ti,j , xi,j ), ui,j }1≤i≤M,1≤j≤N ,
where M and N are the number of sampled training trajectories and the number of points chosen in
each path, respectively. Finally, a function approximator (mostly neural network, as considered in
this work) with parameters θ is trained by solving the following regression problem:
                                                M    N
                                         1 X X i,j
                                  min               ∥u − uNN (ti,j , xi,j ; θ)∥2 ,                               (3)
                                   θ    M N i=1 j=1

and gives the NN controller uNN .


                                                              3
 Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


 3       IVP E NHANCED S AMPLING M ETHOD
 Although the vanilla supervised-learning-based approach can achieve a good performance in certain
 problems (Nakamura-Zimmerer et al., 2021a), it is observed that its performance on complex prob-
 lems is not satisfactory (see Nakamura-Zimmerer et al. (2021b); Zang et al. (2022) and examples
 below). One of the crucial reasons that the vanilla method fails is the distribution mismatch phe-
 nomenon. To better illustrate this phenomenon, let µ0 be the distribution of the initial state of interest
 and u : [0, T ] × Rn → U be a closed-loop control function. We use µu (t) to denote the distribution
 of x(t) generated by u: ẋ(t) = f (t, x(t), u(t, x(t))), x0 ∼ µ0 . Note that in the training process
 (3), the distribution of the state at time t is µu∗ (t), the state distribution generated by the closed-loop
 optimal control. On the other hand, when we apply the learned NN controller in the dynamics, the
 distribution of the input state of uNN at time t is µuNN (t). The error between state x driven by u∗
 and uNN accumulates and makes the discrepancy between µu∗ (t) and µuNN (t) increases over time.
 Hence, the training data fails to represent the states encountered in the controlled process, and the
 error between u∗ and uNN dramatically increases when t is large. See Figures 1 (left) and 2 below
 for an illustration of this phenomenon.
 To overcome this problem, we propose the following IVP enhanced sampling method. The key idea
 is to improve the quality of the NN controller iteratively by enlarging the training dataset with the
 states seen by the NN controller at previous times. Given predesigned (not necessarily even-spaced)
 temporal grid points 0 = t0 < t1 < · · · < tK = T , we first generate a training dataset S0 by
 solving open-loop optimal control problems on the time interval [0, T ] starting from points in X0 ,
 a set of initial points sampled from µ0 , and train the initial model û0 . Under the control of û0 , the
 generated trajectory deviates more and more from the optimal trajectory. So we stop at time t1 , i.e.,
 compute the IVPs using û0 as the closed-loop control and points in X0 as the initial points on the
 time interval [0, t1 ], and then on the interval [t1 , T ] solve new optimal paths that start at the end-
 points of the previous IVPs. The new training dataset S1 is then composed of new data (between
 t1 and T) and the data before time t1 in the dataset S0 , and we train a new model û1 using S1 .
 We repeat this process to the predesigned temporal grid points t2 , t3 , · · · until end up with T . In
 other words, in each iteration, the adaptively sampled data replaces the corresponding data (defined
 on the same time interval) in the training dataset (the size of training data remains the same). The
 whole process can be formulated as Algorithm 1, and we refer to Figure 1 for an illustration of the
 algorithm’s mechanism. We call this method IVP enhanced sampling method because the initial
 points of the open-loop optimal control problems are sampled by solving the IVP with the up-to-
 date NN controller. It is worth noting that the later iterations require less effort in labeling data as
 the trajectories
       space
                   are shorter and thus easier to solve.
                   space                                                        space                                                               space

                                                                                                                                      range of                                        Region IV
     range of                                                     range of
      target                                                       target                                                              target
       state                                                        state                                                               state                                         Region V



                                                                                                                   Region II
     range of                              Region II              range of                                                            range of
       initial       Region I                                       initial       Region I          Region III                          initial       Region I           Region III
       state                                                        state                                                               state
                                                           time                                                                time                                                               time

                 t0 = 0          t1              t2    t3 = T                 t0 = 0           t1                  t2     t3 = T                  t0 = 0            t1                t2     t3 = T
                            before iteration                                                 rst iteration                                                       second iteration

       Region I           Optimal paths        Region II        Paths controlled by û0                     Region III    Optimal paths from the states reached by û0 at t1

                                               Region IV        Paths controlled by û1                     Region V      Optimal paths from the states reached by û1 at t2

      The rst             policy û0 is trained on { Region I data}

      The second policy û1 is trained on { Region I data in [0, t1)} ∪ { Region III data }

      The nal             policy û2 is trained on { Region I data in [0, t1)} ∪ { Region III data in [t1, t2)} ∪ { Region V data }


 Figure 1: An illustration of how the proposed IVP enhanced sampling (Algorithm 1) works when
 there are two intermediate temporal grid points t1 and t2 .

 It is worthwhile mentioning that the IVP enhanced sampling method is versatile enough to com-
 bine other improvements for closed-loop optimal control problems, such as efficient open-loop con-
 trol problem solvers (Kang et al., 2021; Zang et al., 2022) or specialized neural network structures
 (Nakamura-Zimmerer et al., 2020; 2021b; 2022). One design choice regarding the network structure
fi        fi



                                                                                                    4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Algorithm 1 IVP enhanced sampling method for closed-loop optimal control design
 1: Input: Initial distribution µ0 , number of time points K, temporal grid points 0 = t0 < t1 <
    · · · < tK = T , time step δ, number of initial points N .
 2: Initialize: S−1 = ∅, û−1 (t, x) = 0.
 3: Independently sample N initial points from µ0 to get an initial point set X0 .
 4: for i = 0, 1, · · · , K − 1 do
 5:     For any x0 ∈ X0 , compute IVP (x0 , 0, ti , ûi−1 ) according to (2).      ▷Exploration
 6:     Set Xi = {xûi−1 (ti ; 0, x0 ) : x0 ∈ X0 }.
 7:     For any xi ∈ Xi , call the open-loop optimal control solver to obtain x∗ (t; ti , xi ) and
    u∗ (t; ti , xi ) for t ∈ [ti , T ].                                                                 ▷Labeling
 8:     Set Ŝi = {(t, x∗ (t; ti , xi ), u∗ (t; ti , xi )) : xi ∈ Xi , t ∈ [ti , T ], (t − t0 )/δ ∈ N}.
                         S
 9:     Set Si = Ŝi {(t, x, u) : t < ti , (t, x, u) ∈ Si−1 }.
10:     Train ûi with dataset Si .                                                                     ▷Training
11: end for
12: Output: ûK−1 .



in the IVP enhanced sampling method is whether to share the same network among different time
intervals. We choose to use the same network for all the time intervals in the following numerical
examples, but the opposite choice is also feasible.


4    C OMPARISON WITH OTHER A DAPTIVE S AMPLING M ETHODS

In this section, we review existing literature on adaptive sampling methods for the closed-loop opti-
mal control problem.
We start with the methods in imitation learning (Hussein et al., 2017), which aim to learn the ex-
pert’s control function. Our task can be viewed as an imitation problem if we take the optimal
control function as the expert’s control. With the same argument, we know the distribution mis-
match phenomenon also exists therein. However, there is a key difference regarding the mecha-
nism of data generation between the two settings: in imitation learning, it is often assumed that
one can easily access the expert’s behavior at every time-state pair while in the optimal control
problem, it is much more computationally expensive to access since one must solve an open-loop
optimal control problem. This difference affects algorithm design fundamentally. Take the for-
ward training algorithm (Ross & Bagnell, 2010), a popular method in imitation learning for mitigat-
ing distribution mismatch, as an example. To apply it to the closed-loop optimal control problem,
we first need to consider a discrete-time version of the problem with a sufficiently fine time grid:
0 = t0 < t1 < · · · < tK ′ = T . At each time step ti , we learn a policy function ūi : Rn → U where
the state x in the training data are generated by sequentially applying ū0 , . . . , ūi−1 and the labels
are generated by solving the open-loop optimal solutions with (ti , x) as the initial time-state pair.
Hence, the open-loop control solver is called with numbers proportionally to the discretized time
steps K ′ , and only the first value on each optimal control path is used for learning. In contrast, in
Algorithm 1, we can use much more values over the optimal control paths in learning, which allows
its temporal grid for sampling to be much coarser than the grid in the forward training algorithm,
and the total cost of solving open-loop optimal control problems is much lower.
Another popular method in imitation learning is DAGGER (Dataset Aggregation) (Ross et al., 2011),
which can also be applied to help sampling in the closed-loop optimal control problem. In DAG-
GER, in order to improve the current closed-loop controller û, one solves IVPs using û over [0, T ]
starting from various initial states and collect the states on a time grid 0 < t1 < · · · < tK−1 < T .
The open-loop control problems are then solved with all the collected time-state pairs as the ini-
tial time-state pair, and all the corresponding optimal solutions are used to construct a dataset for
learning a new controller. The process can be repeated until a good controller is obtained. The time-
state selection in DAGGER is also related to the distribution mismatch phenomenon, but somehow
different from the IVP enhanced sampling. Take the data collection using the controller û1 in the
first iterative step for example. The IVP enhanced sampling focuses on the states at the time grid t1
while DAGGER collects states at all the time grids. If û1 is still far from optimal, the data collected
at later time grids may be irrelevant to or even mislead training due to error accumulation in states.


                                                       5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


In Appendix G, we reports more theoretical and numerical comparison between DAGGER and IVP
enhanced sampling, which indicates DAGGER performs less satisfactorily.
Except for the forward training algorithm and DAGGER, there are other adaptive sampling meth-
ods for the closed-loop optimal control problems. Nakamura-Zimmerer et al. (2021a) propose an
adaptive sampling method that prefers to choose the initial points with large gradients of the value
function as the value function tends to be steep and hard to learn around these points. Landry et al.
(2021) propose to sample the initial points on which the errors between predicted values from the
NN and optimal values are large. These two adaptive sampling methods both focus on finding points
that are not learned well but ignore the influence of the accumulation of the distribution mismatch
over time brought by controlled dynamics. We will show in Section 6 that the IVP enhanced sam-
pling method can outperform such sampling methods.

5   T HEORETICAL A NALYSIS ON AN LQR E XAMPLE
In this section, we analyze the superiority of the IVP sampling method by considering the following
uni-dimensional linear quadratic regulator (LQR) problem:
                                             1 T
                                              Z
                                     min          |u(t)|2 dt + |x(T )|2
                                   x(t),u(t) T t0

                             s.t. ẋ(t) = u(t), t ∈ [t0 , T ], x(t0 ) = x0 ,
where T is a positive integer, t0 ∈ [0, T ] and x0 ∈ R. Classical theory on linear quadratic control
(see, e.g. Sontag (2013)) gives the following explicit linear form of the optimal controls:
                            
                             u∗ (t; t0 , x0 ) = −      T
                                                   T (T −t0 )+1 x0 ,      (open-loop optimal control)
                             u∗ (t, x) = −        T
                                              T (T −t)+1 x.            (closed-loop optimal control)

We consider the following two models to approximate the closed-loop optimal control function with
parameter θ:
                                   T
       Model 1: uθ (t, x) = − T (T −t)+1 x + b(t), where θ = {θt }0≤t≤T = {b(t)}0≤t≤T .            (4)
       Model 2: uθ (t, x) = a(t)x + b(t), where θ = {θt }0≤t≤T = {(a(t), b(t))}0≤t≤T .             (5)
Since there will be no error in learning a linear model when the data is exact, to mimic the errors
encountered when learning neural networks, throughout this section, we assume the data has certain
noise. To be precise, for any t0 ∈ [0, T ] and x0 ∈ R, the open-loop optimal control solver gives the
following approximated optimal path:
             
                                        T
              û(t; t0 , x0 ) = − T (T −t
                                           0 )+1
                                                 x0 + ϵZ,
              x̂(t; t0 , x0 ) = x0 + t û(t; t0 , x0 )dt = T (T −t)+1 x0 + (t − t0 )ϵZ,
                                       R
                                         t0                 T (T −t0 )+1

where ϵ > 0 is a small positive number to indicate the scale of the error and Z is a normal random
variable whose mean is m and variance is σ 2 . In other words, the obtained open-loop control is still
constant in each path, just like the optimal open-loop control, but perturbed by a random constant.
The random variables in different approximated optimal paths starting from different t0 or x0 are
assumed to be independent.
We compare the vanilla supervised-learning-based method and IVP enhanced sampling method the-
oretically for the first model and numerically for the second model (in Appendix B). In the vanilla
method, we randomly sample N T initial points from a standard normal distribution and use corre-
sponding optimal paths to learn the controller. In the IVP enhanced sampling method, we randomly
sample N initial points from a standard normal distribution, set the temporal grid points for sam-
pling as 0 < 1 < · · · < T − 1 < T , and perform Algorithm 1. In both methods, the open-loop
optimal control solver is called N T times in total.
Theorem 1 compares the performance of the vanilla method and the IVP enhanced sampling method
under Model 1 (4) . The more detailed statement and proof can be found in Appendix B. This theo-
rem shows that both the distribution difference and performance difference with respect to the opti-
mal solution for the vanilla method will increase when T increases, while they are always constantly


                                                    6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


bounded for the IVP enhanced sampling method. Therefore, compared to the vanilla method, the
IVP enhanced sampling method mitigates the distribution mismatch phenomenon and significantly
improves the performance when T is large.
Theorem 1. Under Model 1 (4), let uo , uv and ua be the optimal controller, the controller learned by
the vanilla method, and the controller learned by the IVP enhanced sampling method, respectively.
Define IVPs: ẋs (t) = us (t) = us (t, xs (t)), xs (0) = xinit , 0 ≤ t ≤ T, s ∈ {o, v, a}.

      1. If xinit is a random variable following a standard normal distribution, which is independent
         of the initial points and noises in the training process. Let {x̂jv (t)}N T          j      N
                                                                                 j=1 and {x̂a (t)}j=1 be
         the state variables in the training data of the vanilla method and the last iteration of the
         IVP enhanced sampling method. Then, x̂jv (t), x̂ja (t), xv (t) and xa (t) are normal random
         variables, Ex̂jv (t) = Exv (t), Ex̂ja (t) = Exa (t) and
                                                        1 2 2
                   |E|x̂jv (t)|2 − E|xv (t)|2 | = (1 −    )ϵ t , |E|x̂ja (t)|2 − E|xa (t)|2 | ≤ ϵ2 .
                                                       NT
      2. If xinit is a fixed initial point, define the total cost
                                       1 T
                                          Z
                                Js =           |us (t)|2 dt + |xs (T )|2 ,   s ∈ {o, v, a}.
                                       T 0
                                                    σ2 2                                 σ2 2
         Then, EJv − Jo = (T 2 + 1)(m2 +               )ϵ ,      EJa − Jo ≤ 3(m2 +         )ϵ .
                                                    NT                                   N

6   T HE O PTIMAL L ANDING P ROBLEM OF Q UADROTOR
In this section, we test the IVP enhanced sampling method on the optimal landing problem of a
quadrotor. We consider the full quadrotor dynamic model with 12-dimensional state variable and 4-
dimensional control variable (Bouabdallah et al., 2004; Madani & Benallegue, 2006; Mahony et al.,
2012). We aim to find optimal landing paths from some initial states x0 to a target state xT = 0 with
minimum control efforts during a fixed time duration T = 16. The open-loop optimal solutions are
obtained by solving the corresponding two-point boundary value problems with the space-marching
technique (Zang et al., 2022). See Appendix C, D and E for more details.
We sample N = 500 initial points for generating training data and and use a fully-connected neural
network to approximate the optimal control. The temporal grid points on which we do IVP enhanced
sampling is 0 < 10 < 14 < 16. After learning, we use learned models to run the initial value
problem at 500 training initial points and show the similarity between paths controlled by the NN
controller and their corresponding training data. In Figure 2, the left sub-figure shows the average
pointwise distance between data reached by the NN controller and corresponding training data at
different times. The right sub-figure shows the maximum mean discrepancy (Borgwardt et al., 2006)
                                                                              2
between these two datasets using Gaussian kernel k(x, y) = exp(− ∥x−y∥     2    ). In both figures, there
are jumps at t = 10 and 14 since the NN-controlled path is continuous across time while training
data is discontinuous at locations where we do IVP enhanced sampling. It can be seen that without
adaptive sampling (after iteration 0), the discrepancy between the states reached by the NN controller
and training data is large. With our method, they get closer to each other as the iteration goes.


Figure 2: Left: the average pointwise distance between the training data and the data reached by
controllers at different times. Right: the maximum mean discrepancy (in the logarithm scale) be-
tween the training data and the data reached by controllers at every time using the Gaussian kernel.


                                                        7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Next we check the performance of the learned NN controller. Figure 3 (left) and Figure 3 (middle)
show the cumulative distribution function of the ratio between NN-controlled cost and optimal cost
on 500 training initial points and 200 test initial points, respectively. Without any adaptive sampling,
the performance of model û0 is poor even on the training set. In contrast, the NN model is very
close to the optimal policy after two rounds of adaptive sampling. More statistics of the results are
provided in Appendix E.


Figure 3: Cumulative distribution function of the cost ratio (with the ideal curve being a straight
horizontal segment passing ratio = 1, percentage=100%). Left: results of the IVP enhanced method
on 500 training initial points. Middle: results of the IVP enhanced method on 200 test initial points.
Right: comparison between different sampling methods.

Then we compare our method with four other methods. As data generation is the most time-
consuming part, for the sake of fairness, we keep the number of solving open-loop problems the
same (1500) among all the methods (except the last method). The first method is training a model
on directly sampled 1500 optimal paths (called vanilla sampling). The second method is the adaptive
sampling (AS) method proposed by Nakamura-Zimmerer et al. (2021a) that chooses initial points
with large gradient norms. This is equivalent to choosing initial points whose optimal control has
large norms, and we refer to this method as AS w. large u. With a little modification, the third
method, AS w. large v, is to choose initial points whose total costs are large under the latest NN
controller. The last adaptive sampling method, AS w. bad v, is a variant of the SEAGuL algorithm
(Sample Efficient Adversarially Guided Learning) (Landry et al., 2021). The original SEAGuL algo-
rithm proposes to use a few gradient ascent updates to find initial points with large gaps between the
learned values and optimal values. Here we give this method more computational budget to solve
more open-loop optimal control problems to find such initial points. The cumulative distribution
functions of cost ratios of the above methods are shown in Figure 3 (right), which clearly demon-
strate the superiority of the IVP enhanced sampling method. More details about the implementation
and results of these methods are provided in Appendix E.
We also test the NN controllers obtained from different sampling methods in the presence of obser-
vation noises, considering that the sensors have errors in reality. The detailed results are provided
in Appendix E. It is observed that when measurement errors exist, closed-loop controllers are more
reliable than the open-loop controller and the one trained by the IVP enhanced sampling method
performs best among all the considered methods. Finally, we test 4 different choices of temporal
grid points in Algorithm 1, and train networks on the same 500 initial points. The results listed in
Appendix E show that our algorithm is robust to the choice of temporal grid points.

7   T HE O PTIMAL R EACHING P ROBLEM OF A 7-D O F M ANIPULATOR

In this section, we consider the optimal reaching problem on a 7-DoF torque-controlled manipulator,
the KUKA LWR iiwa R820 14 (Kuka; Bischoff et al., 2010). See the figure in appendix F for an
illustration of this task. Let x = (q, v) = (q, q̇) be the state of the system where q, v ∈ R7 are
joint angles and velocities of the manipulator, respectively. Our goal is to find the optimal torque
u ∈ U ⊂ R7 that drives the manipulator from x0 = (q0 , 0) to x1 = (q1 , 0) in T = 0.8 seconds
and minimizes a quadratic type cost. See Appendix F for details of the problem and the experiment
configurations. To obtain training data, we use differential dynamic programming (Jacobson &
Mayne, 1970) implemented in the Crocoddy library (Mastalli et al., 2020).
We use the QRNet (Nakamura-Zimmerer et al., 2020; 2021b) as the backbone network in this ex-
ample (see Appendix F for details) and evaluate networks trained in six different ways: four of them


                                                   8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


are trained using Algorithm 1 with different choices of temporal grid points for adaptive sampling
and two of them are trained by vanilla sampling method with 300 (Vanilla300) and 900 (Vanilla900)
trajectories separately. All four networks (AS1–AS4) trained by the IVP enhanced sampling have
initial training data of 100 trajectories and three iterations (K = 3), i.e., each of them requires
solving the open-loop solution 300 times in total for generating training data. The difference of the
four networks lies in that they use different temporal grids (t1 and t2 ) for enhanced sampling. Each
experiment has been independently run five times and we report their average results. We plot the
cumulative distribution functions of cost ratios (clipped at 2.0) between the NN-controlled cost and
optimal cost in Figure 4 (left). More details and results are provided in Appendix F. We find that
adding more data in the vanilla sampling method has very limited effects on improvement while the
IVP enhanced sampling greatly improves the performance. Furthermore, such improvement is again
robust to different choices of temporal grid points (AS1–AS4).
In addition, we also test the performance of the network trained by our adaptive sampling method
in the presence of measurement errors. At each simulation timestep, we sample the disturbances
uniformly in [−σ, σ]14 for σ = 1e−5, 1e−4, 1e−3 and add them to the input states of the network.
See Figure 4 (right) for the result on the best model trained from AS1–AS4. We find that the NN
controller performs well at σ = 1e−4, and there are more than 60% of cases on which our controller
achieves a ratio less than 2.0 at σ = 1e−3.


Figure 4: Cumulative distribution functions of cost ratios (with the ideal curve being a straight
horizontal segment passing ratio = 1, percentage=100%) under different training schemes (left) and
different intensities of measurement noises (right).


8   C ONCLUSION AND F UTURE W ORK
In this work, we propose the IVP enhanced sampling method to overcome the distribution mismatch
problem in the supervised-learning-based approaches for the closed-loop optimal control problem.
Both theoretical and numerical results show that the IVP enhanced sampling method significantly
improves the performance of the learned NN controller and outperforms other adaptive sampling
methods. There are a few directions worth exploring in future work. In the IVP enhanced sam-
pling method, one choice we need to make is the temporal grid points for adaptive sampling. We
recommend that at each iteration, one can compute the distance between the training data and data
reached by the NN controller at different times (see Figure 2 for an example) and choose the time at
which the distance starts to increase quickly as the temporal grid for adaptive sampling. We observe
that the IVP enhanced sampling method performs well using this strategy. It will be ideal to make
this process more systematic. Another direction is to design more effective approaches utilizing the
training data. In Algorithm 1 (lines 8–9), at each iteration, we replace parts of the training data
with the newly collected data, and hence some optimal labels are thrown away, which are costly to
                                                                                 S
obtain. An alternative choice is to augment data directly, i.e., setting Si = Ŝi Si−1 in line 9. Nu-
merically, we observe that this choice gives similar performance to the version used in Algorithm 1,
which suggests that so far the dropped data provides little value for training; see Appendix E and
F for details. But it is still possible to find smarter ways to utilize them to improve performance.
We also need to evaluate the IVP enhanced sampling method for problems with more features like
state/control constraints. Furthermore, the IVP enhanced sampling method can be straightforwardly
applied to learning general dynamics from multiple trajectories as the controlled system under the
optimal closed-loop policy can be viewed as a special dynamical system. It is an interesting direc-
tion to investigate its performance in such general settings. Finally, theoretical analysis beyond the
LQR setting is also an interesting and important problem.


                                                  9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


R EFERENCES
Samuel Ainsworth, Kendall Lowrey, John Thickstun, Zaid Harchaoui, and Siddhartha Srinivasa.
  Faster policy learning with continuous-time gradients. In Learning for Dynamics and Control,
  pp. 1054–1067. PMLR, 2021.
Richard E. Bellman. Dynamic Programming. Princeton University Press, 1957.
John T. Betts. Survey of numerical methods for trajectory optimization. Journal of Guidance,
  Control, and Dynamics, 21(2):193–207, 1998.
Rainer Bischoff, Johannes Kurth, Günter Schreiber, Ralf Koeppe, Alin Albu-Schäffer, Alexander
  Beyer, Oliver Eiberger, Sami Haddadin, Andreas Stemmer, Gerhard Grunwald, et al. The kuka-dlr
  lightweight robot arm-a new reference platform for robotics research and manufacturing. In ISR
  2010 (41st international symposium on robotics) and ROBOTIK 2010 (6th German conference on
  robotics), pp. 1–8. VDE, 2010.
Karsten M Borgwardt, Arthur Gretton, Malte J Rasch, Hans-Peter Kriegel, Bernhard Schölkopf,
  and Alex J Smola. Integrating structured biological data by kernel maximum mean discrepancy.
  Bioinformatics, 22(14):e49–e57, 2006.
Lucas Böttcher, Nino Antulov-Fantulin, and Thomas Asikis. AI pontryagin or how artificial neural
  networks learn to control dynamical systems. Nature communications, 13(1):1–9, 2022.
Samir Bouabdallah, Pierpaolo Murrieri, and Roland Siegwart. Design and control of an indoor micro
  quadrotor. In IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation, 2004. Proceedings.
  ICRA’04. 2004, volume 5, pp. 4393–4398. IEEE, 2004.
Justin Carpentier and Nicolas Mansard. Analytical derivatives of rigid body dynamics algorithms.
  In Robotics: Science and Systems, 2018.
Justin Carpentier, Florian Valenza, Nicolas Mansard, et al. Pinocchio: fast forward and inverse
  dynamics for poly-articulated systems. https://stack-of-tasks.github.io/pinocchio, 2015–2021.
Justin Carpentier, Guilhem Saurel, Gabriele Buondonno, Joseph Mirabel, Florent Lamiraux, Olivier
  Stasse, and Nicolas Mansard. The pinocchio c++ library: A fast and flexible implementation of
  rigid body dynamics algorithms and their analytical derivatives. In 2019 IEEE/SICE International
  Symposium on System Integration (SII), pp. 614–619. IEEE, 2019.
Djork-Arné Clevert, Thomas Unterthiner, and Sepp Hochreiter. Fast and accurate deep network
  learning by exponential linear units (elus). In Yoshua Bengio and Yann LeCun (eds.), 4th Inter-
  national Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2016, San Juan, Puerto Rico, May 2-4,
  2016, Conference Track Proceedings, 2016.
Weinan E, Jiequn Han, and Linfeng Zhang. Machine-learning-assisted modeling. Physics Today,
 74:36–41, 2021. ISSN 0031-9228. doi: 10.1063/PT.3.4793.
Weinan E, Jiequn Han, and Jihao Long. Empowering optimal control with machine learning: A
 perspective from model predictive control. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.07990, 2022.
Xavier Glorot and Y. Bengio. Understanding the difficulty of training deep feedforward neural
  networks. Journal of Machine Learning Research - Proceedings Track, 9:249–256, 01 2010.
Jiequn Han and Weinan E. Deep learning approximation for stochastic control problems. arXiv
   preprint arXiv:1611.07422, 2016.
Ahmed Hussein, Mohamed Medhat Gaber, Eyad Elyan, and Chrisina Jayne. Imitation learning: A
  survey of learning methods. ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR), 50(2):1–35, 2017.
David H Jacobson and David Q Mayne. Differential dynamic programming. Number 24 in Modern
  analytic and computational methods in science and mathematics. Elsevier Publishing Company,
  1970.
Sham Kakade and John Langford. Approximately optimal approximate reinforcement learning. In
  In Proc. 19th International Conference on Machine Learning. Citeseer, 2002.


                                               10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Wei Kang, Qi Gong, Tenavi Nakamura-Zimmerer, and Fariba Fahroo. Algorithms of data generation
 for deep learning and feedback design: A survey. Physica D: Nonlinear Phenomena, 425:132955,
 2021.
Jacek Kierzenka and Lawrence F Shampine. A bvp solver based on residual control and the maltab
  pse. ACM Transactions on Mathematical Software (TOMS), 27(3):299–316, 2001.
Diederik P. Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. In Yoshua Bengio
  and Yann LeCun (eds.), 3rd International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2015,
  San Diego, CA, USA, May 7-9, 2015, Conference Track Proceedings, 2015.
Kuka. Kuka ag, 2022. URL https://www.kuka.com/.
Benoit Landry, Hongkai Dai, and Marco Pavone. Seagul: Sample efficient adversarially guided
  learning of value functions. In Learning for Dynamics and Control, pp. 1105–1117. PMLR,
  2021.
Sergey Levine and Vladlen Koltun. Learning complex neural network policies with trajectory opti-
  mization. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 829–837. PMLR, 2014.
Daniel Liberzon. Calculus of variations and optimal control theory: a concise introduction. Prince-
  ton university press, 2011.
Jihao Long and Jiequn Han. Perturbational complexity by distribution mismatch: A systematic anal-
   ysis of reinforcement learning in reproducing kernel hilbert space. Journal of Machine Learning
   vol, 1:1–34, 2022.
Tarek Madani and Abdelaziz Benallegue. Control of a quadrotor mini-helicopter via full state back-
  stepping technique. In Proceedings of the 45th IEEE Conference on Decision and Control, pp.
  1515–1520. IEEE, 2006.
Robert Mahony, Vijay Kumar, and Peter Corke. Multirotor aerial vehicles: Modeling, estimation,
  and control of quadrotor. IEEE Robotics and Automation magazine, 19(3):20–32, 2012.
Carlos Mastalli, Rohan Budhiraja, Wolfgang Merkt, Guilhem Saurel, Bilal Hammoud, Maximilien
  Naveau, Justin Carpentier, Ludovic Righetti, Sethu Vijayakumar, and Nicolas Mansard. Crocod-
  dyl: An efficient and versatile framework for multi-contact optimal control. In 2020 IEEE Inter-
  national Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pp. 2536–2542. IEEE, 2020.
Tenavi Nakamura-Zimmerer, Qi Gong, and Wei Kang. QRnet: optimal regulator design with lqr-
  augmented neural networks. IEEE Control Systems Letters, 5(4):1303–1308, 2020.
Tenavi Nakamura-Zimmerer, Qi Gong, and Wei Kang. Adaptive deep learning for high-dimensional
  Hamilton–Jacobi–Bellman equations. SIAM Journal on Scientific Computing, 43(2):A1221–
  A1247, 2021a.
Tenavi Nakamura-Zimmerer, Qi Gong, and Wei Kang. Neural network optimal feedback control
  with enhanced closed loop stability. arXiv preprint arXiv:2109.07466, 2021b.
Tenavi Nakamura-Zimmerer, Qi Gong, and Wei Kang. Neural network optimal feedback control
  with guaranteed local stability. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.00394, 2022.
Adam Paszke, Sam Gross, Francisco Massa, Adam Lerer, James Bradbury, Gregory Chanan, Trevor
  Killeen, Zeming Lin, Natalia Gimelshein, Luca Antiga, et al. Pytorch: An imperative style, high-
  performance deep learning library. Advances in neural information processing systems, 32, 2019.
Lev Semenovich Pontryagin. Mathematical theory of optimal processes. CRC press, 1987.
Anil V. Rao. A survey of numerical methods for optimal control. Advances in the Astronautical
  Sciences, 135(1):497–528, 2009.
Stéphane Ross and Drew Bagnell. Efficient reductions for imitation learning. In Proceedings of the
   thirteenth international conference on artificial intelligence and statistics, pp. 661–668. JMLR
   Workshop and Conference Proceedings, 2010.

                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Stéphane Ross, Geoffrey Gordon, and Drew Bagnell. A reduction of imitation learning and struc-
   tured prediction to no-regret online learning. In Proceedings of the fourteenth international con-
   ference on artificial intelligence and statistics, pp. 627–635. JMLR Workshop and Conference
   Proceedings, 2011.

Eduardo D Sontag. Mathematical control theory: deterministic finite dimensional systems, vol-
  ume 6. Springer Science & Business Media, 2013.

Russ Tedrake and the Drake Development Team. Drake: Model-based design and verification for
  robotics, 2019.

Yaohua Zang, Jihao Long, Xuanxi Zhang, Wei Hu, Weinan E, and Jiequn Han. A machine learning
  enhanced algorithm for the optimal landing problem. In 3rd Annual Conference on Mathematical
  and Scientific Machine Learning, pp. 1–20. PMLR, 2022.

Linfeng Zhang, Han Wang, and Weinan E. Reinforced dynamics for enhanced sampling in large
  atomic and molecular systems. The Journal of chemical physics, 148(12):124113, 2018.

Zhigen Zhao, Simiao Zuo, Tuo Zhao, and Ye Zhao. Adversarially regularized policy learning guided
  by trajectory optimization. In Learning for Dynamics and Control Conference, pp. 844–857.
  PMLR, 2022.


A     S UPERVISED - LEARNING - BASED A PPROACH THROUGH THE L ENS OF ELT
      A LGORITHM

As pointed out in the introduction, the supervised-learning-based approach empowered by the adap-
tive sampling can be interpreted as an instance of the exploration-labeling-training (ELT) algorithms
(Zhang et al., 2018; E et al., 2021) for closed-loop optimal control problems. Through the lens of the
ELT algorithm, there are at least three aspects to improve the efficiency of the supervised-learning-
based approach for the closed-loop optimal control problem:

       • Use the adaptive sampling method. Adaptive sampling methods aim to sequentially choose
         the time-state pairs based on previous results to improve the performance of the NN con-
         troller. This corresponds to the first step in the ELT algorithm and is the main focus of this
         work.
       • Improve the efficiency of data generation, i.e., solving the open-loop optimal control prob-
         lems. Although the open-loop optimal control problem is much easier than the closed-loop
         optimal control problem, its time cost cannot be neglected and the efficiency varies signif-
         icantly with different methods. This corresponds to the second step in the ELT algorithm
         and we refer to Kang et al. (2021) for a detailed survey.
       • Improve the learning process of the neural networks. This corresponds to the third step
         in the ELT algorithm. The recent works Nakamura-Zimmerer et al. (2020; 2021b; 2022)
         focus on the structure of the neural networks and design a special ansatz such that the NN
         controller is close to the linear quadratic controller around the equilibrium point to improve
         the stability of the NN controller.


B    D ETAILED A NALYSIS OF THE LQR E XAMPLE

In this section, we give the detailed settings for the comparison in Section 5 and the detailed state-
ment and proof of Theorem 1. Through this section, all symbols having a hat are open-loop optimal
paths sampled for training, e.g. ûj , x̂j , ûij , x̂ij . Let x̃ denote a single state instead of a state trajec-
tory. The clean symbol x without hat or tilde is the IVP solution generated by specific controllers
which are specified in the subscript; e.g. xo , xv , xa are trajectories generated by uo , uv , ua which
are optimal, vanilla, and IVP enhanced controllers, respectively. The positive integer j in the sub-
script always denotes the index of the optimal path. Symbols with superscript i are related to the
i-th iteration of the IVP enhanced sampling method.


                                                       12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


For the vanilla method, we first randomly sample N T initial states {x̃j }N   T
                                                                            j=1 from a standard normal
distribution where N is a positive integer (recalling T is a positive integer). Then N T approximated
optimal paths are collected starting at t0 = 0:
                                        T                                   T (T − t) + 1
                    ûj (t) = −              x̃j + ϵZj ,       x̂j (t) =                  x̃j + ϵtZj ,              (6)
                                      T2 + 1                                   T2 + 1
where {Zj }N    T                                                                2
              j=1 are i.i.d. normal random variables with mean m and variance σ , and independent of
initial states. Finally, the parameters θ are learned by solving the following least square problems:
                                      Z TXNT
                                 min          |ûj (t) − uθ (t, x̂j (t))|2 dt.                     (7)
                                          θ   0   j=1

Optimizing θt independently for each t, we have
                   NT                                                             NT
                   X                       T                                      X
 θt = arg min            |ûj (t) +                 x̂j (t) − b|2 or θt = arg min     |ûj (t) − ax̂j (t) − b|2
           b       j=1
                                      T (T − t) + 1                         (a,b) j=1

for the first and second models, respectively. We will use uv to denote the closed-loop controller
determined in this way.
For the IVP enhanced sampling method, we choose K = T and the temporal grid points ti = i
for 0 ≤ i ≤ K. We first sample N initial points {x̃0j }Nj=1 from the normal standard distribution,
denote the parameters optimized at i-th iteration as θ and initialize θ−1 = 0. At the i-th iteration
                                                      i

(0 ≤ i ≤ T − 1), we use uθi−1 to solve the IVPs on the time horizon [0, i]
                             ẋij (t) = uθi−1 (t, xij (t)),          xij (0) = x̃0j , 1 ≤ j ≤ N,                    (8)
and collect {x̃ij }N        i     i
                   j=1 as x̃j := xj (i). Here we omit the controller subscript a for simplicity, i.e.
xj = xa,j . We then compute N approximated optimal paths starting from {x̃ij }N
 i     i
                                                                               j=1 at ti = i:

                        T                                            T (T − t) + 1 i
    ûij (t) = −                x̃i + ϵZji ,            x̂ij (t) =                x̃ + (t − i)ϵZji , t ∈ [i, T ]    (9)
                   T (T − i) + 1 j                                   T (T − i) + 1 j
where {Zji }0≤i≤T −1,1≤j≤N are i.i.d. normal random variables with mean m and variance σ 2 , and
independent of {x̃0j }N                  i      i
                      j=1 . Note that ûj and x̂j are only defined in t ∈ [i, T ] (for i ≥ 1), we then fill
their values in interval [0, i) with values from previous iteration,
                               ûij (t) = ûji−1 (t),      x̂ij (t) = x̂i−1
                                                                        j (t),      t ∈ [0, i).                    (10)
Finally, we solve the least square problems to determine θi :
                                    Z TX N
                               min          |ûij (t) − uθ (t, x̂ij (t))|2 dt.                                     (11)
                                          θ   0   j=1

We will use ua to denote the closed-loop controller uθT −1 , the closed-loop controller generated
in the (T − 1)-th iteration by the IVP enhanced sampling method. The theorem below gives the
performance of uv and ua when using Model 1 (4).
Theorem 1’. Under Model 1 (4), define the IVPs generated by uo = u∗ , uv and ua as follows:
                 
                  ẋo (t) = uo (t) = uo (t, xo (t)), xo (0) = x̃init , 0 ≤ t ≤ T,
                 
                    ẋv (t) = uv (t) = uv (t, xv (t)), xv (0) = x̃init , 0 ≤ t ≤ T,
                  ẋ (t) = u (t) = u (t, x (t)), x (0) = x̃ , 0 ≤ t ≤ T.
                 
                      a        a        a      a        a         init


      1. If x̃init is a random variable following a standard normal distribution, which is independent
         of the initial points {x̃j }N T      0 N                    NT      i
                                     j=1 /{x̃j }j=1 and noises {Zj }j=1 / {Zj }0≤i≤T −1,1≤j≤N in the
         training process, the state variables x̂j (t) in the training data and xv (t) in the IVP from
         the vanilla method follow normal distributions and satisfy:
                                                                                                    1 2 2
                            Ex̂j (t) = Exv (t), |E|x̂j (t)|2 − E|xv (t)|2 | = σ 2 (1 −                )ϵ t .       (12)
                                                                                                   NT

                                                               13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


         On the other hand, the state variables x̂Tj −1 in the training data and xa (t) in the IVP from
         the IVP enhanced sampling method also follow and satisfy:
                                                                                              1
             Ex̂Tj −1 (t) = Exa (t), |E|x̂Tj −1 (t)|2 − E|xa (t)|2 | = σ 2 ϵ2 (t − i)2 (1 −     ) ≤ σ 2 ϵ2 . (13)
                                                                                              N

     2. If x̃init is a fixed initial point, define the total cost
                                                 1 T
                                                   Z
                                         Jo =           |uo (t)|2 dt + |xo (T )|2 ,
                                                T 0
                                                 1 T
                                                   Z
                                         Jv =           |uv (t)|2 dt + |xv (T )|2 ,
                                                T 0
                                                 1 T
                                                   Z
                                         Ja =           |ua (t)|2 dt + |xa (T )|2 .
                                                T 0
         Then,
                                                                            σ2 2
                                         EJv − Jo = (T 2 + 1)(m2 +             )ϵ ,                         (14)
                                                                            NT
                                                                   σ2 2
                                         EJa − Jo ≤ 3(m2 +           )ϵ .                                   (15)
                                                                   N


Proof. We first give the closed-form expressions of uv and ua using Model 1 (4). Recalling ûj (t)
and x̂j (t) given in equation (6), we have
                                     T                     T2 + 1
                  ûj (t) = −                 x̂j (t) +               ϵZj , 1 ≤ j ≤ N T.
                                T (T − t) + 1           T (T − t) + 1
Therefore, recalling uv is learned through the least square problem (7), we have
                                                 T              T2 + 1
                           uv (t, x) = −                  x+               ϵZ̄v ,                           (16)
                                            T (T − t) + 1    T (T − t) + 1
where
                                                              NT
                                                         1 X
                                              Z̄v =             Zj .
                                                        N T j=1

To compute ua , recalling equations (9) and (10), when 0 ≤ i ≤ T − 1, 1 ≤ j ≤ N and t ∈ [i, i + 1),
we have
                                                           T
                           ûTj −1 (t) = ûij (t) = −              x̃i + ϵZji ,
                                                      T (T − i) + 1 j
                                                    T (T − t) + 1 i
                           x̂Tj −1 (t) = x̂ij (t) =              x̃ + (t − i)ϵZji .                         (17)
                                                    T (T − i) + 1 j
Therefore,
                                              T                    T (T − i) + 1 i
                       ûTj −1 (t) = −                x̂T −1 (t) +              ϵZ .
                                         T (T − t) + 1 j           T (T − t) + 1 j
Hence, recalling ua is learned through the least square problem (11), we have, when t ∈ [i, i + 1)
                                                 T           T (T − i) + 1 i
                           ua (t, x) = −                  x+              ϵZ̄ ,                             (18)
                                            T (T − t) + 1    T (T − t) + 1 a
where
                                                 N
                                              1 X i
                                     Z̄ai =        Z , 0 ≤ i ≤ T − 1.
                                              N j=1 j
Equation (18) also holds when i = T − 1 and t = T .


                                                         14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


We then compute the starting points {x̃ij }0≤i≤T −1,1≤j≤N in the IVP enhanced sampling method.
                                                                                             ′
By equation (10), we know that when 1 ≤ i ≤ i′ ≤ T − 1 and 0 ≤ t < ti , θti = θti . Together
with equation (8), we know that when 0 ≤ i ≤ T − 2, uθi (t, x) = uθT −1 (t, x) = ua (t, x) for
t ∈ [i, i + 1), and xi+1         i                                   i+1        i         i
                       j (t) ≡ xj (t) for t ∈ [0, i], which implies xj (i) = xj (i) = x̃j . Therefore,
for 1 ≤ j ≤ N , when 0 ≤ i ≤ T − 2, we have
             
               ẋi+1 (t) = uθi (t, xi+1                i+1
                                     j (t)) = ua (t, xj (t))
              j
             
             
                                      T                   T (T − i) + 1 i
                          =−                   xi+1
                                                j (t) +                ϵZ̄ , t ∈ [i, i + 1],
             
                              T (T  −  t) + 1            T (T − t) + 1 a
              xi+1 (i) = x̃i .
             
                  j           j


Solving the above ODE, we get the solution
                                       T (T − t) + 1 i
                          xi+1
                           j (t) =                  x̃ + (t − i)ϵZ̄ai , t ∈ [i, i + 1].
                                       T (T − i) + 1 j
Hence, by definition, for 0 ≤ i ≤ T − 2,
                                                        T (T − i − 1) + 1 i
                            x̃i+1
                              j   = xi+1
                                     j (i + 1) =                         x̃j + ϵZ̄ai .
                                                          T (T − i) + 1
Utilizing the above recursive relationship, we obtain, for 0 ≤ i ≤ T − 11 ,
                                                           i−1
                                   T (T − i) + 1 0         X        T (T − i) + 1
                            x̃ij =              x̃j +                             ϵZ̄ k .        (19)
                                        2
                                      T +1                       T (T − k − 1) + 1 a
                                                           k=0


Now we are ready to prove the main results of the Theorem. First, for equation (12), using the
control (16), we have
                                      T                    T2 + 1
                   ẋv (t) = −                 xv (t) +               ϵZ̄v , xv (0) = x̃init .
                                 T (T − t) + 1          T (T − t) + 1
Solving this ODE gives
                                        T (T − t) + 1
                                      xv (t) =        x̃init + ϵtZ̄v .                           (20)
                                            T2 + 1
Combining the last equation with the fact that
                                                   T (T − t) + 1
                                       x̂j (t) =                 x̃j + ϵtZj ,
                                                      T2 + 1
x̃j , x̃init and {Zj }N T
                      j=1 are independent normal random variables and

                                     x̃j , x̃init ∼ N (0, 1), Zj ∼ N (m, σ 2 ),
we know that x̂j (t) and xv (t) are normal random variables with
                                                                                    1 2 2
                     Ex̂j (t) = Exv (t), |E|x̂j (t)|2 − E|xv (t)|2 | = σ 2 (1 −       )ϵ t .
                                                                                   NT
Next, we prove the equation (13). for 0 ≤ i ≤ T − 1 and t ∈ [i, i + 1), using the control (18), we
have
                                        T                T (T − i) + 1 i
                      ẋa (t) = −               xa (t) +                  ϵZ̄ .
                                  T (T − t) + 1          T (T − t) + 1 a
Solving the above ODE with the initial condition xa (0) = x̃init , we can get the solution
                                                     i−1
                            T (T − t) + 1          X T (T − t) + 1
                 xa (t) =                 x̃init +                   ϵZ̄ k + (t − i)ϵZ̄ai ,      (21)
                                 2
                               T +1                 T (T − k − 1) + 1 a
                                                     k=0

when 0 ≤ i ≤ T − 1 and t ∈ [i, i + 1). The above equation also holds when i = T − 1 and t = T .
   1                                                             Pn
       In this section, we take by convention that summation       k=m ck = 0 if m > n.



                                                           15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


On the other hand, combining equations (17) and (19), we know that when 0 ≤ i ≤ T − 1 and
t ∈ [i, i + 1) or i = T − 1 and t = T ,

                               T (T − t) + 1 i
               x̂Tj −1 (t) =                x̃ + (t − i)ϵZji
                               T (T − i) + 1 j
                                                         i−1
                               T (T − t) + 1 0 X T (T − t) + 1
                         =                  x̃j +                  ϵZ̄ k + (t − i)ϵZji .
                                  T2 + 1          T (T − k − 1) + 1 a
                                                         k=0

The above equation also holds when i = T − 1 and t = T . Combining the last equation with
equation (21) and the fact that x̃0j ,x̃init and {Zji }0≤i≤T −1,1≤j≤N are independent normal random
variables and
                                      x̃0j , x̃init ∼ N (0, 1), Zji ∼ N (m, σ 2 ),

we know that x̂Tj −1 (t) and xa (t) are normal random variables with

                                                                                                       1
          Ex̂Tj −1 (t) = Exa (t), |E|x̂Tj −1 (t)|2 − E|xa (t)|2 | = σ 2 ϵ2 (t − i)2 (1 −                 ) ≤ σ 2 ϵ2 .
                                                                                                       N
We then prove equations (14) and (15). First, with the optimal solution
                                                T                                     1
                               uo (t) = −           x̃init ,        xo (T ) =          x̃init ,
                                             T2 + 1                             T2 + 1
we have
                               Z T                   2                            2
                        1               T                1                                  1
                   Jo =                2
                                           x̃init dt + 2   x̃init                     =            |x̃init |2 .
                        T       0     T +1            T +1                                T2 + 1
Recalling equation (20) and plugging (20) into (16), we know that
                                                       1
                                           xv (T ) =        x̃init + ϵT Z̄v ,
                                                     T2 + 1
                                                        T
                                           uv (t) = − 2      x̃init + ϵZ̄v .
                                                      T +1
Hence,
                                2T                                   2T                  1
          Jv = ϵ2 |Z̄v |2 −           x̃init ϵZ̄v + ϵ2 T 2 |Z̄v |2 + 2   x̃init ϵZ̄v + 2   |x̃init |2 ,
                               T2 + 1                               T +1              T +1
which gives
                                                                            σ2 2
                                      EJv − Jo = (T 2 + 1)(m2 +                )ϵ .
                                                                            NT
On the other hand, recalling equation (21) and plugging (21) into (18), we know that
                                    T −1
                   1          X         1
   xa (T ) =         x̃init +                    ϵZ̄ k ,
                 2
                T +1            T (T − k − 1) + 1 a
                                    k=0
                                     i−1
                   T           X         T
   ua (t) = −         x̃init −                    ϵZ̄ k + ϵZ̄ai , 0 ≤ i ≤ T − 1, t ∈ [i, i + 1).
                  2
                 T +1            T (T − k − 1) + 1 a
                                     k=0

To compute the difference between Ja and Jo , we first notice that
             " Z                                   # " Z                                         #
               1 T                                         1 T             2               2
 EJa − Jo =           Var(ua (t))dt + Var(xa (T )) +              |Eua (t)| dt + |Exa (T )| − Jo
               T 0                                        T 0
             := I1 + I2 .


                                                               16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                −1
By the independence of {Z̄ai }Ti=0 , we know that
                       T −1 i−1                                      T −1
                σ 2 ϵ2 X X                 T2              σ 2 ϵ2 X                  1          σ 2 ϵ2
         I1 =                                           +         +
                N T i=0         [T (T − k − 1) + 1]2         N             [T (T − k − 1) + 1]2 N
                            k=0                                      k=0
                                                                                             
                  2 2        T −1 X
                                  i−1                             T −1
                σ ϵ          X                   T               X                1
              =          1+                                  2
                                                                +                             
                 N            i=0 k=0
                                       [T (T  − k −  1) + 1]            [T (T  − k − 1) + 1]2
                                                                  k=0
                                                                                               
                  2 2        T −2 T  −1                              T −1
                σ ϵ          X    X                T                X               1
              =          1+                                       +                             
                 N                        [T (T − k − 1) + 1]2             [T (T − k − 1) + 1]2
                              k=0 i=k+1                              k=0
                                                        
                  2 2        T −1
                σ ϵ          X     T (T − k − 1) + 1 
              =          1+
                 N                [T (T − k − 1) + 1]2
                              k=0
                                           
                  2 2        T −1
                σ ϵ          X       1 
              =          1+
                 N                Tk + 1
                               k=0
                    2 2
            3σ ϵ
              ≤   .
             N
Meanwhile, noticing that
                                                          T −1
                                          1          X         1
                          Exa (T ) =    2
                                            x̃init +                     ϵm,
                                       T +1            T (T − k − 1) + 1
                                                          k=0
                                                           i−1
                                          T            X         T
                          Eua (t) = −    2
                                             x̃ init −                     ϵm + ϵm,
                                        T +1             T (T − k − 1) + 1
                                                           k=0
it is straightforward to compute that
                                                2ϵmx̃init
                                        I2 =              I3 + ϵ2 m2 (I4 + 1),
                                                T2 + 1
where
                            T −1                      T −1 X
                                                           i−1
                            X              1          X                T
                    I3 =                            +                            −T
                                   T (T − k − 1) + 1 i=0       T (T − k − 1) + 1
                            k=0                                  k=0
                            T −1                            T −1 T −1
                            X              1                X    X              T
                       =                             +                                    −T
                                   T (T − k − 1) + 1                    T (T − k − 1) + 1
                            k=0                             k=0 i=k+1
                            T −1
                            X      T (T − k − 1) + 1
                       =                             − T = 0,
                                   T (T − k − 1) + 1
                            k=0
and
        T −1                            T −1 Xi−1                        T −1 X
                                                                              i−1
        X              1                X                 1              X                2
I4 = (                           )2 + T     (                       )2 −
               T (T − k − 1) + 1        i=0
                                                  T (T − k − 1) + 1      i=0
                                                                                  T (T − k − 1) + 1
         k=0                                        k=0                              k=0


       T −1                            T −1 X
                                            i−1
       X       1 + T (T − k − 1)       X                  T (T − i − 1) + 1
   =                             2
                                   + 2
              [1 + T (T − k − 1)]      i=0
                                                [T (T − k − 1) + 1][T (T − i − 1) + 1]
       k=0                                        k=0
                                               T −1 X
                                                    i−1
                                               X                  1
                                         −2
                                               i=0 k=0
                                                          T (T − k − 1) + 1
       T −1                             T −1
       X              1                 X        1
   =                            =                     ≤ 2.
              1 + T (T − k − 1)                Tk + 1
       k=0                              k=0



                                                            17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Therefore,
                                     2ϵmx̃init        2 2                2   σ2 2
                  EJa − Jo = I1 +              I3 + ϵ  m  (I 4 + 1) ≤ 3(m  +   )ϵ .
                                     T2 + 1                                  N


Next we present the numerical results when we use Model 2 (5) to fit the closed-loop optimal control.
In the following experiments, we set ϵ = 0.1, m = 0.1 and σ 2 = 1. Figure 5 (left) compares
the optimal path xo (t) with xv (t) and xa (t), the IVPs generated by the controllers learned by the
vanilla method and IVP enhanced sampling method (all three paths start at xinit = 1). In this
experiment, we set T = 30 and N = 100. Figure 5 (middle) shows how the time t influences
the differences of the second order moments between the state distribution of the training data and
the state distribution of the IVP generated by learned controllers in the vanilla method and the IVP
enhanced sampling method. We set the total time T = 100 and N = 100. Figure 5 (right) compares
the performance of the vanilla method and IVP enhanced sampling method on different total times
T . The performance difference is an empirical estimation of E[Jv − Jo ] and E[Ja − Jo ] when xinit
follows a standard normal distribution. In this experiment, for each method, we set N = 100 and
learn 10 different controllers with different realizations of the training data and calculate the average
of the performance difference on 1000 randomly sampled initial points (from a standard normal
distribution) and 10 learned controllers.


Figure 5: Numerical results on learning Model 2 (5). Left: the optimal path and the paths generated
by the vanilla sampling method and the IVP enhanced sampling method. Middle: differences of the
second order moments (in the logarithm scale) between the distributions of the training data and the
data reached by the controllers at different times. Right: performance differences (in the logarithm
scale) of the vanilla sampling method and the IVP enhanced sampling method for different total
times (in the logarithm scale).


C    F ULL DYNAMICS OF Q UADROTOR
In this section, we introduce the full dynamics of quadrotor (Bouabdallah et al., 2004; Madani &
Benallegue, 2006; Mahony et al., 2012) that are considered in Section 6. The state variable of a
quadrotor is x = (pT , vbT , η T , wbT )T ∈ R12 where p = (x, y, z) ∈ R3 is the position of quadrotor
in Earth-fixed coordinates, vb ∈ R3 is the velocity in body-fixed coordinates, η = (ϕ, θ, ψ) ∈ R3
(roll, pitch, yaw) is the attitude in terms of Euler angles in Earth-fixed coordinates, and wb ∈ R3 is
the angular velocity in body-fixed coordinates. Control u = (s, τx , τy , τz )T ∈ R4 is composed of
total thrust s and body torques (τx , τy , τz ) from the four rotors. Then we can model the quadrotor’s
dynamics as                     
                                           T
                                 ṗ = R (η)vb
                                
                                                                   1
                                
                                   v̇b = −wb × vb − R(η)g + m         Au
                                
                                 η̇ = K(η)wb
                                
                                 ẇ = −J −1 w × J w + J −1 Bu,
                                
                                      b            b       b

with matrix A and B defined as
                                                                         
                              0      0   0   0                0   1   0   0
                       A = 0        0   0   0 ,        B = 0   0   1   0 .
                              1      0   0   0                0   0   0   1

                                                    18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


The constant mass m and inertia matrix J = diag(Jx , Jy , Jz ) are the parameters of the quadrotor,
where Jx , Jy , and Jz are the moments of inertia of the quadrotor in the x-axis, y-axis, and z-axis,
respectively. We set m = 2kg and Jx = Jy = 12 Jz = 1.2416kg · m2 which are the same system
parameters as in (Madani & Benallegue, 2006). The constants g = (0, 0, g)T denote the gravity
vector where g = 9.81m/s2 is the acceleration of gravity on Earth. The direction cosine matrix
R(η) ∈ SO(3) represents the transformation from the Earth-fixed coordinates to the body-fixed
coordinates:
                                                                                            
                           cos θ cos ψ                      cos θ sin ψ             − sin θ
     R(η) = sin θ cos ψ sin ϕ − sin ψ cos ϕ sin θ sin ψ sin ϕ + cos ψ cos ϕ cos θ sin ϕ  ,
                 sin θ cos ψ cos ϕ + sin ψ sin ϕ sin θ sin ψ cos ϕ − cos ψ sin ϕ cos θ cos ϕ
and the attitude kinematic matrix K(η) relates the time derivative of the attitude representation with
the associated angular rate:
                                                                    
                                       1 sin ϕ tan θ cos ϕ tan θ
                             K(η) = 0        cos ϕ        − sin ϕ  ,
                                       0 sin ϕ sec θ cos ϕ sec θ

Note that in practice the quadrotor is directly controlled by the individual rotor thrusts F =
(F1 , F2 , F3 , F4 )T , and we have the relation u = EF with
                                                            
                                                 1   1 1 1
                                              0     l 0 −l 
                                        E=   −l 0 l 0  ,
                                                             
                                                 c −c c −c
where l is the distance from the rotor to the UAV’s center of gravity and c is a constant that relates the
rotor angular momentum to the rotor thrust (normal force). So once we obtain the optimal control
u∗ , we are able to get the optimal F ∗ immediately by the relation F ∗ = E −1 u∗ .

D    PMP AND S PACE M ARCHING M ETHOD
In this section we introduce the open-loop optimal problem solver used for solving the optimal
landing problem of a quadrotor. The solver is based on Pontryagin’s minimum principle (PMP)
(Pontryagin, 1987) and space-marching method (Zang et al., 2022). The optimal landing problem is
defined as                        Z T
                           min        L(x(τ ), u(τ ))dτ + M (x(T )),
                            x,u 0
                                  (                                                         (22)
                                    ẋ(t) = f (x(t), u(t)), t ∈ [0, T ],
                             s.t.
                                    x(0) = x0 ,
where x(t) : [0, T ] → R12 and u(t) : [0, T ] → R4 denote the state trajectory and control trajectory,
respectively, and f is the full dynamics of quadrotor introduced in Appendix C. By PMP, problem
(22) can be solved through solving a two-point boundary value problem (TPBVP). Introduce costate
variable λ ∈ R12 and Hamiltonian
                                H(x, λ, u) = L(x, u) + λ · f (x, u).
The TPBVP is defined as
                               (
                                   ẋ(t) = ∂λT H x(t), λ(t), u∗ (t) ,

                                                                                                     (23)
                                   λ̇(t) = −∂xT H x(t), λ(t), u∗ (t) .
We have the boundary conditions:

                                          x(0) = x0 ,
                                          λ (T ) = ∇M x (T ) ,
and the optimal control u∗ (t) should minimize Hamiltonian at each t :
                                   u∗ (t) = arg min H(x(t), λ(t), u).                                (24)
                                              u


                                                   19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


We use solve bvp function of scipy (Kierzenka & Shampine, 2001) to solve TPBVP (23)-(24) and
set tolerance to 10−5 , max nodes to 5000. We note that when the initial state x0 is far from the
target state xT , solving the TPBVP directly often fails. Thus we use the space-marching method
proposed in Zang et al. (2022). We uniformly select K points in the line segment from xT to x0 ,
and denote them as {x10 , x20 , · · · , xK                                                   K
                                         0 } according to their increasing distances to xT (x0 = x0 ).
These K TPBVPs will be solved in order and at every step we use the previous solution as the initial
guess to the current problem.


E    E XPERIMENT D ETAILS AND M ORE R ESULTS OF THE O PTIMAL L ANDING
     P ROBLEM

In this section, we give more details about implementation and numerical results in Section 6. We
aim to find the optimal controls to steer the quadrotor from some initial states x0 to a target state
xT = 0. The distribution of the initial state of interest is the uniform distribution on the set X =
{x, y ∈ [−40, 40], z ∈ [20, 40], vx , vy , vz ∈ [−1, 1], θ, ϕ ∈ [−π/4, π/4], ψ ∈ [−π, π]; w = 0}. We
consider a quadratic running cost:

                                 L(x, u) = (u − ud )T Qu (u − ud ),

where ud = (mg, 0, 0, 0) represents the reference control that balances with gravity and Qu =
diag(1, 1, 1, 1) represents the weight matrix characterizing the cost of deviating from the reference
control. The terminal cost is

                M (x) = pT Qpf p + v T Qvf v + η T Qηf η + wT Qwf w = xT Qf x

where Qpf = 5I3 , Qvf = 10I3 , Qηf = 25I3 , Qwf = 50I3 . We set the entries in the terminal
cost larger than the running cost as we want to give the endpoint more penalty for deviating from
the landing target.
We sample N = 500 initial points for training. On every optimal path, we select time-state-action
tuples with time step δ = 0.2. Thus the number of training data is always 81 × 500 at every
iteration. Note that when solving BVPs and IVPs, we use denser time grids to ensure the solution is
accurate enough. The neural network models in all quadrotor experiments have the same structure
with 13-dimensional input (12 for states and 1 for time) and 4-dimensional output. The networks
are fully-connected with 2 hidden layers; each layer has 128 hidden neurons and we use tanh as the
activation function. The inputs are scaled to (−1, 1) where the upper bound and lower bound are
the maximum and minimum of the training dataset. Since the activation fucntion is tanh, we adapt
Xavier initialization (Glorot & Bengio, 2010) before training. We train the neural network by the
Adam (Kingma & Ba, 2015) optimizer with learning rate 0.001, batch size 1000, and 1000 epochs.
At every iteration of IVP enhanced sampling method, we train a new neural network from scratch.
Our model and training programs are implemented by PyTorch (Paszke et al., 2019).
In the first experiment, we use our IVP enhanced sampling method and choose temporal grid points
0 < 10 < 14 < 16. More statistics of the ratios between the NN-controlled costs and the optimal
costs during three iterations are shown in Table 1. We also test an alternative way to construct
                                                                                              S
dataset during the IVP enhanced sampling as discussed in Section 8, i.e., setting Si = Ŝi Si−1 in
Algorithm 1 line 9. We denote the final policy obtained in this approach as ũ and report the statistics
of corresponding cost ratios in Table 1 as well. We have to point out that the ratio of ũ has been
clipped at 10.0 as there is a test path with a ratio over 1000. The performance of ũ is similar to that
of û2 , suggesting that so far the dropped data provides little value for training. Additionally, as we
always train networks 1000 epochs and this alternative approach has more training data, the training
time of ũ is 1.5 times that of others.
We also illustrate the trajectories of states controlled by learned policy and optimal policy in Figure
6. The path controlled by uˆ0 matches the optimal path at the beginning but deviates around t = 10.
Then the path controlled by uˆ1 fits the optimal path more and deviates around t = 14. Finally, the
path controlled by uˆ3 matches the optimal path till the terminal time. Note that the cost of three
controlled paths is 3296.18, 119.91, 6.69, respectively, and the optimal cost is 6.32.


                                                  20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                   Policy    Mean      Std       Max       90%       75%     Median
                     û0     45.52    55.73     521.98     23.53     20.32   17.32
                     û1      4.41     4.17      39.69      2.24      2.01    1.67
                     û2      1.02     0.03       1.30      1.01      1.01    1.01
                      ũ      1.03     0.04       1.43      1.01      1.01    1.01
                                        (a) on 500 training points
                  Policy    Mean       Std      Max        90%       75%     Median
                    û0     67.90     86.14    578.05     145.82     74.13    38.21
                    û1      5.57      7.70     91.63      11.54      6.52     3.74
                    û2      1.09      0.25      3.95       1.16      1.08     1.04
                     ũ      1.14      0.64     10.00       1.24      1.10     1.05
                                         (b) On 200 test points

Table 1: The numerical results of the IVP enhanced sampling method on training and test points.
The results in Table (a) and (b) correspond to Figure 3 (left) and 3 (middle), respectively. û0 , û1 ,
û2 denote the policy after the first, second, and third round of training, respectively. ũ denotes the
final policy obtained from an alternative approach for constructing datasets during the iteration of
the IVP enhanced sampling; see discussion in Section 8.


Figure 6: The optimal path and path controlled by learned controllers. We show the 3-dimensional
position p = (x, y, z) and 3-dimensional attitude η = (ϕ, θ, ψ) in terms of Euler angles in Earth-
fixed coordinates.


In the experiments of comparing different methods, the three adaptive sampling methods are pro-
cessed as follows. The initial network is the same policy as in the IVP enhanced sampling method,
i.e., the policy û0 after iteration 0 in the IVP enhanced sampling method, which is trained on 500
optimal paths. Then we will sequentially add 400, 300, 300 paths to training data so we use 1500
optimal paths to train the final network (solving 1500 open-loop optimal control problems namely).
When sampling new training paths, we will randomly sample 2 initial points, calculate some indices
using the latest policy and preserve the preferable one. For AS w. large u, we will calculate the
norms of the control variables of these two points at time 0 and choose the one with larger norms.
For AS w. large v, we will solve IVPs to obtain the NN-controlled costs and choose the larger one.
For AS w. bad v, we will solve 2 TPBVPs corresponding to these two points and choose the one
with a large difference between the NN-controlled value and optimal value. Note that in all other
methods, the time span of the solved open-loop problem is always T . Nevertheless, in our method,
the time span of the optimal paths to be solved is getting shorter and shorter along iterations, which
means it takes less time to solve. Specifically, in our experiment, it takes about 11.1s to solve an


                                                   21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


optimal path whose total time T − t0 = 16 at iteration 0 and takes about 3.1s to solve an optimal
path whose total time T − t2 = 2 at iteration 2. More statistics are shown in Table 2.

           Methods                      Mean          Std     Max     90%       75%      Median
           IVP enhanced sampling            1.09     0.25    3.95      1.16     1.08          1.04
           Vanilla sampling                 2.27     1.39    10.11     3.93     2.54          1.86
           AS w. large u                    2.04     1.34    8.70      3.39     2.21          1.57
           AS w. large v                    1.61     0.66    5.56      2.28     1.75          1.37
           AS w. bad v                      1.32     0.84    8.49      1.54     1.26          1.12

                        Table 2: Comparison on different sampling methods.

We further test the performance of NN controllers obtained from different sampling methods in the
presence of observation noises, considering that the sensors have errors in reality. During simulation,
we add a disturbance ϵ to the input of the network, where ϵ ∈ R13 (including the disturbance of
time) is uniformly sampled from [−σ, σ]13 . We test σ = 0.01, 0.05, 0.1 and the numerical results
are shown in Figure 7. We also test the performance of the open-loop optimal controller under
perturbation where a disturbance ϵ̂ ∈ R is added to the input time. Figure 7 shows that when
disturbance exists, closed-loop controllers are more reliable than the open-loop controller and the
one trained by the IVP enhanced sampling method performs best among all the methods.


Figure 7: Cumulative distribution function of the cost ratio between NN controlled value and the
optimal value under disturbance.


Finally we consider the impact of different choices of temporal grid points in Algorithm 1. We test
4 experiments which are all trained using the same 500 initial points. The results listed in Table 3
show that our algorithm is robust to the choice of temporal grid points.

                                              Temporal grid points (T = 16)
                  # of iterations       0        4       8      10     12              14
                         2           67.90                                             1.14
                         3           67.90                           5.57              1.09
                         4           67.90                  37.11             2.34     1.18
                         5           67.90         37.66    11.13             1.79     1.32

Table 3: Average cost ratio on 200 test points of every model. The first line means that we take
2 iterations and the corresponding temporal grid points for adaptive sampling are 0 < 14 < 16.
The average ratio of policy cost / optimal cost is 67.90 after iteration 0 and the average ratio after
iteration 1 is 1.14. The second line shows the same experiment in Figure 3 (middle).


F    E XPERIMENT D ETAILS AND M ORE R ESULTS OF THE M ANIPULATOR
We can write down the dynamics of the manipulator as,
                                    ẋ = f (x, u) = (v, a(x, u)),


                                                     22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 8: An illustration of the reaching problem of the manipulator. The solid manipulator demon-
strates its initial position. We label the end effectors of the five instances of robots by “1,2,3,4,5” to
indicator the position of the robot at different times t1 = 0.0, t2 = 0.2, t3 = 0.4, t4 = 0.6, t5 = 0.8.


where u ∈ R7 is the control torque, x = (q, v) ∈ R14 , q ∈ R7 is the joint angles, v = q̇ ∈ R7 is
the joint velocities, q̈ = a(x, u) ∈ R7 is the acceleration of joint angles.
The acceleration a is given by the (non-linear) forward dynamics
                                   M (q)a + C(q, q̇)q̇ + g(q) = u.
Here M (q) is the generalized inertia matrix, C(q, q̇)q̇ represents the centrifugal forces and Coriolis
forces, and g(q) is the generalized gravity.
The reaching task is to move the manipulator from the initial states near x0 to the terminal states
x1 . In the experiments, we take x0 = (q0 , 0), x1 = (q1 , 0) with
               q0 = [1.6800, 1.2501, 2.4428, −1.2669, −0.9778, 1.1236, −1.3575]T ,
               q1 = [2.7736, 0.5842, 1.5413, −1.7028, −2.1665, 0.0847, −2.5764]T .
See Figure 8 for an illustration of the task. Besides, we take the running cost and terminal cost to be
                     L(x, u) = a(x, u)T Qa a(x, u) + (u − u1 )T Qu (u − u1 ),
                       M (x) = (x − x1 )T Qf (x − x1 ).
where u1 is the torque to balance gravity at state x1 , i.e. a(x1 , u1 ) = 0. Under this setting, (x1 , u1 )
is an equilibrium of the system, i.e. a1 = a(x1 , u1 ) = 0 and f (x1 , u1 ) = (v1 , a1 ) = 0.
In the experiment, we take Qa = 0.005I7 , Qu = 0.025I7 , Qf = 25000I14 where we use large
weights Qf to ensure the reaching goal is approximately achieved.
The backbone network for this example is the QRNet (Nakamura-Zimmerer et al., 2020; 2021b).
QRNet exploits the solution corresponding to the LQR problem at equilibrium and thus improves
the network performance around the equilibrium. The usage of other network structures also demon-
strates the genericness/versatility of the IVP enhanced sampling method. Suppose we have the linear
quadratic regulator (LQR) uLQR for the problem with linearized dynamics and quadratized costs at
(x1 , u1 ), the QRNet can be formulated as
                      uQR (t, x) = σ(uLQR (t, x) + uNN (t, x; θ) − uNN (T, x1 )),
where uNN (t, x; θ) is any neural network with trainable parameters θ, and σ is a saturating function
that satisfies σ(u1 ) = u1 , σu (u1 ) = I7 . The σ used in this example is defined coordinate-wisely as
                                                       umax − umin
                               σ(u) = umin +                              ,
                                                1 + c1 exp[−c2 (u − u1 )]

                                                    23
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


where c1 = (umax − u1 )/(u1 − umin ), c2 = (umax − umin )/[(umax − u1 )(u1 − umin )] with umin , umax
being minimum and maximum values for u. Here u, umin = −150 and umax = 150 are the corre-
sponding values at each coordinate of u, umin , umax , respectively.
To get the LQR, we need to expand the dynamics linearly as
                      f (x, u) ≈ fx (x1 , u1 )(x − x1 ) + fu (x1 , u1 )(u − u1 ),
and the term related to acceleration in the running cost quadratically as
      a(x, u)T Qa a(x, u) ≈ La (x, u)T Qa La (x, u)
                             = (x − x1 )T aT                            T T
                                           x Qa ax (x − x1 ) + (u − u1 ) au Qa au (u − u1 )
                               + 2(x − x1 )T aT
                                              x Qa au (u − u1 ),

where La = ax (x1 , u1 )(x − x1 ) + au (x1 , u1 )(u − u1 ), and we exploit a(x1 , u1 ) = 0 and
f (x1 , u1 ) = 0. The derivatives boil down to ax and au which can be analytically computed in
the Pinocchio library (Carpentier et al., 2015–2021; 2019; Carpentier & Mansard, 2018). In the
experiment, we solve the LQR by the implementation in the Drake library (Tedrake & the Drake
Development Team, 2019).
In the simulation and open-loop solver, we take time step ∆t = 0.001 and use the semi-implicit
Euler discretization. The initial positions q are sampled uniformly and independently in a 7-
dimensional cube centered at q0 with side length 0.02. Initial velocities v are set to zero. Other
than directly applying the open-loop solver to collected initial states, we first sample another mini-
batch of initial states and call the open-loop solver on it. We then pick one solution of the lowest cost
and use it as an initial guess later. This can not only speed up the data generation process but also
avoid sampling trajectories that fall into bad local minima. We use the differential dynamic program-
ming solver implemented in (Mastalli et al., 2020), which is a second-order algorithm that favors a
good initial guess. The dataset is then created from the (discrete) optimal trajectories warm-started
by the initial guess. Each trajectory has T /∆t = 800 data points that are pairs of 15-dimensional
input states including time and 7-dimensional output controls. The validation dataset and test dataset
contain 605 and 1200 optimal trajectories, respectively.
Finally, all the QRNets uQR are trained by minimizing a mean square error (3) over the training
dataset with the Adam optimizer (Kingma & Ba, 2015) with learning rate 0.001, batch size 256 and
epochs 2000. uNN is a fully-connected network with 6 hidden layers; each layer has 128 neurons.
The first three layers use the tanh function as activation while the last three layers use ELU (Clevert
et al., 2016). Network and training are implemented in PyTorch (Paszke et al., 2019). During
iterations, all networks are trained from scratch, i.e. a new network with random weights instead of
inheriting weights from the previous iteration. After each epoch of training, we compute the loss on
the validation dataset. The network with the least validation loss is then used for data generation in
the next iteration or as the final policy (at the last iteration).
We compare the ratio of policy cost over the optimal cost, see Table 4 for the mean ratio over all
1200 trajectories of the test dataset. The ratio has been clipped at 2.0 for each trajectory. The
results demonstrate that the IVP enhanced sampling method has great improvement over the vanilla
supervised-learning-based method. It also shows the IVP enhanced sampling is not sensible to the
choices of the temporal grid points. Besides, we also try augmenting the dataset with newly collected
data instead of replacing them, as detailed in Section 8. Through the comparison between AS3 and
AS3* in Table 4, we find that the alternative approach does not bring further improvement.

G    C OMPARISON WITH DAGGER
In this section, we give a comprehensive comparison between DAGGER (Dataset Aggregation)
(Ross et al., 2011) and the IVP enhanced sampling, in terms of concepts, theoretical results, and
numerical results. When referring to DAGGER, we mostly mean the single iteration version of
DAGGER (i.e., augmenting dataset once) unless otherwise stated explicitly.

Concept. Both DAGGER and IVP enhanced sampling methods solve IVPs using the policy from
the previous iteration to generate time-state pairs as new initial time-state pairs and call the open-
loop solver to label the trajectories starting from these pairs. Their main differences are as follows.


                                                   24
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                     Temporal grid points (T = 0.8)
                     # of iterations       0.0       0.16   0.48      0.56     0.64              0.72
     Vanilla300              1           1.9204
     Vanilla900              1           1.8717
       AS1                   3           1.8104     1.2830     1.1182
       AS2                   3           1.9971     1.4535                1.0441
       AS3                   3           1.9161     1.3678                           1.0745
       AS3*                  3           1.8549     1.4402                           1.1491
       AS4                   3           1.9552     1.2892                                     1.1295

Table 4: The mean ratio of policy costs / optimal costs of the optimal reaching problem of the manip-
ulator. The ratio has been clipped at 2.0 for each test trajectory. The vanilla300/900 correspond to
networks trained on 300/900 optimal trajectories, respectively. The choices of temporal grid points
for adaptive sampling in the remaining rows can be inferred by the location of columns. For ex-
ample, AS1 has temporal grid points 0 < 0.16 < 0.48 < 0.8. AS3* has the same temporal grid
points as AS3 except that it augments the dataset directly instead of replacing them, as discussed in
Section 8.


In the i-th iteration, the IVP enhanced sampling method only solves the IVPs till the i-th time grid
and uses the time and the visited states at the i-th time grid as the initial time-state pairs to collect new
open-loop optimal data. In contrast, in each iteration, the DAGGER method needs to solve until the
penultimate temporal grid tK−1 , collect the states on all the time grids 0 < t1 < · · · < tK−1 < T ,
and use all the collected time-state pairs as the initial time-state pair to generate new open-loop
optimal data. In the IVP enhanced sampling method, the later times are only visited by networks
trained from later iterations. Hopefully, networks from later iterations perform better and generate
relevant time-state pairs at later time grids. In contrast, each network from the DAGGER method
acts on the dynamical system until the final grid. For stiff dynamics that accumulate errors fast, the
time-state pairs at later time grids generated by a network from earlier iterations can deviate much
from what the optimal policy will visit. These data might then deteriorate the performance instead,
as supported by the numerical results below.

Computation cost. With the same time grids (say 0 = t0 < t1 · · · < tK = T ), we argue that the
efforts of training the IVP enhanced sampling method and single iteration DAGGER are approxi-
mately the same since the cost for data labeling and training are approximately the same, respec-
tively.
First, in terms of the computation cost of data labeling, the IVP enhanced sampling method requires
labeling K dataset of M trajectories. The single iteration DAGGER labels the same amounts of data.
Though DAGGER requires fewer efforts in solving the IVPs as the IVP enhanced sampling method
always solves IVPs from t = 0. However, for many problems, the time spent in solving IVPs is
negligible compared to that in solving the open-loop optimal control problems. Specifically, in our
first numerical example of optimal landing, it takes about 2.5 hours to do the BVP computation in
total while it only takes 7 minutes to do IVP integration in total. In the second numerical example of
the reaching problem, to solve 100 trajectories, it takes 308 seconds to solve the open-loop solution
through DDP while it only takes 3 seconds to do IVP integration. Therefore, the cost for data
labeling is approximately the same.
Second, in terms of training time, let us assume that the initial dataset contains M trajectories and
each trajectory contributes N time-state-action tuples. The IVP enhanced sampling method needs to
train K networks; each network is trained on an enhanced dataset with M trajectories. Then, there
are in total M KN time-state-action tuples visited in the IVP enhanced sampling method (same
data is counted repeatedly when training different networks, the same below). DAGGER trains two
networks, one with M trajectories and the other with M K trajectories. The former dataset contains
M N time-state-action tuples while the latter one contains approximately
           T − t0     T − t1          T − tK−1                    1
       M(          +         + ··· +             )N = M (K − (t0 + t1 + · · · + tK−1 ))N
             T          T                  T                      T
time-state-action tuples. Then, for time grids t0 = 0 < 10 < 14 < 16 = T (e.g. the landing
problem of a quadrotor below), DAGGER visits approximately 16.67% fewer data than the IVP


                                                     25
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


enhanced sampling method; for time grids t0 = 0 < 0.16 < 0.64 < 0.8 = T and t0 = 0 <
0.16 < 0.48 < 0.8 = T (e.g. the reaching problem of the manipulator below), DAGGER visits the
same amounts of data as and approximately 6.67% more than the IVP enhanced sampling method,
respectively; Therefore, with the same number of epochs in training each network, the training
efforts do not differ much in the two methods.
In the following, we compare the IVP enhanced sampling method with DAGGER. We will see that,
for the LQR example in Section 5 and Appendix B, the IVP enhanced sampling method surpasses
DAGGER both theoretically and numerically, especially for large T . For the landing and reaching
problem studied previously (see Appendix F and E), both methods perform similarly well. How-
ever, in more difficult settings of both problems, the IVP enhanced sampling method outperforms
DAGGER.

Results on the LQR example. We first investigate the performance of DAGGER on the LQR ex-
ample. With a slight abuse of notation, we will use x̂ij (t) and ûij (t) to denote the open-loop optimal
paths sampled for training, x̃ij to denote the initial states used to generate the training trajectories,
ud (t, x) to denote the closed-loop controller learned by DAGGER, and xd (t), ud (t) to denote the
IVP solution generated by the closed-loop controller ud .
In DAGGER, we again choose K = T and the temporal grid points ti = i for 0 ≤ i ≤ K. We
first sample N initial points {x̃0j }N
                                     j=1 from the normal standard distribution and then generated N
approximated optimal paths starting at t0 = 0:
                                       T                           T (T − t) + 1
                      û0j (t) = −         x̃0 + ϵZj0 , x̂0j (t) =               x̃j + ϵtZj0 ,
                                     T2 + 1 j                         T2 + 1
where {Zj0 }N
            j=1 are i.i.d. normal random variables and independent with initial states whose mean
is m and variance is σ 2 . We then train the closed-loop controller u0 by solving the following least
square problems:
                                    Z TX  N
                               min           |û0j (t) − u0 (t, x̂0j (t))|2 dt.
                                         θ       0   j=1

Then, we use u0 to solve the IVPs on the whole time horizon [0, T ] with initial states {x̃0j }:
                                ẋ0j (t) = u0 (t, x0j (t)), x0j (0) = x̃0j , 1 ≤ j ≤ N,                 (25)
and collect {x̃ij }N        i     0
                   j=1 as x̃j := xj (i) for i = 1, 2, . . . , T − 1. At each time step ti = i, we then
compute N approximated optimal paths starting from {x̃ij }N      j=1 :

                          T                               T (T − t) + 1 i
      ûij (t) = −                x̃i + ϵZji , x̂ij (t) =              x̃ + (t − i)ϵZji , t ∈ [i, T ]   (26)
                     T (T − i) + 1 j                      T (T − i) + 1 j
where {Zji }1≤i≤T −1 are i.i.d. normal random variables and independent with {x̃0j }N                j=1 and
{Zj }N  j=1     whose  mean  is  m  and  variance   is   σ 2
                                                             .  Finally,      we    collect the optimal paths
{(ûij , x̂ij )}0≤i≤T −1,1≤j≤N to train the closed-loop controller ud by solving the following least
square problems:
                                    Z i+1 Xi X N
                                min               |ûkj (t) − uθ (t, x̂kj (t))|2 dt                      (27)
                                     θ       i       k=0 j=1
for k = 0, 1, . . . , T − 1.
Theorem 2. Under Model 1 (4), define IVP generated by ud :
                           ẋd (t) = ud (t) = ud (t, xd (t)).xd (t) = x̃init , 0 ≤ t ≤ T                (28)
and the total cost:                                      Z T
                                                     1
                                         Jd =                  |ud (t)|2 dt + |xd (T )|2 .
                                                     T    0
If x̃init is a fixed point, then
                                                                  T 2 m2   T σ2 2
                                             EJd − Jo ≥ (                +     )ϵ .
                                                                     4     3N

                                                                   26
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Proof. With the same approach of computing uv in (16), we have
                                           T            T2 + 1
                      u0 (t, x) = −               x+              ϵZ̄ 0 ,
                                    T (T − t) + 1    T (T − t) + 1 d
where
                                                  N
                                              1 X 0
                                       Z̄d0 =       Z .
                                              N j=1 j
Recalling the definition of x0j in equation (25), we have
                                                      T (T − t) + 1 0
                                         x0j (t) =                 x̃j + ϵtZ̄d0 .
                                                         T2 + 1
Hence, for 0 ≤ i ≤ T − 1, we have
                                                   T (T − i) + 1 0
                                     x̃ij = x0j (i) =               x̃j + ϵiZ̄d0 .
                                                       T2 + 1
Plugging the last equation into equation (26), we have that for t ∈ [i, T ]
                                     T                    Ti
                   ûij (t) = − 2         x̃0j − ϵ                  Z̄ 0 + ϵZji ,
                                   T +1            T (T − i) + 1 d
                                 T (T − t) + 1 0        iT (T − t) + i 0
                   x̂ij (t) =                   x̃j + ϵ                    Z̄ + (t − i)ϵZji .
                                    T2 + 1               T (T − i) + 1 d
Therefore,
                                               T                   T (T − i) + 1 i
                          ûij (t) = −                  x̂ij (t) +                 ϵZ .
                                       T (T − t) + 1               T (T − t) + 1 j
We can then compute the least square problem (27) to obtain that for 0 ≤ i ≤ T −1 and t ∈ [i, i+1),
we have
                                                                    i
                                           T                   1 X T (T − k) + 1 k
                   ud (t, x) = −                     x+                                 ϵZ̄ ,
                                     T (T − t) + 1           i+1         T (T − t) + 1 d
                                                                         k=0
where
                                                                    N
                                                               1 X i
                                                      Z̄di =        Z ,
                                                               N j=1 j
for 0 ≤ i ≤ T − 1. We can then solve the ODE (28), we have that when 0 ≤ i ≤ T − 1 and
t ∈ [i, i + 1)
                                      i−1                                   k                            i
           T (T − t) + 1           X      F (t)       1 X          l       t−i      X
xd (t) =                 x̃ init +                        ϵF (l)Z̄ d +                F (k)ϵZ̄dk ,
              T2 + 1                 F (k + 1)F (k) k + 1              (i + 1)F (i)
                                      k=0                                l=0                         k=0


where F (t) = T (T − t) + 1. Therefore, when 0 ≤ i ≤ T − 1 and t ∈ [i, i + 1),
                                   i−1                                  k                            i
                  T           X           T           X                   1       X
 ud (t) = −      2
                     x̃init −                           ϵF (l)Z̄dl +                F (k)ϵZ̄dk .
                T +1            (k + 1)F (k)F (k + 1)                (i + 1)F (i)
                                  k=0                                   l=0                        k=0
Define
               i−1                                k                                 i
               X               T           X                   1       X
   ei = −                                    ϵF (l)Z̄dl +                F (k)ϵZ̄dk , 0 ≤ i ≤ T − 1
                     (k + 1)F (k)F (k + 1)                (i + 1)F (i)
               k=0                               l=0                            k=0
then
                 T −1                                                T −1
               1 X        T                             T2           X
       Jd =           |− 2   x̃init + ei |2 + |x̃init − 2   x̃init +      ei |2
               T i=0    T +1                           T +1          i=0
                                T −1                T −1                          T −1                T −1
                T 2 |xinit |2   X    2x̃init ei   1 X          2     |x̃init |2   X    2ei x̃init     X
           =                  −                 +        |e i |  +              +                 + |      ei |2
               (T 2 + 1)2       i=0
                                     T 2+1        T i=0
                                                                   (T 2 + 1)2
                                                                                  i=0
                                                                                       T 2+1
                                                                                                      i=0
                              T −1              T −1
               |x̃init |2   1 X           2
                                                X
           =              +        |e i |   + |      ei |2 .
               T 2 + 1 T i=0                    i=0



                                                               27
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Therefore
                                                T
                                                X −1                  T
                                                                      X −1              T
                                                                                        X −1
                             EJd − Jo ≥ E|               ei |2 = (E          ei )2 + Var(         ei ).   (29)
                                                   i=0                i=0                   i=0
We can then compute that
               T −1               T −1 X
                                       i−1 X
                                           k                              T −1 X
                                                                               i
               X                  X                      ϵT F (l)Z̄dl     X       F (k)ϵZ̄dk
                      ei = −                                            +
               i=0                i=0 k=0 l=0
                                                   (k + 1)F (k)F (k + 1) i=0     (i + 1)F (i)
                                                                                        k=0
                                T −1 X
                                     i                          T −1 X
                                                                     k T −1
                                X           F (k)ϵZ̄dk          X      X                ϵT F (l)Z̄dl
                            =                              −
                                i=0 k=0
                                          (i + 1)F (i)                            (k + 1)F (k)F (k + 1)
                                                                k=0 l=0 i=k+1
                                T −1 X
                                     i                          T −1 X
                                                                     i
                                X           F (k)ϵZ̄dk          X           ϵT (T − i − 1)F (k)Z̄dk
                            =                              −
                                i=0 k=0
                                          (i + 1)F (i)          i=0 k=0
                                                                             (i + 1)F (i)F (i + 1)
                                T −1 X
                                     i
                                X               F (k)ϵZ̄dk
                            =                                         .
                                i=0 k=0
                                          (i + 1)F (i)F (i + 1)

Therefore,
                     T −1              T −1 X
                                            i
                     X                 X                  F (k)
                E           ei = ϵm                                                                       (30)
                     i=0               i=0 k=0
                                                   (i + 1)F (i)F (i + 1)
                                       T −1
                                       X   (T 2 + 1)(i + 1) − T i(i + 1)/2
                                = ϵm
                                       i=0
                                                (i + 1)F (i)F (i + 1)
                                       T −1
                                       X            T 2 + 1 − T i/2
                                = ϵm
                                       i=0
                                           [T (T − i) + 1][T (T − i − 1) + 1]
                                                         T −1
                                       T2 + T + 2 X             1                 1
                                ≥ ϵm                  [                   −                ]
                                           2T     i=0
                                                        T (T − i − 1) + 1   T (T −  i) + 1
                              T2 + T + 2        1    ϵmT
                                = ϵm     (1 − 2   )≥     .
                                  2T         T +1     2
On the other hand, noticing that
                                     T −1          T −1 T −1
                                     X             X    X             F (k)ϵZ̄dk
                                            ei =                                      ,
                                     i=0
                                                                (i + 1)F (i)F (i + 1)
                                                   k=0 i=k

we have
             T −1                  T −1             T −1
             X               ϵ2 σ 2 X 2     X           1
      Var(          ei ) =           F (k)(                         )2                                    (31)
             i=0
                              N               (i + 1)F (i)F (i + 1)
                                    k=0             i=k
                                    T −1                          T −1
                             ϵ2 σ 2 X                    X         1               1
                       ≥          4
                                      [T (T − k) + 1]2 (                    −              )2
                             NT                            T (T − i − 1) + 1 T (T − i) + 1
                                    k=0                           i=k
                                2 2 T −1
                             ϵ σ    X                                           1
                       =                  [T (T − k) + 1]2 [1 −                         ]2
                             NT4                                          T (T − k) + 1
                                    k=0
                                2 2 T −1
                             ϵ σ    X                       ϵ2 σ 2 T (T + 1)(2T + 1)   ϵ2 σ 2 T
                       =                  (T − K)2 =                                 ≥          .
                             NT2                            NT   2         6             3N
                                    k=0

Combining equations (29), (30) and (31), we can conclude our result.

We then numerically compare the performance of DAGGER with the vanilla method and the IVP
enhanced sampling method on Model 2 (5). In these experiments, we again set ϵ = 0.1, m = 0.1


                                                                28
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


and σ 2 = 1. We present the paths generated by the optimal controller and the controllers learned
by the vanilla method, the IVP enhanced sampling method, and DAGGER in Figure 9 (left). Figure
9 (middle) compares the performance of these three methods on different time horizons T . We
also test DAGGER with multiple iterations in Figure 9 (right). Here we set total time T = 30.
The experiment shows that the performance of the learned controller does not improve with more
iterations. The detailed settings are identical to the numerical experiments in Appendix B.


                Figure 9: Numerical results on learning Model 2 (5) with DAGGER.


Results on the landing problem. Following the same settings as in Appendix E, we train a policy
by DAGGER with additional sampling at time t = 10 and 14. The results are summarized in Table
5. It shows that DAGGER performs closely to the IVP enhanced sampling method. However, if we
decrease the number of trajectories in the initial dataset from 500 to 300 to train controllers using
these two methods, we observe more decreases in performance in the DAGGER method, which
implies that DAGGER is more sensitive to the data amount. The main reason is that DAGGER
demands enough data at the beginning to have a good initial controller to explore the state over the
whole time interval. However, in complicated control problems, we do not have such privilege and
indeed require adaptive sampling to improve the controller.

                                                 # of iterations     result
                                AS                      3            1.092
                              DAGGER                    2            1.069
                               AS-300                   3            1.287
                             DAGGER-300                 2            1.405

Table 5: Average cost ratio on 200 test points of controllers trained by the IVP enhanced sampling
method and DAGGER. All models are with time grids 0 < 10 < 14 < 16. Models with the suffix
300 are those trained on the initial dataset with 300 trajectories, whose cost ratios are clipped at 10.0
for each test trajectory.

Results on the reaching problem. For the problem detailed in Appendix F, by additionally sam-
pling at time 0.16 and 0.64 in one iteration, the DAGGER algorithm achieves a policy cost / optimal
cost ratio of 1.049 on the test dataset, which is close to that achieved by the IVP enhanced sampling
method.
We then increase the difficulty of the control problem by increasing the moving distance. Following
the configurations in Appendix F, we change the center of initial position and the terminal position
to
                        q0 = [1.60, 1.30, 2.70, −0.85, −1.90, 0.95, −1.60]T ,
                        q1 = [2.75, 0.60, 2.00, −1.55, −2.15, 0.00, −2.60]T .
Besides, as the DAGGER will generate states in a wider range, we modify umin , umax in QRNet to
umin = −2000, umax = 2000 in order to avoid saturation. We also increase the size of the initial
dataset from 100 trajectories to 200 trajectories. Each network is trained with 1500 epochs. The
other settings are the same as that in Appendix F.
Each method has been run 5 times independently, and we report their average and best performance.
The results are summarized in Table 6 and Figure 10. As we can see, the IVP enhanced sampling


                                                   29
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


method is capable of finding a closed-loop controller with an average ratio between policy cost and
optimal cost achieving 1.0155. However, the DAGGER algorithm cannot yield such a satisfactory
result.
In DAGGER1, we apply the DAGGER method with time grids 0 < 0.16 < 0.48 < 0.8, an earlier
final grid compared to DAGGER2 which has time grids 0 < 0.16 < 0.64 < 0.8. We see an average
improvement from 1.8528 to 1.6327. DAGGER1 performs similarly to the network trained at the
second iteration of AS, which implies that the extra data sampled at t = 0.48 does not help much.
Furthermore, we conduct an additional iteration of the DAGGER method, which requires solving
the open-loop problem to get 400 more trajectories and extra training of the network with 1000
trajectories in total. It performs worse, which also confirms the arguments we made at the beginning
that the uncarefully collected data may deteriorate the performance.


Figure 10: Cumulative distribution functions of average cost ratios over 5 independent experiments
(left) and cost ratios of the best controller among 5 independent experiments under the proposed
method and DAGGER for the optimal reaching problem with a larger moving distance.


                                                    Temporal grid points (T = 0.8)
                    # of iterations          0.16               0.48               0.64
        AS                  3          1.6592 (1.5417)                        1.3610 (1.0155)
     DAGGER1                2                              1.6327 (1.4004)
     DAGGER2                2                                                 1.8528 (1.6364)
     DAGGER3                3                                                 1.9293 (1.7478)

Table 6: The mean ratio between policy costs and optimal costs of the reaching problem with larger
moving distance. In each cell, the first number is averaged over 5 independent experiments and
the number in parenthesis is the average ratio achieved by the best controller among 5 independent
experiments. The ratio has been clipped at 2.0 for each test trajectory. Both AS and DAGGER2
have temporal grid points 0 < 0.16 < 0.64 < 0.8. DAGGER3 repeats DAGGER2 for one more
DAGGER iteration.


                                                30
