Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


E FFECTS OF G RAPH C ONVOLUTIONS IN M ULTI - LAYER
N ETWORKS
    Aseem BaranwalРѕЌ                  Kimon FountoulakisРѕЌ                   Aukosh JagannathРђа



                                               A BSTRACT

          Graph Convolutional Networks (GCNs) are one of the most popular architectures
          that are used to solve classification problems accompanied by graphical infor-
          mation. We present a rigorous theoretical understanding of the effects of graph
          convolutions in multi-layer networks. We study these effects through the node
          classification problem of a non-linearly separable Gaussian mixture model coupled
          with a stochastic block model. First, we show that a single graph convolution
          expands the regime of the distance between Рѕџ     the means where multi-layer networks
          can classify the data by a factor of at least 1/ 4 deg, where deg denotes the expected
          degree of a node. Second, we show that with a slightly   Рѕџ stronger graph density, two
          graph convolutions improve this factor to at least 1/ 4 n, where n is the number of
          nodes in the graph. Finally, we provide both theoretical and empirical insights into
          the performance of graph convolutions placed in different combinations among the
          layers of a neural network, concluding that the performance is mutually similar
          for all combinations of the placement. We present extensive experiments on both
          synthetic and real-world data that illustrate our results.


1       I NTRODUCTION
A large amount of interesting data and the practical challenges associated with them are defined
in the setting where entities have attributes as well as information about mutual relationships. Tra-
ditional classification models have been extended to capture such relational information through
graphs (Hamilton, 2020), where each node has individual attributes and the edges of the graph
capture the relationships among the nodes. A variety of applications characterized by this type of
graph-structured data include works in the areas of social analysis (Backstrom & Leskovec, 2011),
recommendation systems (Ying et al., 2018), computer vision (Monti et al., 2017), study of the prop-
erties of chemical compounds (Gilmer et al., 2017; Scarselli et al., 2009), statistical physics (Bapst
et al., 2020; Battaglia et al., 2016), and financial forensics (Zhang et al., 2017; Weber et al., 2019).
The most popular learning models for relational data use graph convolutions (Kipf & Welling, 2017),
where the idea is to aggregate the attributes of the set of neighbours of a node instead of only utilizing
its own attributes. Despite several empirical studies of various GCN-type models (Chen et al., 2019;
Ma et al., 2022) that demonstrate an improvement in the performance of traditional classification
methods such as MLPs, there has been limited progress in the theoretical understanding of the benefits
of graph convolutions in multi-layer networks in terms of improving node classification tasks.

Related work. The capacity of a graph convolution for one-layer networks is studied in Baran-
wal et al. (2021), along with its out-of-distribution (OoD) generalization potential. A more recent
work (Wu et al., 2022) formulates the node-level OoD problem, and develops a learning method
that facilitates GNNs to leverage invariance principles for prediction. In Gasteiger et al. (2019), the
authors utilize a propagation scheme based on personalized PageRank to construct a model that
outperforms several GCN-like methods for semi-supervised classification. Through their algorithm,
APPNP, they show that placing power iterations at the last layer of an MLP achieves state of the art
performance. Our results align with this observation.
    РѕЌ
     David R. Cheriton School of Computer Science, University of Waterloo, Waterloo, Canada.
{aseem.baranwal,kimon.fountoulakis}@uwaterloo.ca
   Рђа
     Department of Statistics and Actuarial Science, Department of Applied Mathematics, University of Waterloo,
Waterloo, Canada. a.jagannath@uwaterloo.ca


                                                      1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


There exists a large amount of theoretical work on unsupervised learning for random graph models
where node features are absent and only relational information is available (Decelle et al., 2011;
Massouli├Е, 2014; Mossel et al., 2018; 2015; Abbe & Sandon, 2015; Abbe et al., 2015; Bordenave
et al., 2015; Deshpande et al., 2015; Montanari & Sen, 2016; Banks et al., 2016; Abbe & Sandon,
2018; Li et al., 2019; Kloumann et al., 2017; Gaudio et al., 2022). For a comprehensive survey,
see Abbe (2018); Moore (2017). For data models which have node features coupled with relational
information, several works have studied the semi-supervised node classification problem, see, for
example, Scarselli et al. (2009); Cheng et al. (2011); Gilbert et al. (2012); Dang & Viennet (2012);
G├╝nnemann et al. (2013); Yang et al. (2013); Hamilton et al. (2017); Jin et al. (2019); Mehta et al.
(2019); Chien et al. (2022); Yan et al. (2021). These papers provide good empirical insights into
the merits of graph structure in the data. We complement these studies with theoretical results that
explain the effects of graph convolutions in a multi-layer network.
In Deshpande et al. (2018); Lu & Sen (2020), the authors explore the fundamental thresholds for the
classification of a substantial fraction of the nodes with linear sample complexity and large but finite
degree. Another relatively recent work (Hou et al., 2020) proposes two graph smoothness metrics
for measuring the benefits of graphical information, along with a new attention-based framework. In
Fountoulakis et al. (2022), the authors provide a theoretical study of the graph attention mechanism
(GAT) and identify the regimes where the attention mechanism is (or is not) beneficial to node-
classification tasks. Our study focuses on convolutions instead of attention-based mechanisms. Several
works have studied the expressive power and extrapolation of GNNs, along with the oversmoothing
phenomenon (see, for e.g., Balcilar et al. (2021); Xu et al. (2021); Oono & Suzuki (2020); Li et al.
(2018)). Some other works have also studied the homophily and heterophily problem in GNNs
(Luan et al., 2021; Ma et al., 2022). However, our focus is to draw a comparison of the benefits and
limitations of graph convolutions with those of a traditional MLP that does not utilize relational
information. Similar to Wei et al. (2022), our setting is immune to the heterophily problem, and the
focus of our study is on regimes where oversmoothing does not occur.
To the best of our knowledge, this area of research still lacks theoretical guarantees that explain
when and why graphical data, and in particular, graph convolutions, can boost traditional multi-
layer networks to perform better on node-classification tasks. To this end, we study the effects of
graph convolutions in deeper layers of a multi-layer network. For node classification tasks, we also
study whether one can avoid using additional layers in the network design for the sole purpose of
gathering information from neighbours that are farther away, by comparing the benefits of placing all
convolutions in a single layer versus placing them in different layers.

Our contributions. We study the performance of multi-layer networks for the task of binary node
classification on a data model where node features are sampled from a Gaussian mixture, and relational
information is sampled from a symmetric two-block stochastic block model1 (see Section 2.1 for
details). The node features are modelled after XOR data with two classes, and therefore, has four
distinct components, two for each class. Our choice of the data model is inspired from the fact
that it is non-linearly separable. Hence, a single layer network fails to classify the data from this
model. Similar data models based on the contextual stochastic block model (CSBM) have been used
extensively in the literature, see, for example, Deshpande et al. (2018); Binkiewicz et al. (2017);
Chien et al. (2021; 2022); Baranwal et al. (2021). We now summarize our contributions below.

      1. We show that when node features are accompanied by a graph, a single graph convolution
         enables a multi-layer network to classify the nodes in a wider regime as compared to methods
         that do not utilize the graph, improving Рѕџ the threshold for the distance between the means
         of the features by a factor of at least 1/ 4 Edeg. Furthermore, assuming a slightly denser
         graph, we show that with two graph convolutions, a multi-layer network canРѕџclassify the
         data in an even wider regime, improving the threshold by a factor of at least 1/ 4 n, where n
         is the number of nodes in the graph.
      2. We show that for multi-layer networks equipped with graph convolutions, the classification
         capacity is determined by the number of graph convolutions rather than the number of layers
         in the network. In particular, we study the gains obtained by placing graph convolutions
         in a layer, and compare the benefits of placing all convolutions in a single layer versus
   1
     Our analyses generalize to non-symmetric SBMs with more than two blocks. However, we focus on the
binary symmetric case for the sake of simplicity in the presentation of our ideas.


                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


          placing them in different combinations across different layers. We find that the performance
          is mutually similar for all combinations with the same number of graph convolutions.
      3. We verify our theoretical results through extensive experiments on both synthetic and
         real-world data, showing trends about the performance of graph convolutions in various
         combinations across multiple layers of a network, and in different regimes of interest.

The rest of our paper is organized as follows: In Section 2, we provide a detailed description of the
data model and the network architecture that is central to our study, followed by our analytical results
in Section 3. Finally, Section 4 presents extensive experiments that illustrate our theoretical findings.

2     P RELIMINARIES
2.1    D ESCRIPTION OF THE DATA MODEL

Let n, d be positive integers, where n denotes the number of data points (sample size) and d denotes
the dimension of the features. Define the Bernoulli random variables ╬х1 , . . . , ╬хn Рѕ╝ Ber(1/2) and
╬и1 , . . . , ╬иn Рѕ╝ Ber(1/2). Further, define two classes Cb = {i Рѕѕ [n] | ╬хi = b} for b Рѕѕ {0, 1}.
Let ┬х and ╬й be fixed vectors in Rd , such that k┬хk2 = k╬йk2 and h┬х, ╬йi = 0.2 Denote by X Рѕѕ Rn├Ќd
the data matrix where each row-vector Xi Рѕѕ Rd is an independent Gaussian random vector distributed
as Xi Рѕ╝ N ((2╬иi Рѕњ 1)((1 Рѕњ ╬хi )┬х + ╬хi ╬й), ¤Ѓ 2 ). We use the notation X Рѕ╝ XOR-GMM(n, d, ┬х, ╬й, ¤Ѓ 2 )
to refer to data sampled from this model.
Let us now define the model with graphical information. In this case, in addition to the features X
described above, we have a graph with the adjacency matrix, A = (aij )i,jРѕѕ[n] , that corresponds
to an undirected graph including self-loops, and is sampled from a standard symmetric two-block
stochastic block model with parameters p and q, where p is the intra-block and q is the inter-block edge
probability. The SBM(n, p, q) is then coupled with the XOR-GMM(n, d, ┬х, ╬й, ¤Ѓ 2 ) in the way that
aij Рѕ╝ Ber(p) if ╬хi = ╬хj and aij Рѕ╝ Ber(q) if ╬хi 6= ╬хj . For data (A, X) = ({aij }i,jРѕѕ[n] , {Xi }iРѕѕ[n] )
sampled from this model, we say (A, X) Рѕ╝ XOR-CSBM(n, d, ┬х, ╬й, ¤Ѓ 2 , p, q).
We will denote byPD the diagonal degree matrix of the graph with adjacency matrix A, and thus,
                      n
deg(i) = Dii = j=1 aij denotes the degree of node i. We will use Ni = {j Рѕѕ [n] | aij = 1} to
denote the set of neighbours of a node i. We will also use the notation i Рѕ╝ j or i   j throughout the
paper to signify, respectively, that i and j are in the same class, or in different classes.

2.2    N ETWORK ARCHITECTURE

Our analysis focuses on MLP architectures with ReLU activations. In particular, for a network with
L layers, we define the following:
                        H(0) = X,
                                                                        )
                         f (l) (X) = (DРѕњ1 A)kl H(lРѕњ1) W(l) + b(l)
                                                                            for l Рѕѕ [L],
                         H(l) = ReLU(f (l) (X))
                        y╠ѓ = ¤Ћ(f (L) (X)).
Here, X Рѕѕ Rn├Ќd is the given data, which is an input for the first layer and ¤Ћ(x) = sigmoid(x) =
   1
1+eРѕњx , applied element-wise. The final output of the network is represented by y╠ѓ = {y╠ѓi }iРѕѕ[n] . Note
that DРѕњ1 A is the normalized adjacency matrix3 and kl denotes the number of graph convolutions
placed in layer l. In particular, for a simple MLP with no graphical information, we have A = In .
We will denote by ╬И, the set of all weights and biases, (W(l) , b(l) )lРѕѕ[L] , which are the learnable
parameters of the network. For a dataset (X, y), we denote the binary cross-entropy loss obtained by
   2
     We take ┬х and ╬й to be orthogonal and of the same magnitude for keeping the calculations relatively simpler,
while clearly depicting the main ideas behind our results.
   3
     Our results rely on degree concentration for each node, hence, they readily generalize to other normalization
                   1       1
methods like DРѕњ 2 ADРѕњ 2 (see Appendix A for proofs).


                                                        3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


a multi-layer network with parameters ╬И by `╬И (A, X) = Рѕњ n1
                                                              P
                                                                 iРѕѕ[n] yi log(y╠ѓi ) + (1 Рѕњ yi ) log(1 Рѕњ y╠ѓi ),
and the optimization problem is formulated as
                                   OPT(A, X) = min `╬И (A, X),                                             (1)
                                                       ╬ИРѕѕC

where C denotes a suitable constraint set for ╬И. For our analyses, we take the constraint set C to
impose the condition W(1) 2 РЅц R and W(l) 2 РЅц 1 for all 1 < l РЅц L, i.e., the weight parameters
of all layers l > 1 are normalized, while for l = 1, the norm is bounded by some fixed value R. This
is necessary because without the constraint, the value of the loss function can go arbitrarily close to
0. Furthermore, the parameter R helps us concisely provide bounds for the loss in our theorems for
various regimes by bounding the Lipschitz constant of the learned function. In the rest of our paper,
we use `╬И (X) to denote `╬И (In , X), which is the loss in the absence of graphical information.

3     R ESULTS

We now describe our theoretical contributions, followed by a discussion and a proof sketch.

3.1   S ETTING UP THE BASELINE

Before stating our main result about the benefits and performance of graph convolutions, we set up a
comparative baseline in the setting where graphical information is absent. In the following theorem,
we completely characterize the classification threshold for the XOR-GMM data model in terms of the
distance between the means of the mixture model and the number of data points n. Let ╬д(┬и) denote
the cumulative distribution function of a standard Gaussian, and ╬дc (┬и) = 1 Рѕњ ╬д(┬и).
Theorem 1. Let X Рѕѕ Rn├Ќd Рѕ╝ XOR-GMM(n, d, ┬х, ╬й, ¤Ѓ 2 ) and define ╬│ = k┬х Рѕњ ╬йk2 to be the
distance between the means. Then we have the following:

      1. Assume that ╬│ РЅц K¤Ѓ and let h(x) : Rd Рєњ {0, 1} be any binary classifier. Then for any
                                                                2
         K > 0 and any   Рѕѕ (0, 1), at least a fraction 2╬дc (K/2) Рѕњ O(nРѕњ /2 ) of all data points are
         misclassified by h with probability at least 1 Рѕњ exp(Рѕњ2n1Рѕњ  ).
                                                                                1
      2. For any   > 0, if the distance between the means is ╬│ = Рёд(¤Ѓ(log n) 2 +  ), then for any c > 0,
         with probability at least 1 Рѕњ O(nРѕњc ), there exist a two-layer and a three-layer network that
         perfectly classify the data, and obtain a cross-entropy loss given by
                                                                Рѕџ

                                                     R

                                `╬И (X) = C exp Рѕњ Рѕџ ╬│ 1 ┬▒ c/(log n)               ,
                                                      2
         where C Рѕѕ [1/2, 1] is an absolute constant and R is the optimality constraint from Eq. (1).

Part one of Theorem 1 shows that if the means of the features of the two classes are at most O(¤Ѓ) apart
then with overwhelming probability, there is a constant fraction of points that are misclassified. Note
that the fraction of misclassified points is 2╬дc (K/2)2 , which approaches 0 as K Рєњ Рѕъ and approaches
1/2 as K Рєњ 0, signifying that if the means are very far apart then we successfully classify all data
points, while if they
                    Рѕџcoincide then we always misclassify roughly half of all data points. Furthermore,
note that if K = c log n for some constant c Рѕѕ [0, 1), then the total number of points misclassified
                           2     1Рѕњc2                                   Рѕџ
is 2n╬дc (K)2   Kn2 eРѕњK   nlog n = Рёд(1). Thus, intuitively, K   log n is the threshold beyond
which learning methods are expected to perfectly classify the data. This is formalized in part two of
the theorem,
     Рѕџ         which supplements the misclassification result by showing that if the means are roughly
¤Ѕ(¤Ѓ log n) apart then the data is classifiable with overwhelming probability.

3.2   I MPROVEMENT THROUGH GRAPH CONVOLUTIONS

We now state the results that explain the effects of graph convolutions in multi-layer networks with the
architecture described in Section 2.2. We characterize the improvement in the classification
                                                                                         Рѕџ     threshold
in terms of the distance between the means of the node features.Рѕџ    Let  erf(t) =  2╬д(t   2) Рѕњ 1 be the
Gauss error function and ╬Х(t) = t erf(t) Рѕњ (1 Рѕњ exp(Рѕњt2 ))/ ¤ђ.


                                                   4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Theorem 2. Let (A, X) Рѕ╝ XOR-CSBM(n, d, ┬х, ╬й, ¤Ѓ 2 , p, q), ╬│ = k┬х Рѕњ ╬йk2 , and ╬Њ(p, q) = |p Рѕњ
q|/(p + q). There exist a two-layer network and a three-layer network with the following properties:
                                                                                  2
       Рђб If the intra-class and inter-class edge probabilities are p, q = Рёд( logn n ), and it holds that
                               q
                                    log n                                                           Рѕњc
         ╬Њ(p, q)╬Х(╬│/2¤Ѓ) = ¤Ѕ       n(p+q) , then for any c > 0, with probability at least 1 Рѕњ O(n ),
         the networks equipped with a graph convolution in the second or the third layer perfectly
         classify the data, and obtain the following loss:
                                                                          p
                         `╬И (A, X) = C 0 exp РѕњC¤ЃR╬Њ(p, q)╬Х(╬│/2¤Ѓ)(1 ┬▒ c/log n) ,

         where C > 0 and C 0 Рѕѕ [1/2, 1] are constants and R is the constraint from Eq. (1).
                                                     q
                     log n            2 ╬│               log n
       Рђб If p, q = Рёд( n ) and ╬Њ(p, q) ╬Х( /2¤Ѓ) = ¤Ѕ
                      Рѕџ
                                                          n    , then for any c > 0, with probability
         at least 1 Рѕњ O(nРѕњc ), the networks with any combination of two graph convolutions in the
         second and/or the third layers perfectly classify the data, and obtain the following loss:
                                                                          p
                       `╬И (A, X) = C 0 exp РѕњC¤ЃR╬Њ(p, q)2 ╬Х(╬│/¤Ѓ)(1 ┬▒ c/log n) ,

         where C > 0 and C 0 Рѕѕ [1/2, 1] are constants and R is the constraint from Eq. (1).

To understand Theorem 2, it helps to consider the regime where ╬Њ(p, q) = Рёд(1). Part one of the
                                                            2
theorem shows that under the assumption that p, q = Рёд(log n/n), a single graph convolution   Рѕџimproves
the classification threshold for ╬│, the distance between the means by a factor of at least 1/ 4 n(p+q) as
compared to the case without the graph. Part two then shows that with a slightly stronger assumption
                                                                                                      Рѕџ
on the graph density, we observe further improvement in the threshold up to a factor of at least 1/ 4 n.
We refer to Appendix A.8 for a comprehensive explanation of this simpler case.
Note that although the regime of graph density is different for part two of the theorem, the result
                                                           Рѕџ
itself is an improvement. In particular, if p, q = Рёд(log n/ n) then part one of the theorem states that
                                                                   Рѕџ
one graph convolution achieves an improvement of at least 1/ 8 n, while part two states that two
                                      Рѕџ
convolutions improve it to at least 1/ 4 n. However, we also emphasize that in the regime where the
graph is dense, i.e., when p, q = Рёдn (1), two graph convolutions do not have a significant advantage
over one graph convolution. Our experiments in Section 4.1 demonstrate this effect.
The XOR-CSBM data model also demonstrates why graph convolutions in the first layer can severely
hurt the classification accuracy. Hence, for Theorem 2, our analysis only considers networks with no
graph convolution in the first layer, i.e., k1 = 0. This effect is visualized in Fig. 1, and is attributed
to the averaging of data points in the same class but different components of the mixture that have
means with opposite signs. We defer the reader to Appendix A.5 for a more formal argument, and
to Appendix B.1 for experiments that demonstrate this phenomenon. As n (the sample size) grows,
the difference between the averages of node features over the two classes diminishes (see Figs. 1a
and 1b). In other words, the means of the two classes collapse to the same point for large n. However,
in the last layer, since the input consists of transformed features that are linearly separable, a graph
convolution helps with the classification task (see Figs. 1c and 1d).

3.3   P LACEMENT OF GRAPH CONVOLUTIONS

We observe that the improvements in the classification capability of a multi-layer network depends on
the number of convolutions, and does not depend on where the convolutions are placed. In particular,
for the XOR-CSBM data model, putting the same number of convolutions among the second and/or
the third layer in any combination achieves mutually similar improvements in the classification task.
Corollary 2.1. Consider the data model XOR-CSBM(n, d, ┬х, ╬й, ¤Ѓ 2 , p, q) and the network architec-
ture from Section 2.2.
                                     2
       Рђб Assume that p, q = Рёд(log n/n), and consider the three-layer network characterized by
         part one of Theorem 2, with one graph convolution. For this network, placing the graph
         convolution in the second layer (k2 = 1, k3 = 0) obtains the same results as placing it in
         the third layer (k2 = 0, k3 = 1).


                                                    5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


         (a) Original node features at the first layer.       (b) Feature representation after GC at the first layer.


       (c) Feature representation at the last layer.      (d) Feature representation after GC at the last layer.

Figure 1: Placement of a graph convolution (GC) in the first layer versus the last layer for data
sampled from the XOR-CSBM. For this figure we used 1000 nodes in each class and a randomly
sampled stochastic block-model graph with p = 0.8 and q = 0.2.

                                           Рѕџ
       Рђб Assume that p, q = Рёд(log n/ n), and consider the three-layer network characterized by part
         two of Theorem 2, with two graph convolutions. For this network, placing both convolutions
         in the second layer (k2 = 2, k3 = 0) or both of them in the third layer (k2 = 0, k3 = 2)
         obtains the same results as placing one convolution in the second layer and one in the third
         layer (k2 = 1, k3 = 1).

Corollary 2.1 is immediate from the proof of Theorem 2 (see Appendices A.6 and A.7). In Section 4,
we also show extensive experiments on both synthetic and real-world data that demonstrate this result.

3.4   P ROOF SKETCH

In this section, we provide an overview of the key ideas and intuition behind our proof technique for
the results. For comprehensive proofs, see Appendix A.
For part one of Theorem 1, we utilize the assumption on the distribution of the data. Since the
underlying distribution of the mixture model is known, we can find the (Bayes) optimal classifier4 ,
hРѕЌ (x), for the XOR-GMM, which takes the form hРѕЌ (x) = 1(| hx, ╬йi | Рѕњ | hx, ┬хi |), where 1(┬и) is the
indicator function. We then compute a lower bound on the probability that hРѕЌ fails to classify one
data point from this model, followed by a concentration argument that computes a lower bound on the
fraction of points that hРѕЌ fails to classify with overwhelming probability. Consequently, a negative
result for the Bayes optimal classifier implies a negative result for all classifiers.
For part two of Theorem 1, we design a two-layer and a three-layer network that realize the (Bayes)
optimal classifier. We then use a concentration argument to show that in the regime where the distance
between the means is large enough, the function representing our two-layer or three-layer network
roughly evaluates to a quantity that has a positive sign for one class and a negative sign for the other
class. Furthermore, the output of the function scales with the distance between the means. Thus,
with a suitable assumption on the magnitude of the distance between the means, the output of the
   4
     A Bayes classifier makes the most probable prediction for a data point. Formally, such a classifier is of the
form hРѕЌ (x) = argmaxbРѕѕ{0,1} Pr [y = b | x].


                                                          6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


networks has the correct signs with overwhelming probability. Following this argument, we show
that the cross-entropy loss obtained by the networks can be made arbitrarily small by controlling the
optimization constraint R (see Eq. (1)), implying perfect classification.
For Theorem 2, we observe that for the (Bayes) optimal networks designed for Theorem 1, placing
graph convolutions in the second or the third layer reduces the effective variance of the functions
representing the network. This stems from the fact that for the data model we consider, multi-layer
networks with ReLU activations are Lipschitz functions of Gaussian random variables. First, we
compute the precise reduction in the variance of the data characterized by K > 0 graph convolutions
(see Lemma A.3). Then for part one of the theorem where we analyze one graph convolution, we use
the assumption on the graph density to conclude that the degrees of each node concentrate around the
expected degree. This helps us characterize the variance reduction, which further allows the distance
between the means to be smaller than in the case of a standard MLP, hence, obtaining an improvement
in the threshold for perfect classification5 . Part two of the theorem studies the placement of two graph
convolutions using a very similar argument. In this case, the variance reduction is characterized by
the number of common neighbours of a pair of nodes rather than the degree of a node, and is stronger
than the variance reduction offered by a single graph convolution.

4     E XPERIMENTS

In this section we provide empirical evidence that supports our claims in Section 3. We begin by
analyzing the synthetic data models XOR-GMM and XOR-CSBM that are crucial to our theoretical
results, followed by a similar analysis on multiple real-world datasets tailored for node classification
tasks. We show a comparison of the test accuracy obtained by various learning methods in different
regimes, along with a display of how the performance changes with the properties of the underlying
graph, i.e., with the intra-class and inter-class edge probabilities p and q.
For both synthetic and real-world data, the performance of the networks does not change significantly
with the choice of the placement of graph convolutions. In particular, placing all convolutions in the
last layer achieves a similar performance as any other placement for the same number of convolutions.
This observation aligns with the results in Gasteiger et al. (2019).

4.1   S YNTHETIC DATA

In this section, we empirically show the landscape of the accuracy achieved for various multi-layer
networks with up to three layers and up to two graph convolutions6 . In Fig. 2, we show that as claimed
                                                                                                 Рѕџ
in Theorem 2, a single graph convolution reduces the classification threshold by a factor of 1/ 4 E deg
                                                                   Рѕџ                      n
and two graph convolutions reduce the threshold by a factor of 1/ 4 n, where E deg = 2 (p + q).
We observe that the placement of graph convolutions does not matter as long as it is not in the first
layer. Figs. 2a and 2b show that the performance is mutually similar for all networks that have one
graph convolution placed in the second or the third layer, and for all networks that have two graph
convolutions placed in any combination among the second and the third layers. In Figs. 2c and 2d, we
observe that two graph convolutions do not obtain a significant advantage over one graph convolution
in the setting where p and q are large, i.e., when the graph is dense. We observed similar results for
various other values of p and q (see Appendix B.1 for some more plots).
Furthermore, in Appendix B.1 we verify that if a graph convolution is placed in the first layer of
a network, then it is difficult to learn a classifier for the XOR-CSBM data model. In this case, test
accuracy is low even for the regime where the distance between the means is quite large.

4.2   R EAL - WORLD DATA

For real-world data, we test our results on three graph benchmarks: CORA, CiteSeer, and Pubmed
citation network datasets (Sen et al., 2008). Results for larger datasets are presented in Appendix B.2.
We observe the following trends: First, as claimed in Theorem 2, networks that utilize the graph
    5
      We note that although scaling the parameters of a network scales the output of the network, yet, it does not
affect the accuracy, which is determined by the sign of the outputs.
    6
      We defer to Appendix B.1 for experiments with networks having graph convolutions in the first layer.


                                                        7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


    (a) Two-layer networks with (p, q) = (0.2, 0.02).         (b) Three-layer networks with (p, q) = (0.2, 0.02).


    (c) Two-layer networks with (p, q) = (0.5, 0.1).          (d) Three-layer networks with (p, q) = (0.5, 0.1).

Figure 2: Averaged test accuracy (over 50 trials) for various networks with and without graph
convolutions on the XOR-CSBM data model with n = 400, d = 4 and ¤Ѓ 2 = 1/d. The x-axis denotes
the ratio K = k┬х Рѕњ ╬йk2 /¤Ѓ on a logarithmic scale. The vertical lines indicate the classification
thresholds mentioned in part two of Theorem 1 (red), and in Theorem 2 (violet and pink).


perform remarkably better than a traditional MLP that does not use relational information. Second,
all networks with one graph convolution in any layer achieve a mutually similar performance, and all
networks with two graph convolutions in any combination of placement achieve a mutually similar
performance. This demonstrates a result similar to Corollary 2.1 for real-world data. Finally, networks
with two graph convolutions perform better than networks with one graph convolution.
In Fig. 3, we present for all networks, the maximum accuracy over 50 trials, where each trial
corresponds to a random initialization of the networks. For 2-layer networks, the hidden layer has
width 16, and for 3-layer networks, both hidden layers have width 16. We use a dropout probability
of 0.5 and a weight decay of 10Рѕњ5 while training.
For this study, we attribute minor changes in the accuracy to hyperparameters involving dropout and
weight decay. This helps us clearly observe the important difference in the accuracy of networks with
one graph convolution versus two graph convolutions. For example, in Fig. 3a, we note that there are
differences in the accuracy of the networks with one graph convolution (red and blue). However, these
differences are minor compared to the networks with one convolution (red and blue) and networks
with two convolutions (green and yellow). We also show the averaged accuracy in Appendix B.2.
Note that the accuracy slightly differs from well-known results in the literature due to implementation
                                                                                               1      1
differences. In particular, the GCN implementation in Kipf & Welling (2017) uses A╠Ѓ = DРѕњ 2 ADРѕњ 2
as the normalized adjacency matrix, however, we use A╠Ѓ = DРѕњ1 A.7 In Appendix B.2, we also show
                                                   1     1
empirical results for the normalization A╠Ѓ = DРѕњ 2 ADРѕњ 2 .

5       C ONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
We study the fundamental limits of the capacity of graph convolutions when placed beyond the first
layer of a multi-layer network for the XOR-CSBM data model, and provide theoretical guarantees
for their performance in different regimes of the signal in the data. Through our experiments on
both synthetic and real-world data, we show that the number of convolutions is a more significant
    7
        Our proofs rely on degree concentration, and thus, generalize to the other type of normalization as well.


                                                          8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                      (a) Accuracy of various learning models on the CORA dataset.


                      (b) Accuracy of various learning models on the Pubmed dataset.


                      (c) Accuracy of various learning models on the CiteSeer dataset.

Figure 3: Maximum accuracy (percentage) over 50 trials for various networks. A network with k
layers and j1 , . . . , jk convolutions in each of the layers is represented by the label kL-j1 . . . jk .


factor for determining the performance of a network, rather than the number of layers in the network.
Furthermore, we show that placing graph convolutions in any combination achieves mutually similar
performance enhancements for the same number of them. We observe that multiple graph convolutions
are advantageous when the underlying graph is relatively sparse. Intuitively, this is because in a dense
graph, a single convolution can gather information from a large number of nodes, while in a sparser
graph, more convolutions are needed to gather information from a larger number of nodes.
Our analysis is limited to a positive result and we only provide a minimum guarantee for improve-
ment in the classification threshold. To fully understand the limitations of graph convolutions, a
complementary negative result (similar to part one of Theorem 1) for data models with relational
information is required, showing the maximum improvement that graph convolutions can realize in
a multi-layer network. This problem is hard because a graph convolution transforms an iid set of
features into a highly correlated set of features, making it difficult to apply classical high-dimensional
concentration arguments. Another potential line of work is to generalize our results for arbitrary data
models. However, since our arguments rely heavily on the concentration of measure, it is hard to
extend the analysis to arbitrary distributions. Therefore, we require distribution-agnostic tools.


                                                     9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


6   ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
K.F. would like to acknowledge the support of the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council
of Canada (NSERC). Cette recherche a ├Еt├Е financ├Еe par le Conseil de recherches en sciences naturelles
et en g├Еnie du Canada (CRSNG), [RGPIN-2019-04067, DGECR-2019-00147]. A.J. acknowledges
the support of the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC). Cette
recherche a ├Еt├Е financ├Еe par le Conseil de recherches en sciences naturelles et en g├Еnie du Canada
(CRSNG), [RGPIN-2020-04597, DGECR-2020-00199].

R EFERENCES
E. Abbe. Community detection and stochastic block models: Recent developments. Journal of
  Machine Learning Research, 18:1РђЊ86, 2018.
E. Abbe and C. Sandon. Community detection in general stochastic block models: Fundamental
  limits and efficient algorithms for recovery. In 2015 IEEE 56th Annual Symposium on Foundations
  of Computer Science, pp. 670РђЊ688, 2015. doi: 10.1109/FOCS.2015.47.
E. Abbe and C. Sandon. Proof of the achievability conjectures for the general stochastic block model.
  Communications on Pure and Applied Mathematics, 71(7):1334РђЊ1406, 2018.
E. Abbe, A. S. Bandeira, and G. Hall. Exact recovery in the stochastic block model. IEEE Transactions
   on Information Theory, 62(1):471РђЊ487, 2015.
Lars Backstrom and Jure Leskovec. Supervised random walks: predicting and recommending links
  in social networks. In Proceedings of the fourth ACM international conference on Web search and
  data mining, pp. 635РђЊ644, 2011.
Muhammet Balcilar, Guillaume Renton, Pierre H├Еroux, Benoit Ga├╝z├еre, S├Еbastien Adam, and Paul
 Honeine. Analyzing the expressive power of graph neural networks in a spectral perspective. In
 International Conference on Learning Representations, 2021.
J. Banks, C. Moore, J. Neeman, and P. Netrapalli. Information-theoretic thresholds for community
   detection in sparse networks. In Conference on Learning Theory, pp. 383РђЊ416. PMLR, 2016.
Victor Bapst, Thomas Keck, A Grabska-Barwin╠Ђska, Craig Donner, Ekin Dogus Cubuk, Samuel S
  Schoenholz, Annette Obika, Alexander WR Nelson, Trevor Back, Demis Hassabis, et al. Unveiling
  the predictive power of static structure in glassy systems. Nature Physics, 16(4):448РђЊ454, 2020.
Aseem Baranwal, Kimon Fountoulakis, and Aukosh Jagannath. Graph convolution for semi-
  supervised classification: Improved linear separability and out-of-distribution generalization. In
  Proceedings of the 38th International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 139 of Proc. of
  Mach. Learn. Res., pp. 684РђЊ693. PMLR, 18РђЊ24 Jul 2021.
P. Battaglia, R. Pascanu, M. Lai, D. J. Rezende, and K. Kavukcuoglu. Interaction Networks for
   Learning about Objects, Relations and Physics. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
   Systems (NeurIPS), 2016.
N. Binkiewicz, J. T. Vogelstein, and K. Rohe. Covariate-assisted spectral clustering. Biometrika, 104:
  361РђЊ377, 2017.
C. Bordenave, M. Lelarge, and L. Massouli├Е. Non-backtracking spectrum of random graphs: com-
  munity detection and non-regular ramanujan graphs. In 2015 IEEE 56th Annual Symposium on
  Foundations of Computer Science, pp. 1347РђЊ1357. IEEE, 2015.
Z. Chen, L. Li, and J. Bruna. Supervised community detection with line graph neural networks. In
  International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2019.
H. Cheng, Y. Zhou, and J. X. Yu. Clustering large attributed graphs: A balance between structural
  and attribute similarities. ACM Transactions on Knowledge Discovery from Data, 12, 2011.
Eli Chien, Jianhao Peng, Pan Li, and Olgica Milenkovic. Adaptive universal generalized pagerank
  graph neural network. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2021.


                                                 10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Eli Chien, Wei-Cheng Chang, Cho-Jui Hsieh, Hsiang-Fu Yu, Jiong Zhang, Olgica Milenkovic, and
  Inderjit S Dhillon. Node feature extraction by self-supervised multi-scale neighborhood prediction.
  In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2022.
T. A. Dang and E. Viennet. Community detection based on structural and attribute similarities. In
   The Sixth International Conference on Digital Society (ICDS), 2012.
A. Decelle, F. Krzakala, C. Moore, and L. Zdeborov├А. Asymptotic analysis of the stochastic block
  model for modular networks and its algorithmic applications. Physical Review E, 84(6):066106,
  2011.
Y. Deshpande, E. Abbe, and A. Montanari. Asymptotic mutual information for the two-groups
  stochastic block model. ArXiv, 2015. arXiv:1507.08685.
Y. Deshpande, A. Montanari S. Sen, and E. Mossel. Contextual stochastic block models. In Advances
   in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2018.
M. Fey and J. E. Lenssen. Fast graph representation learning with PyTorch Geometric. In ICLR
 Workshop on Representation Learning on Graphs and Manifolds, 2019.
Kimon Fountoulakis, Amit Levi, Shenghao Yang, Aseem Baranwal, and Aukosh Jagannath. Graph
  attention retrospective. arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.13060, 2022.
Johannes Gasteiger, Aleksandar Bojchevski, and Stephan G├╝nnemann. Predict then propagate:
  Graph neural networks meet personalized pagerank. In International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2019.
Julia Gaudio, Miklos Z Racz, and Anirudh Sridhar. Exact community recovery in correlated stochastic
  block models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.15736, 2022.
J. Gilbert, E. Valveny, and H. Bunke. Graph embedding in vector spaces by node attribute statistics.
   Pattern Recognition, 45(9):3072РђЊ3083, 2012.
J. Gilmer, S. S. Schoenholz, P. F. Riley, O. Vinyals, and G. E. Dahl. Neural message passing for
   quantum chemistry. In Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on Machine Learning,
   2017.
S. G├╝nnemann, I F├цrber, S. Raubach, and T. Seidl. Spectral subspace clustering for graphs with
   feature vectors. In IEEE 13th International Conference on Data Mining, 2013.
W. L. Hamilton, R. Ying, and J. Leskovec. Inductive representation learning on large graphs. NIPSРђЎ17:
  Proceedings of the 31st International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, pp.
 1025РђЊ1035, 2017.
William L Hamilton. Graph representation learning. Synthesis Lectures on Artifical Intelligence and
 Machine Learning, 14(3):1РђЊ159, 2020.
Yifan Hou, Jian Zhang, James Cheng, Kaili Ma, Richard T. B. Ma, Hongzhi Chen, and Ming-Chang
  Yang. Measuring and improving the use of graph information in graph neural networks. In
  International Conference on Learning Representations, 2020.
Weihua Hu, Matthias Fey, Marinka Zitnik, Yuxiao Dong, Hongyu Ren, Bowen Liu, Michele Catasta,
 and Jure Leskovec. Open graph benchmark: Datasets for machine learning on graphs. arXiv
 preprint arXiv:2005.00687, 2020.
D. Jin, Z. Liu, W. Li, D. He, and W. Zhang. Graph convolutional networks meet markov random
  fields: Semi-supervised community detection in attribute networks. Proceedings of the AAAI
  Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 3(1):152РђЊ159, 2019.
T. N. Kipf and M. Welling. Semi-supervised classification with graph convolutional networks. In
   International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2017.
I. M. Kloumann, J. Ugander, and J. Kleinberg. Block models and personalized pagerank. Proceedings
   of the National Academy of Sciences, 114(1):33РђЊ38, 2017.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


P. Li, I. (Eli) Chien, and O. Milenkovic. Optimizing generalized pagerank methods for seed-expansion
   community detection. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), pp.
   11705РђЊ11716, 2019.

Qimai Li, Zhichao Han, and Xiao-Ming Wu. Deeper insights into graph convolutional networks for
  semi-supervised learning. In Thirty-Second AAAI conference on artificial intelligence, 2018.

Chen Lu and Subhabrata Sen. Contextual stochastic block model: Sharp thresholds and contiguity.
  ArXiv, 2020. arXiv:2011.09841.

Sitao Luan, Chenqing Hua, Qincheng Lu, Jiaqi Zhu, Mingde Zhao, Shuyuan Zhang, Xiao-Wen
   Chang, and Doina Precup. Is heterophily a real nightmare for graph neural networks to do node
   classification? arXiv preprint arXiv:2109.05641, 2021.

Yao Ma, Xiaorui Liu, Neil Shah, and Jiliang Tang. Is homophily a necessity for graph neural
  networks? In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2022.

Laurent Massouli├Е. Community detection thresholds and the weak ramanujan property. In Pro-
  ceedings of the Forty-Sixth Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing, pp. 694РђЊ703,
  2014.

N. Mehta, C. L. Duke, and P. Rai. Stochastic blockmodels meet graph neural networks. In Proceedings
  of the 36th International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 97, pp. 4466РђЊ4474, 2019.

A. Montanari and S. Sen. Semidefinite programs on sparse random graphs and their application to
  community detection. In Proceedings of the forty-eighth annual ACM Symposium on Theory of
  Computing, pp. 814РђЊ827, 2016.

Federico Monti, Davide Boscaini, Jonathan Masci, Emanuele Rodola, Jan Svoboda, and Michael M.
  Bronstein. Geometric deep learning on graphs and manifolds using mixture model cnns. In
  Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), July
  2017.

C. Moore. The computer science and physics of community detection: Landscapes, phase transitions,
  and hardness. Bulletin of The European Association for Theoretical Computer Science, 1(121),
  2017.

E. Mossel, J. Neeman, and A. Sly. Consistency thresholds for the planted bisection model. In
  Proceedings of the forty-seventh annual ACM Symposium on Theory of computing, pp. 69РђЊ75,
  2015.

E. Mossel, J. Neeman, and A. Sly. A proof of the block model threshold conjecture. Combinatorica,
   38(3):665РђЊ708, 2018.

Kenta Oono and Taiji Suzuki. Graph neural networks exponentially lose expressive power for node
  classification. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2020.

D. B. Owen. A table of normal integrals. Communications in Statistics-Simulation and Computation,
  9(4):389РђЊ419, 1980.

F. Scarselli, M. Gori, A. C. Tsoi, M. Hagenbuchner, and G. Monfardini. The graph neural network
   model. IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks, 20(1), 2009.

Prithviraj Sen, Galileo Namata, Mustafa Bilgic, Lise Getoor, Brian Galligher, and Tina Eliassi-Rad.
  Collective classification in network data. AI magazine, 29(3):93, 2008.

R. Vershynin. High-Dimensional Probability: An Introduction with Applications in Data Science,
  volume 47. Cambridge University Press, 2018.

Mark Weber, Giacomo Domeniconi, Jie Chen, Daniel Karl I Weidele, Claudio Bellei, Tom Robin-
 son, and Charles E Leiserson. Anti-money laundering in bitcoin: Experimenting with graph
 convolutional networks for financial forensics. arXiv preprint arXiv:1908.02591, 2019.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Rongzhe Wei, Haoteng Yin, Junteng Jia, Austin R. Benson, and Pan Li. Understanding non-linearity
  in graph neural networks from the bayesian-inference perspective. In Alice H. Oh, Alekh Agarwal,
  Danielle Belgrave, and Kyunghyun Cho (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  2022.
Qitian Wu, Hengrui Zhang, Junchi Yan, and David Wipf. Towards distribution shift of node-
  level prediction on graphs: An invariance perspective. In International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2022.
Keyulu Xu, Mozhi Zhang, Jingling Li, Simon Shaolei Du, Ken-Ichi Kawarabayashi, and Stefanie
  Jegelka. How neural networks extrapolate: From feedforward to graph neural networks. In
  International Conference on Learning Representations, 2021.
Yujun Yan, Milad Hashemi, Kevin Swersky, Yaoqing Yang, and Danai Koutra. Two sides of the same
  coin: Heterophily and oversmoothing in graph convolutional neural networks, 2021.
J. Yang, J. McAuley, and J. Leskovec. Community detection in networks with node attributes. In
   2013 IEEE 13th International Conference on Data Mining, pp. 1151РђЊ1156, 2013.
R. Ying, R. He, K. Chen, P. Eksombatchai, W. L. Hamilton, and J. Leskovec. Graph convolutional
  neural networks for web-scale recommender systems. KDD РђЎ18: Proceedings of the 24th ACM
  SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery & Data Mining, pp. 974РђЊ983, 2018.
Si Zhang, Dawei Zhou, Mehmet Yigit Yildirim, Scott Alcorn, Jingrui He, Hasan Davulcu, and
  Hanghang Tong. Hidden: hierarchical dense subgraph detection with application to financial
  fraud detection. In Proceedings of the 2017 SIAM International Conference on Data Mining, pp.
  570РђЊ578. SIAM, 2017.


A     P ROOFS
A.1   A SSUMPTIONS AND NOTATION

Assumption 1. For the XOR-GMM data model, the means of the Gaussian mixture are such that
h┬х, ╬йi = 0 and k┬хk2 = k╬йk2 .
We denote [x]+ = ReLU(x) and ¤Ћ(x) = sigmoid(x) = 1/1+eРѕњx , applied element-wise on the inputs.
                        v
For any vector v, v╠ѓ = kvk 2
                             denotes the normalized v. We use ╬│ = k┬х Рѕњ ╬йk2 to denote the distance
between the means of the inter-class components of the mixture model, and ╬│ 0 to denote the norm of
                   Рѕџ
the means, ╬│ 0 = ╬│/ 2 = k┬хk2 = k╬йk2 .
Given intra-class and inter-class edge probabilities p and q, we define ╬Њ(p, q) = |pРѕњq|
                                                                                   p+q . We denote the
probability density function of a standard Gaussian by ¤є(x), and the cumulative distribution function
by ╬д(x). The complementary distribution function is denoted by ╬дc (x) = 1 Рѕњ ╬д(x).

A.2   E LEMENTARY RESULTS

In this section, we state preliminary results about the concentration of the degrees of all nodes and the
number of common neighbours for all pairs of nodes, along with the effects of a graph convolution
on the mean and the variance of some data. Our results regarding the merits of graph convolutions
rely heavily on these arguments.
                                                                                              2
Proposition A.1 (Concentration of degrees). Assume that the graph density is p, q = Рёд( logn n ). Then
for any constant c > 0, with probability at least 1 Рѕњ 2nРѕњc , we have for all i Рѕѕ [n] that
                      n                                    1           2
           deg(i) = (p + q)(1 ┬▒ on (1)),                         =            (1 ┬▒ on (1)),
                      2                                 deg(i)     n(p + q)
                          №БФ                       №БХ
                     1 №БГX                X                      pРѕњq
                                 aij Рѕњ        aij №БИ = (2╬хi Рѕњ 1)       (1 + on (1)),
                  deg(i)                                        p+q
                            jРѕѕC1        jРѕѕC0
                                  q
                                       c
where the error term on (1) = O      log n .



                                                   13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Proof. Note that deg(i) is a sum of n Bernoulli random variables, hence, we have by the Chernoff
bound (Vershynin, 2018, Section 2) that
            h         hn                  n                  ic i
        Pr deg(i) Рѕѕ        (p + q)(1 Рѕњ ╬┤), (p + q)(1 + ╬┤)         РЅц 2 exp(РѕњCn(p + q)╬┤ 2 ),
                         2                2
                                        q
                                           (c+1) log n
for some C > 0. We now choose ╬┤ =                      for a large constant c > 0. Note that since
                                          qCn(p+q)
p, q = Рёд(log n/n), we have that ╬┤ = O( logc n ) = on (1). Then following a union bound over
            2



i Рѕѕ [n], we obtain that with probability at least 1 Рѕњ 2nРѕњc ,
                                                      r c
                                 n
                      deg(i) = (p + q) 1 ┬▒ O                      for all i Рѕѕ [n],
                                  2                     log n
                                                      r c
                         1           2
                              =               1┬▒O                 for all i Рѕѕ [n].
                      deg(i)     n(p + q)               log n
             1
                 P
Note that deg(i)    jРѕѕCb aij for any b Рѕѕ {0, 1} is a sum of independent Bernoulli random variables.
Hence, by a similar argument, we have that with probability at least 1 Рѕњ 2nРѕњc ,
                    №БФ                      №БХ
               1 №БГX               X                       pРѕњq
                           aij Рѕњ       aij №БИ = (2╬хi Рѕњ 1)       (1 + on (1)) for all i Рѕѕ [n].
           deg(i)                                         p+q
                      jРѕѕC1        jРѕѕC0

Proposition A.2 (Concentration of the number of common neighbours). Assume that the graph
density is p, q = Рёд( log
                      Рѕџ n ). Then for any constant c > 0, with probability at least 1 Рѕњ 2nРѕњc ,
                        n
                              n 2
                 |Ni РѕЕ Nj | =   (p + q 2 )(1 ┬▒ on (1))                     for all i Рѕ╝ j,
                              2
                 |Ni РѕЕ Nj | = npq(1 ┬▒ on (1))                              for all i   j,
                                  q
                                      c
where the error term on (1) = O     log n .


Proof. For any twoP distinct nodes i, j Рѕѕ [n] we have that the number of common neighbours of i and
j is |Ni РѕЕ Nj | = kРѕѕ[n] aik ajk . This is a sum of independent Bernoulli random variables, with mean
E|Ni РѕЕ Nj | = n2 (p2 + q 2 ) for i Рѕ╝ j and E|Ni РѕЕ Nj | = npq for i   j. Denote ┬хij = E|Ni РѕЕ Nj |.
Therefore, by the Chernoff bound (Vershynin, 2018, Section 2), we have for a fixed pair of nodes
(i, j) that
                                                                 c                   2
                 Pr |Ni РѕЕ Nj | Рѕѕ [┬хij (1 Рѕњ ╬┤ij ), ┬хij (1 + ╬┤ij )] РЅц 2 exp(РѕњC┬хij ╬┤ij    )
                                                    q
for some constant C > 0. We now choose ╬┤ij = (c+2)           log n
                                                          C┬хij      for any large c > 0. Note that since
                                             q
                Рѕџ
p, q = Рёд(log n/ n), we have that ╬┤ij = O( logc n ) = on (1). Then following a union bound over all
pairs (i, j) Рѕѕ [n] ├Ќ [n], we obtain that with probability at least 1 Рѕњ 2nРѕњc , for all pairs of nodes (i, j)
we have
                                n
                  |Ni РѕЕ Nj | = (p2 + q 2 )(1 ┬▒ on (1))                   for all i Рѕ╝ j,
                                2
                  |Ni РѕЕ Nj | = npq(1 ┬▒ on (1))                           for all i   j.
Lemma A.3 (Variance reduction). Denote the event from Proposition A.1 to be B. Let {Xi }iРѕѕ[n] Рѕѕ
Rn├Ќd be an iid sample of data. For a graph with adjacency matrix A (including self-loops) and a
fixed integer K > 0, define a K-convolution to be X╠Ѓ = (DРѕњ1 A)K X. Then we have
                                                                      2K X
                                                          1 + on (1)
         Cov(X╠Ѓi | B) = ¤Ђ(K)Cov(Xi ), where ¤Ђ(K) =                          AK (i, j)2 .
                                                             Рѕє
                                                                                 jРѕѕ[n]

Here, A (i, j) is the entry in the ith row and jth column of the exponentiated matrix AK and
         K

Рѕє = E deg = n2 (p + q).


                                                   14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Proof. For a matrix M, the ith convolved data point is X╠Ѓi = M>           >
                                                              i X, where Mi denotes the ith row
of M. Since Xi are iid, we have
                                            X
                               Cov(X╠Ѓi ) =      (Mij )2 Cov(Xj ).
                                                       jРѕѕ[n]

It remains to compute the entries of the matrix M = (DРѕњ1 A)K . Note that we have DРѕњ1 A(i, j) =
aij/deg(i), so we obtain that

                                        n X
                                          n                     n
                                        X                       X        aij1 aj1 j2 ┬и ┬и ┬и ajKРѕњ2 jKРѕњ1 ajKРѕњ1 j
          Mij = (DРѕњ1 A)K (i, j) =                       ┬и┬и┬и                                                   .
                                        j1 =1 j2 =1            jKРѕњ1   =1
                                                                         deg(i)deg(j1 ) ┬и ┬и ┬и deg(jKРѕњ1 )

Recall that on the event B, the degrees of all nodes are Рѕє(1 ┬▒ on (1)), and hence, we have that
                                           n        n             n
                         (1 ┬▒ on (1))K X X               X
                Mij =                            ┬и ┬и ┬и       aij1 ┬и ┬и ┬и ajKРѕњ2 jKРѕњ1 ajKРѕњ1 j ,
                             РѕєK        j =1 j =1       j  =1
                                          1        2            KРѕњ1

                              1
where the error on (1) = O( Рѕџlog n
                                   ). The sum of these products of the entries of A is simply the
                                                  K
number of length-K paths from node i to j, i.e., A (i, j). Thus, we have
                                                               2K X
                      X                            1 + on (1)
    Cov(X╠Ѓi | B) =         (Mij )2 Cov(Xj ) =                          AK (i, j)2 Cov(Xj ).
                                                      Рѕє
                         jРѕѕ[n]                                                      jРѕѕ[n]
                                                                2K P
                                                   1+on (1)                         K
Since Xj are iid, we obtain that ¤Ђ(K) =              Рѕє                    jРѕѕ[n] A       (i, j)2 .

Let us briefly discuss the implications of Lemma A.3. Consider a sample (A, X) drawn from
XOR-CSBM(n, d, ┬х, ╬й, ¤Ѓ 2 , p, q) for the symmetric case where exactly n/2 nodes are in each of the
two classes. We have that
                                              pIn/2 qIn/2
                                    EA =                    .
                                              qIn/2 pIn/2
This gives us E¤Ђ(K) РЅѕ n1 (1 + ╬Њ(p, q)2K ) for any K РЅЦ 2. Recall that a single graph convolution
reduces the distance between the means by a factor of ╬Њ(p, q). Hence, to comment on the performance
of an arbitrary number of convolutions, K, we might hope to compare the reduction in this distance,
╬Њ(p, q)K with the reduction in the variance (¤Ђ(K)) to obtain a condition on K in terms of n, p, and
q. The challenge, however, lies in the fact that in deeper layers, computing ¤Ђ(K) is non-trivial due
to node features being highly correlated. Moreover, an argument to claim that ¤Ђ(K) РЅѕ E¤Ђ(K) is
needed for this approach, which seems to require strong density assumptions on the graph.
We now state a result about the output of the (Bayes) optimal classifier for the XOR-GMM data
model that is used in several of our proofs.
Lemma A.4. Let h(x) = | hx, ╬й╠ѓi | Рѕњ | hx, ┬х╠ѓi | for all x Рѕѕ Rd and define
                                                    1           2

                                 ╬Х(t) = t erf(t) Рѕњ Рѕџ 1 Рѕњ eРѕњt .
                                                     ¤ђ
Then we have
                                    Рѕџ
                                   Рѕњ 2¤Ѓ╬Х(╬│/2¤Ѓ) i Рѕѕ C0
      1. The expectation Eh(Xi ) = Рѕџ                  .
                                     2¤Ѓ╬Х(╬│/2¤Ѓ) i Рѕѕ C1

      2. For any ╬│, ¤Ѓ > 0 such that ╬│ = Рёдn (¤Ѓ), we have that ╬Х( ¤Ѓ╬│ ) = Рёд( ¤Ѓ╬│ ).
                                                                                                    2
      3. For any ╬│, ¤Ѓ > 0 such that ╬│ = on (¤Ѓ), we have that ╬Х( ¤Ѓ╬│ ) = Рёд( ¤Ѓ╬│ 2 ).

Proof. For part one, observe that hXi , ┬х╠ѓi and hXi , ╬й╠ѓi are Gaussian random variables with variance
                Рѕџ                        Рѕџ
¤Ѓ 2 and means ╬│/ 2, 0 if ╬хi = 0 and 0, ╬│/ 2 if ╬хi = 1, respectively.
                                                                  Рѕџ Thus, | hXi , ┬х╠ѓi | and | hXi , ╬й╠ѓi | are
                                                                        Рѕџ
folded-Gaussian
Рѕџ                random    variables and we  have Eh(X    i ) = Рѕњ  2╬Х(╬│/ 2¤Ѓ ) if i Рѕѕ C and Eh(X ) =
                                                                                         0              i
        Рѕџ
   2╬Х(╬│/ 2¤Ѓ) otherwise.


                                                          15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


We now write

                                             1       Рѕњt2
                           ╬Х(t) = t erf(t) Рѕњ Рѕџ (1 Рѕњ e ) = tH(t),
                                            t ¤ђ
                            Рѕџ             2
where H(t) = erf(t) Рѕњ 1/t ¤ђ(1 Рѕњ eРѕњt ).
For part two, note that H(t) is an increasing function in the range [Рѕњ1, 1] and H(t) > 0 for t > 0.
Hence, for t РЅЦ C for some positive constant C, H(t) РЅЦ H(C) = C 0 , therefore, ╬Х(t) = tH(t) РЅЦ C 0 t.
For part three when t = on (1), we use the series expansion of h(t) about t = 0 to obtain that
                               t   t3           t   t3
                       h(t) = Рѕџ Рѕњ Рѕџ + O(t5 ) РЅЦ Рѕџ Рѕњ Рѕџ = Рёд(t).
                                ¤ђ 6 ¤ђ            ¤ђ 6 ¤ђ
Hence, ╬Х(t) = th(t) = Рёд(t2 ). Putting t = ╬│/¤Ѓ completes the proof.
Fact A.5. For any x Рѕѕ [0, 1], x2 РЅц log(1 + x) РЅц x.

A.3   P ROOF OF T HEOREM 1 PART ONE

In this section we prove our first result about the fraction of misclassified points in the ab-
sence of graphical information. We begin by computing the Bayes optimal classifier for the
data model XOR-GMM (see Section 2.1). A Bayes classifier, denoted by hРѕЌ (x), maximizes
the posterior probability of observing a label given the input data x. More precisely, hРѕЌ (x) =
argmaxbРѕѕ{0,1} Pr [y = b | x = x], where x Рѕѕ Rd represents a single data point.
Lemma A.6. For some fixed ┬х, ╬й Рѕѕ Rd and ¤Ѓ 2 > 0, the Bayes optimal classifier, hРѕЌ (x) : Rd Рєњ
{0, 1} for the data model XOR-GMM(n, d, ┬х, ╬й, ¤Ѓ 2 ) is given by

                     РѕЌ                                  0 |hx, ┬хi| РЅЦ |hx, ╬йi|
                    h (x) = 1(|hx, ┬хi| < |hx, ╬йi|) =                          ,
                                                        1 |hx, ┬хi| < |hx, ╬йi|
where 1 is the indicator function.

Proof. Note that Pr [y = 0] = Pr [y = 1] = 21 . Let fx (x) denote the density function of a continu-
ous random vector x. Therefore, for any b Рѕѕ {0, 1},
                                       Pr [y = b] fx|y (x | y = b)                 1
        Pr [y = b | x = x] = P                                           =    f    (x|y=1Рѕњb)
                                                                                             .
                                     cРѕѕ{0,1} Pr [y = c] fx|y (x | y = c)
                                                                               x|y
                                                                           1+       fx|y (x|y=b)

LetРђЎs compute this for b = 0. We have
                                                            2
                                                                      !
        fx|y (x | y = 1)   cosh(hx, ╬йi /¤Ѓ 2 )            k┬хk Рѕњ ╬й 2            cosh(hx, ╬йi /¤Ѓ 2 )
                         =                    exp                         =                      ,
        fx|y (x | y = 0)   cosh(hx, ┬хi /¤Ѓ 2 )               2¤Ѓ 2              cosh(hx, ┬хi /¤Ѓ 2 )

where in the last equation we used the assumption that k┬хk = k╬йk. The decision regions are then
identified by: Pr [y = 0 | x] РЅЦ 1/2 for label 0 and Pr [y = 0 | x] < 1/2 for label 1.
                           f    (x|y=1)                                        2
                                                                cosh(hx,╬йi/¤Ѓ )
Thus, for label 0, we need fx|y
                            x|y (x|y=0)
                                        < 1, which implies that cosh(hx,┬хi/¤Ѓ 2 ) РЅц 1. Now we note that

cosh(x) РЅц cosh(y) =РЄњ |x| РЅц |y| for all x, y Рѕѕ R, hence, we have |hx, ┬хi| РЅЦ |hx, ╬йi|. Similarly,
we have the complementary condition for label 1.

Next, we design a two-layer and a three-layer network and show that for a particular choice of
parameters ╬И = (W(l) , b(l) ) for l Рѕѕ {1, 2} for the two-layer case and l Рѕѕ {1, 2, 3} for the three-layer
case, the networks realize the optimal classifier described in Lemma A.6.
Proposition A.7. Consider two-layer and three-layer networks of the form described in Section 2.2,
without biases (i.e., b(l) = 0 for all layers l), for parameters W(l) and some R Рѕѕ R+ as follows.

      1. For the two-layer network,
                                                                                              >
                   W(1) = R (┬х╠ѓ Рѕњ┬х╠ѓ ╬й╠ѓ          Рѕњ╬й╠ѓ) ,          W(2) = (Рѕњ1         Рѕњ1   1   1) .


                                                   16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


      2. For the three-layer network,
                                                              Рѕњ1 1
                                                                №БФ  №БХ

                                                            №БгРѕњ1 1 №Би                                     1
             W(1) = R (┬х╠ѓ Рѕњ┬х╠ѓ ╬й╠ѓ           Рѕњ╬й╠ѓ) ,    W(2) = №БГ        ,               W(3)   =               .
                                                              1 Рѕњ1№БИ                                    Рѕњ1
                                                              1 Рѕњ1

Then for any ¤Ѓ > 0, the defined networks realize the Bayes optimal classifier for the data model
XOR-GMM(n, d, ┬х, ╬й, ¤Ѓ 2 ).

Proof. Note that the output of the two-layer network is ¤Ћ([XW(1) ]+ W(2) ), which is interpreted as
the probability with which the network believes that the input is in the class with label 1. The final
prediction for the class label is thus assigned to be 1 if the output is РЅЦ 0.5, and 0 otherwise. For each
i Рѕѕ [n], we have that the output of the network on data point i is
              y╠ѓi = ¤Ћ(R(Рѕњ[hXi , ┬х╠ѓi]+ Рѕњ [Рѕњ hXi , ┬х╠ѓi]+ + [hXi , ╬й╠ѓi]+ + [Рѕњ hXi , ╬й╠ѓi]+ ))
                  = ¤Ћ((R(|hXi , ╬й╠ѓi| Рѕњ |hXi , ┬х╠ѓi|)),
where we used the fact that [t]+ + [Рѕњt]+ = |t| for all t Рѕѕ R. Similarly, for the three-layer network,
the output is ¤Ћ([[XW(1) ]+ W(2) ]+ W(3) ). So we have for each i Рѕѕ [n] that

          y╠ѓi = ¤Ћ R [Рѕњ[hXi , ┬х╠ѓi]+ Рѕњ [Рѕњ hXi , ┬х╠ѓi]+ + [hXi , ╬й╠ѓi]+ + [Рѕњ hXi , ╬й╠ѓi]+ ]+
                                                                                                   !

                         Рѕњ [[hXi , ┬х╠ѓi]+ + [Рѕњ hXi , ┬х╠ѓi]+ Рѕњ [hXi , ╬й╠ѓi]+ Рѕњ [Рѕњ hXi , ╬й╠ѓi]+ ]+

             = ¤Ћ (R([|hXi , ╬й╠ѓi| Рѕњ |hXi , ┬х╠ѓi|]+ Рѕњ [|hXi , ┬х╠ѓi| Рѕњ |hXi , ╬й╠ѓi|]+ ))
             = ¤Ћ (R(|hXi , ╬й╠ѓi| Рѕњ |hXi , ┬х╠ѓi|)) ,
where in the last equation we used the fact that [t]+ Рѕњ [Рѕњt]+ = t for all t Рѕѕ R.
The final prediction is then obtained by considering the maximum posterior probability among the
class labels 0 and 1, and thus,
              pred(Xi ) = 1(R |hXi , ┬х╠ѓi| < R |hXi , ╬й╠ѓi|) = 1(|hXi , ┬хi| < |hXi , ╬йi|),
which matches the Bayes classifier in Lemma A.6.

We now restate the relevant theorem below for convenience.
Theorem (Restatement of part one of Theorem 1). Let X Рѕѕ Rn├Ќd Рѕ╝ XOR-GMM(n, d, ┬х, ╬й, ¤Ѓ 2 ).
Assume that k┬х Рѕњ ╬йk2 РЅц K¤Ѓ and let h(x) : Rd Рєњ {0, 1} be any binary classifier. Then for
                                                            2
any K > 0 and any   Рѕѕ (0, 1), at least a fraction 2╬дc (K/2) Рѕњ O(nРѕњ /2 ) of all data points are
                                                        1Рѕњ
misclassified by h with probability at least 1 Рѕњ exp(Рѕњ2n ).

Proof. Recall from Lemma A.6 that for successful classification, we require for every i Рѕѕ [n],
                                   |hXi , ┬хi| РЅЦ |hXi , ╬йi|       i Рѕѕ C0 ,
                                   |hXi , ┬хi| < |hXi , ╬йi|       i Рѕѕ C1 .
LetРђЎs try to upper bound the probability of the above event, i.e., the probability that the data is
classifiable. We consider only class C0 , since the analysis for C1 is symmetric and similar. For
i Рѕѕ C0 , we can write Xi = ┬х + ¤Ѓgi , where gi Рѕ╝ N (0, I). Recall that ╬│ = k┬х Рѕњ ╬йk2 and
        Рѕџ
╬│ 0 = ╬│/ 2 = k┬хk2 = k╬йk2 . Then we have for any fixed i Рѕѕ C0 that
    Pr [|hXi , ┬хi| РЅЦ |hXi , ╬йi|] = Pr [|╬│ 0 + ¤Ѓ hgi , ┬х╠ѓi| РЅЦ |¤Ѓ hgi , ╬й╠ѓi|]
                                  РЅц Pr [╬│ 0 + ¤Ѓ |hgi , ┬х╠ѓi| РЅЦ ¤Ѓ |hgi , ╬й╠ѓi|]   (by triangle inequality)
                                                                       Рѕџ
                                  РЅц Pr [|hgi , ╬й╠ѓi| Рѕњ |hgi , ┬х╠ѓi| РЅц K/ 2]      (using ╬│ РЅц K¤Ѓ).


                                                     17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


We now define random variablesРѕџZ1 = hgi , ╬й╠ѓi and Z2 = hgi , ┬х╠ѓi and note that Z1 , Z2 Рѕ╝ N (0, 1)
and E[Z1 Z2 ] = 0. Let K 0 = K/ 2. We now have
   Pr [|Z1 | Рѕњ |Z2 | РЅц K 0 ] = 4Pr [Z1 Рѕњ Z2 РЅц K 0 , Z1 , Z2 РЅЦ 0]
                                Z Рѕъ
                             =4      Pr [0 РЅц Z1 РЅц z + K 0 ] ¤є(z)dz
                                Z0 Рѕъ                                 Z Рѕъ
                                                     1
                             =4        ╬д(z + K 0 ) Рѕњ      ¤є(z)dz = 4     ╬д(z + K 0 ) ¤є(z)dz Рѕњ 1
                                 0                   2                0
                           = 2╬д(K/2) + 2╬д(K/2)╬дc (K/2) Рѕњ 1 = 1 Рѕњ 2╬дc (K/2)2 .
To evaluate the integral above, we used (Owen, 1980, Table 1:10,010.6 and Table 2:2.3). Thus, the
probability that a point i Рѕѕ C0 is misclassified is lower bounded as follows
                                                                   2
                            Pr [Xi is misclassified] РЅЦ 2╬дc (K/2) = ¤ёK .
Note that this is a decreasing function of K, implying that the probability of misclassification
decreases as we increase the distance between the means, and is maximum for K = 0.
Define M (n) for a fixed K to be the fraction of misclassified nodes in C0 . Define xi to be the
indicator random variable 1(XiPis misclassified). Then xi are Bernoulli random variables with mean
at least ¤ёK , and EM (n) = n2 iРѕѕC0 Exi РЅЦ ¤ёK . Using HoeffdingРђЎs inequality (Vershynin, 2018,
Theorem 2.2.6), we have that for any t > 0,
               Pr [M (n) РЅЦ ¤ёK Рѕњ t] РЅЦ Pr [M (n) РЅЦ EM (n) Рѕњ t] РЅЦ 1 Рѕњ exp(Рѕњnt2 ).
Choosing t = nРѕњ /2 for any   Рѕѕ (0, 1) yields
                           h                 i
                        Pr M (n) РЅЦ ¤ёK Рѕњ nРѕњ /2 РЅЦ 1 Рѕњ exp(Рѕњn1Рѕњ  ).

A.4    P ROOF OF T HEOREM 1 PART TWO

In this section, we show that in the positive regime (sufficiently large distance between the means),
there exists a two-layer MLP that obtains an arbitrarily small loss, and hence, successfully classifies a
sample drawn from the XOR-GMM model with overwhelming probability.
Theorem (Restatement of part two of Theorem 1). Let X Рѕѕ Rn├Ќd Рѕ╝ XOR-GMM(n, d, ┬х, ╬й, ¤Ѓ 2 ).
                                                                                    1
For any   > 0, if the distance between the means is k┬х Рѕњ ╬йk2 = Рёд(¤Ѓ(log n) 2 +  ), then for any
                                           Рѕњc
c > 0, with probability at least 1 Рѕњ O(n ), the two-layer and three-layer networks described in
Proposition A.7 classify all data points, and obtain a cross-entropy loss given by
                                                                Рѕџ

                                            R

                       `╬И (X) = C exp Рѕњ Рѕџ k┬х Рѕњ ╬йk2 1 ┬▒ c/(log n)                  ,
                                              2
where C Рѕѕ [1/2, 1] is an absolute constant.

Proof. Consider the two-layer and three-layer MLPs described in Proposition A.7, for which we
have y╠ѓi = ¤Ћ (R(|hXi , ╬й╠ѓi| Рѕњ |hXi , ┬х╠ѓi|)). We now look at the loss for a single data point Xi ,
                  `i (X, ╬И) = Рѕњyi log(y╠ѓi ) Рѕњ (1 Рѕњ yi ) log(1 Рѕњ y╠ѓi )

                            = log 1 + exp (1 Рѕњ 2yi )R(|hXi , ╬й╠ѓi| Рѕњ |hXi , ┬х╠ѓi|) .

Note that hXi Рѕњ EXi , ┬х╠ѓi and hXi Рѕњ EXi , ╬й╠ѓi are mean 0 Gaussian random variables with variance
¤Ѓ 2 . So for any fixed i Рѕѕ [n] and mc Рѕѕ {┬х, ╬й}, we use (Vershynin, 2018, Proposition 2.1.2) to obtain
                                                                       t2

                                                            ¤Ѓ
                         Pr [| hXi Рѕњ EXi , m╠ѓc i | > t] РЅц Рѕџ exp Рѕњ 2 .
                                                          t 2¤ђ        2¤Ѓ
Then by a union bound over all i Рѕѕ [n] and mc Рѕѕ {┬х, ╬й}, we have that
                                                                           r
                                                                                       t2

                                                                  n¤Ѓ           2
       Pr [| hXi Рѕњ EXi , m╠ѓc i | РЅц t Рѕђi Рѕѕ [n], mc Рѕѕ {┬х, ╬й}] РЅЦ 1 Рѕњ                exp Рѕњ 2 .
                                                                   t           ¤ђ      2¤Ѓ

                                                  18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023



                    p
We now set t = ¤Ѓ        2(c + 1) log n for any large constant c > 0. We now have with probability at
              Рѕњc
least 1 Рѕњ Рѕџ n             that
             ¤ђ(c+1) log n
                                     p                                            p
      hXi , ┬х╠ѓi = hEXi , ┬х╠ѓi ┬▒ O(¤Ѓ    c log n),    hXi , ╬й╠ѓi = hEXi , ╬й╠ѓi ┬▒ O(¤Ѓ    c log n) Рѕђi Рѕѕ [n].
Thus, we can write
                          r                                            r
                                c                                          c
  hXi , ┬х╠ѓi = ╬│ 0 1 ┬▒ O                ,          hXi , ╬й╠ѓi = ╬│ 0 ┬и O                      Рѕђi Рѕѕ C0 ,    (2)
                              log n                                      log n
                       r                                                  r
                           c                                                    c
  hXi , ┬х╠ѓi = ╬│ 0 ┬и O            ,                hXi , ╬й╠ѓi = ╬│ 0 1 ┬▒ O                    Рѕђi Рѕѕ C1 .    (3)
                         log n                                                log n
Using Eqs. (2) and (3) in the expression for the loss, we obtain for all i Рѕѕ [n],
                           `i (X, ╬И) = log(1 + exp(РѕњR╬│ 0 (1 ┬▒ on (1)))),
                               p
where the error term on (1) = c/log n. The total loss is then given by
                              1X
                   `╬И (X) =         `i (X, ╬И) = log(1 + exp(РѕњR╬│ 0 (1 + on (1)))).
                              n
                                            t
Next, Fact A.5 implies that for t < 0, e /2 РЅц log(1 + et ) РЅц et , hence, we have that there exists a
constant C Рѕѕ [1/2, 1] such that
                                   `╬И (X) = C exp (РѕњR╬│ 0 (1 + on (1)))) .
Note that by scaling the optimality constraint R, the loss can go arbitrarily close to 0.

A.5    G RAPH CONVOLUTION IN THE FIRST LAYER

In this section, we show precisely why a graph convolution operation in the first layer is detrimental
to the classification task.
Proposition A.8. Fix a positive integer d > 0, ¤Ѓ Рѕѕ R+ and ┬х, ╬й Рѕѕ Rd . Let (A, X) Рѕ╝
XOR-CSBM(n, d, ┬х, ╬й, ¤Ѓ 2 , p, q). Define X╠Ѓ to be the transformed data after applying a graph convo-
                                                                        2
lution on X, i.e., X╠Ѓ = DРѕњ1 AX. Then in the regime where p, q = Рёд( logn n ), with probability at least
1 Рѕњ 1/poly(n) we have that
                                          p┬х + q╬й
                                       №Б▒
                                       №Б▓ 2(p + q) ┬и on (1) i Рѕѕ C0
                                       №Б┤
                                       №Б┤
                               EX╠Ѓi =                                 .
                                          p╬й + q┬х
                                                    ┬и o   (1) i Рѕѕ C
                                       №Б┤
                                                        n           1
                                       №Б┤
                                          2(p + q)
                                       №Б│

                                                                       pРѕњq
Hence, the distance between the means of the convolved data, given by 2(p+q) k┬х Рѕњ ╬йk2 ┬и on (1)
diminishes to 0 for n Рєњ Рѕъ.

Proof. Fix ┬х, ╬й Рѕѕ Rd and define the following sets:
               CРѕњ┬х = {i | ╬хi = 0, ╬иi = 0},                   C┬х = {i | ╬хi = 0, ╬иi = 1},
               CРѕњ╬й = {i | ╬хi = 1, ╬иi = 0},                   C╬й = {i | ╬хi = 1, ╬иi = 1}.

Denote X╠Ѓ = DРѕњ1 AX and note that for any i Рѕѕ [n], the row vector
           1     X                1     X
  X╠Ѓi =               aij Xj =               aij (EXj + ¤Ѓgj )
         deg(i)                 deg(i)
                jРѕѕ[n]                  jРѕѕ[n]
                №Б« №БФ                         №БХ      №БФ                   №БХ              №Б╣
           1 №Б░ №БГX                  X                  X          X           X
      =           ┬х         aij Рѕњ       aij №БИ + ╬й №БГ      aij Рѕњ     aij №БИ + ¤Ѓ   aij gj №Б╗ ,
         deg(i)
                            jРѕѕC┬х       jРѕѕCРѕњ┬х              jРѕѕC╬й        jРѕѕCРѕњ╬й              jРѕѕ[n]

where we used the fact that Xj = (2╬иj Рѕњ 1)((1 Рѕњ ╬хj )┬х + ╬хj ╬й + ¤Ѓgj ) for a set of iid Gaussian random
vectors gj Рѕ╝ N (0, Id ).


                                                    19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Note that since  i , ╬иi are Bernoulli random variables, using the Chernoff bound (Vershynin, 2018,
Section 2), we have that with probability at least 1 Рѕњ 1/poly(n),
                                                             n
                           |CРѕњ┬х | = |C┬х | = |CРѕњ╬й | = |C╬й | = (1 ┬▒ on (1)).
                                                             4
We now use an argument similar to Proposition A.1 to obtain that for any c > 0, with probability at
least 1 Рѕњ O(nРѕњc ), the following holds for all i Рѕѕ [n]:
                        №БФ                        №БХ

                                                          (1 Рѕњ ╬хi )p + ╬хi q
                                                                            r
                  1 №БГ      X          X                                         c
                               aij Рѕњ         aij №БИ = O                                ,
              deg(i)                                          2(p + q)        log n
                          jРѕѕC┬х       jРѕѕCРѕњ┬х
                        №БФ                        №БХ

                                                          ╬хi p + (1 Рѕњ ╬хi )q
                                                                            r
                   1 №БГ     X           X                                        c
                               aij Рѕњ         aij №БИ = O                                .
              deg(i)                                          2(p + q)        log n
                            jРѕѕC╬й        jРѕѕCРѕњ╬й

Hence, we have that for all i Рѕѕ [n],
                                                                           r
                        (1 Рѕњ ╬хi )p + ╬хi q         ╬хi p + (1 Рѕњ ╬хi )q            c
           EX╠Ѓi =                           ┬х+                       ╬й ┬иO
                            2(p + q)                  2(p + q)               log n
                      p┬х   +  q╬й
                    №Б▒
                    №Б┤
                    №Б┤             ┬и on (1) i Рѕѕ C0
                    №Б▓  2(p + q)
                 =
                      p╬й + q┬х
                                  ┬и on (1) i Рѕѕ C1
                    №Б┤
                    №Б┤
                       2(p + q)
                    №Б│

Using the above result, we obtain the distance between the means, which is of the order on (╬│) and
thus, diminishes to 0 as n Рєњ Рѕъ.

A.6   P ROOF OF T HEOREM 2 PART ONE

We begin by computing the output of the network when one graph convolution is applied at any layer
other than the first.
Lemma A.9. Let h(x) = | hx, ╬й╠ѓi | Рѕњ | hx, ┬х╠ѓi | for any x Рѕѕ Rd . Consider the two-layer and three-
layer networks in Proposition A.7 where the weight parameter of the last layer, W (L) , is scaled by a
factor of ╬Й = sgn(p Рѕњ q). If a graph convolution is added to these networks in either the second or the
third layer then for a sample (A, X) Рѕ╝ XOR-CSBM(n, d, ┬х, ╬й, ¤Ѓ 2 , p, q), the output of the networks
for a point i Рѕѕ [n] is
                                             №БФ                                №БХ
                                (L)            R  sgn(p Рѕњ  q)  X
                       y╠ѓi = ¤Ћ(fi (X)) = ¤Ћ №БГ                        aij h(Xj )№БИ .
                                                   deg(i)
                                                              jРѕѕ[n]


Proof. The networks with scaled parameters are given as follows.

      1. For the two-layer network,
                                                                                               >
                      W(1) = R (┬х╠ѓ Рѕњ┬х╠ѓ ╬й╠ѓ       Рѕњ╬й╠ѓ) ,      W(2) = ╬Й (Рѕњ1 Рѕњ1              1    1) .

      2. For the three-layer network,
                                                          Рѕњ1           1
                                                         №БФ               №БХ

                (1)                                  (2) №БгРѕњ1           1№Би          (3)           1
            W         = R╬Й (┬х╠ѓ Рѕњ┬х╠ѓ ╬й╠ѓ     Рѕњ╬й╠ѓ) ,    W =№БГ                   ,   W             =╬Й      .
                                                           1          Рѕњ1№БИ                       Рѕњ1
                                                           1          Рѕњ1

When a graph convolution is applied at the second layer of this two-layer MLP, the output of the last
                          (2)
layer for data (A, X) is fi (X) = DРѕњ1 A[XW(1) ]+ W(2) . Then we have
            (2)         R╬Й X                                            R╬Й X
          fi (X) =               aij (| hXj , ╬й╠ѓi | Рѕњ | hXj , ┬х╠ѓi |) =          aij h(Xj ).
                     deg(i)                                            deg(i)
                               jРѕѕ[n]                                           jРѕѕ[n]



                                                    20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Similarly, when the graph convolution is applied at the second layer of the three-layer MLP, the
           (3)
output is fi (X) = [DРѕњ1 A[XW(1) ]+ W(2) ]+ W(3) , and we have
                     №БФ№Б«           №Б╣   №Б«              №Б╣ №БХ
  (3)          R╬Й №БГ№Б░ X                   X                  R╬Й X
 fi (X) =               aij h(Xj )№Б╗ Рѕњ №Б░Рѕњ   aij h(Xj )№Б╗ №БИ =        aij h(Xj ).
              deg(i)                                       deg(i)
                          jРѕѕ[n]                              jРѕѕ[n]                            jРѕѕ[n]
                                                +                             +

Finally, when the graph convolution is applied at the third layer of the three-layer MLP, the output is
 (3)
fi (X) = DРѕњ1 A[[XW(1) ]+ W(2) ]+ W(3) , and we have

       (3)         R╬Й X
      fi (X) =           aij [| hXj , ╬й╠ѓi | Рѕњ | hXj , ┬х╠ѓi |]+ Рѕњ [| hXj , ┬х╠ѓi | Рѕњ | hXj , ╬й╠ѓi |]+
                  deg(i)
                          jРѕѕ[n]
                   R    X                                        R╬Й X
               =          aij (| hXj , ╬й╠ѓi | Рѕњ | hXj , ┬х╠ѓi |) =        aij h(Xj ).
                 deg(i)                                         deg(i)
                          jРѕѕ[n]                                                    jРѕѕ[n]


Therefore, in all cases where we have a single graph convolution, the output of the last layer is

                                  (L)           R sgn(p Рѕњ q) X
                               fi       (X) =                  aij h(Xj ),
                                                   deg(i)
                                                                     jРѕѕ[n]


where L Рѕѕ {2, 3} is the number of layers.

                                                                                2
Theorem (Restatement of part one of Theorem 2). Let (A, X) Рѕ╝ XOR-CSBM(n,
                                                              q       d, ┬х, ╬й, ¤Ѓ , p, q).
                          2
Assume that p, q = Рёд( logn n ), and it holds that ╬Њ(p, q)╬Х(╬│/2¤Ѓ) = ¤Ѕ                log n
                                                                                   n(p+q)   , then for any c > 0,
with probability at least 1 Рѕњ O(nРѕњc ), the networks equipped with a graph convolution in the second
or the third layer perfectly classify the data, and obtain the following loss:
                                                                       p
                    `╬И (A, X) = C 0 exp РѕњC¤ЃR╬Њ(p, q)╬Х(╬│/2¤Ѓ)(1 ┬▒ c/log n) ,

where C > 0 and C 0 Рѕѕ [1/2, 1] are constants and R is the constraint from Eq. (1).


                                                                                                      (L)
Proof. First, we analyze the output conditioned on the adjacency matrix A. Note that R1 fi (X) in
                                        q
                                             2
Lemma A.9 is Lipschitz with constant deg(i)     , and h(Xj ) are mutually independent for j Рѕѕ [n].
Therefore, by Gaussian concentration (Vershynin, 2018, Theorem 5.2.2) we have that for a fixed
i Рѕѕ [n],
                                                                    2
                     1 (L)             (L)                            ╬┤ deg(i)
               Pr      |fi (X) Рѕњ E[fi (X)]| > ╬┤ | A РЅц 2 exp Рѕњ                     .
                     R                                                   4¤Ѓ 2

We refer to the event from Proposition A.1 as B and define Q(t) to be the event that
                                (L)                 (L)
                              |fi     (X) Рѕњ E[fi          (X)]| РЅц t for all i Рѕѕ [n].

Then we can write

                         Pr [Q(t)c ] = Pr [Q(t)c РѕЕ B] + Pr [Q(t)c РѕЕ B c ]
                                               2
                                                  t n(p + q)
                                     РЅц 2n exp Рѕњ                + Pr [B c ]
                                                     8¤Ѓ 2
                                               2
                                                  t n(p + q)
                                     РЅц 2n exp Рѕњ                + 2nРѕњc .
                                                     8¤Ѓ 2


                                                           21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023



                                                                                          q
                                        |pРѕњq|
Let ╬Й = sgn(p Рѕњ q) and note that ╬Й(pРѕњq)
                                  p+q = p+q = ╬Њ(p, q). We now choose t = 2¤Ѓ
                                                                                              2(c+1) log n
                                                                                                n(p+q)     to
obtain that with probability at least 1 Рѕњ 4nРѕњc , the following holds for all i Рѕѕ [n]:
                                         s            !
 1 (L)             (L)                       c log n
  f (X) = E[fi (X)]/¤Ѓ ┬▒ O R
¤Ѓ i                                         n(p + q)
                                                      s           !
                   R╬Й     X                               c log n
            =                  aij Eh(Xj ) ┬▒ O R
               ¤Ѓ deg(i)                                  n(p + q)
                         jРѕѕ[n]
               Рѕџ
                               №БФ                       №БХ          s            !
                  2R╬Й╬Х(╬│/2¤Ѓ) №БГ X              X                      c log n
            =                          aij Рѕњ       aij №БИ ┬▒ O R                        (Lemma A.4)
                  ¤Ѓ deg(i)                                          n(p + q)
                                 jРѕѕC1        jРѕѕC0
                                                                    s            !
               Рѕџ                                                        c log n
            = 2(2╬хi Рѕњ 1)R╬Њ(p, q)╬Х( /2¤Ѓ)(1 ┬▒ on (1)) ┬▒ O R
                                         ╬│                                            (Proposition A.1)
                                                                       n(p + q)
               Рѕџ
            = 2(2╬хi Рѕњ 1)R╬Њ(p, q)╬Х(╬│/2¤Ѓ)(1 ┬▒ on (1)),
                                                                               q
                                                                                    log n
where in the last equation we used the assumption that ╬Њ(p, q)╬Х(╬│/2¤Ѓ) = ¤Ѕ          n(p+q) . Overall, we
obtain that with probability at least 1 Рѕњ 4nРѕњc ,
                    (L)
                  fi      (X) = (2╬хi Рѕњ 1)C¤ЃR╬Њ(p, q)╬Х(╬│/2¤Ѓ)(1 ┬▒ on (1)), for all i Рѕѕ [n].
Recall that the loss for node i is given by
                                        (L)
      (i)
   `╬И (A, X) = log(1 + e(1Рѕњ2╬хi )fi (X) ) = log (1 + exp (РѕњC¤ЃR╬Њ(p, q)╬Х(╬│/2¤Ѓ)(1 ┬▒ on (1)))) .
                                       (i)
The total loss is given by n1 iРѕѕ[n] `╬И (A, X). Next, Fact A.5 implies that for any t < 0, e /2 РЅц
                              P                                                            t


log(1 + et ) РЅц et , hence, we have for some C 0 Рѕѕ [1/2, 1] that
                           `╬И (A, X) = C 0 exp (РѕњC¤ЃR╬Њ(p, q)╬Х(╬│/2¤Ѓ)(1 ┬▒ on (1))) .

A.7         P ROOF OF T HEOREM 2 PART TWO

We begin by computing the output of the networks constructed in Proposition A.7 when two graph
convolutions are placed among any layer in the networks other than the first.
Lemma A.10. Let h(x) : Rd Рєњ R = | hx, ╬й╠ѓi | Рѕњ | hx, ┬х╠ѓi |. Consider the networks constructed in
Proposition A.7 equipped with two graph convolutions in the following combinations:

        1. Both convolutions in the second layer of the two-layer network.
        2. Both convolutions in the second layer of the three-layer network.
        3. One convolution in the second layer and one in the third layer of the three-layer network.
        4. Both convolutions in the third layer of the three-layer network.

Then for a sample (A, X) Рѕ╝ XOR-CSBM(n, d, ┬х, ╬й, ¤Ѓ 2 , p, q), the output of the networks in all the
above described combinations for a point i Рѕѕ [n] is
                               №БФ                         №БХ
                   (L)              R      X                              X aik ajk
          y╠ѓi = ¤Ћ(fi (X)) = ¤Ћ №БГ                ¤ёij h(Xj )№БИ , where ¤ёij =              .
                                  deg(i)                                       deg(k)
                                                 jРѕѕ[n]                            kРѕѕ[n]


Proof. For the two-layer network, the output of the last layer when both convolutions are at the
                          (2)
second layer is given by fi (X) = (DРѕњ1 A)2 [XW(1) ]+ W(2) . Then we have
                (2)          R   X X aij ajk                   R    X
              fi (X) =                            h(Xk ) =              ¤ёij h(Xj ).
                          deg(i)          deg(j)             deg(i)
                                       jРѕѕ[n] kРѕѕ[n]                        jРѕѕ[n]



                                                         22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Next, for the three-layer network, the output of the last layer when both convolutions are at the second
                    (3)
layer is given by fi (X) = [(DРѕњ1 A)2 [XW(1) ]+ W(2) ]+ W(3) , hence, we have
                      №БФ№Б«                                  №Б╣     №Б«                                  №Б╣ №БХ
  (3)            R         X     a ij
                                         X                          X      aij
                                                                                  X
 fi (X) =             №БГ№Б░                     ajk h(Xk )№Б╗ Рѕњ №Б░Рѕњ                         ajk h(Xk )№Б╗ №БИ
              deg(i)           deg(j)                                    deg(j)
                           jРѕѕ[n]             kРѕѕ[n]                            jРѕѕ[n]                kРѕѕ[n]
                                                                   +                                                   +
              R       X       aij      X
          =                                   ajk h(Xk )          (using [t]+ Рѕњ [Рѕњt]+ = t for any t Рѕѕ R)
            deg(i)           deg(j)
                     jРѕѕ[n]            kРѕѕ[n]
              R    X
          =          ¤ёij h(Xj ).
            deg(i)
                     jРѕѕ[n]


Similarly, the output of the last layer when one convolution is at the second layer and the other one is
                                (3)
at the third layer is given by fi (X) = DРѕњ1 A[DРѕњ1 A[XW(1) ]+ W(2) ]+ W(3) , hence, we have
                                        №БФ№Б«                №Б╣      №Б«                    №Б╣ №БХ
     (3)            R     X      a ij
                                           X                           X
    fi (X) =                            №БГ№Б░      ajk h(Xk )№Б╗ Рѕњ №Б░Рѕњ           ajk h(Xk )№Б╗ №БИ
                 deg(i)        deg(j)
                          jРѕѕ[n]                kРѕѕ[n]                               kРѕѕ[n]
                                                                       +                                   +
                R         X        aij      X
            =                                       ajk h(Xk )         (using [t]+ Рѕњ [Рѕњt]+ = t for any t Рѕѕ R)
              deg(i)              deg(j)
                          jРѕѕ[n]             kРѕѕ[n]
                  R    X
            =            ¤ёij h(Xj ).
                deg(i)
                          jРѕѕ[n]


                                                                                                               (3)
Finally, the output of the last layer when both convolutions are at the third layer is given by fi (X) =
(DРѕњ1 A)2 [[XW(1) ]+ W(2) ]+ W(3) , hence, we have
                                                 №БФ                                          №БХ
               (3)           R      X     a ij
                                                   X
             fi (X) =                            №БГ      ajk [h(Xk )]+ Рѕњ [Рѕњh(Xk )]+ №БИ
                          deg(i)        deg(j)
                                    jРѕѕ[n]                kРѕѕ[n]
                            R        X       aij       X                        R    X
                      =                                        ajk h(Xk ) =            ¤ёij h(Xj ).
                          deg(i)            deg(j)                            deg(i)
                                    jРѕѕ[n]              kРѕѕ[n]                               jРѕѕ[n]

Hence, the output for two graph convolutions is the same for any combination of the placement of
convolutions, as long as no convolution is placed at the first layer.

We are now ready to prove the positive result for two convolutions.
Theorem (Restatement of part two of Theorem 2). Let     (A, X) Рѕ╝ XOR-CSBM(n, d, ┬х, ╬й, ¤Ѓ 2 , p, q).
                                                        q
Assume that p, q = Рёд( log
                       Рѕџ n ) and ╬Њ(p, q)2 ╬Х(╬│/2¤Ѓ ) = ¤Ѕ
                         n
                                                          log n
                                                            n   . Then for any c > 0, with probabil-
ity at least 1 Рѕњ O(nРѕњc ), the networks with any combination of two graph convolutions in the second
and/or the third layers perfectly classify the data, and obtain the following loss:
                                                                        p
                    `╬И (A, X) = C 0 exp РѕњC¤ЃR╬Њ(p, q)2 ╬Х(╬│/¤Ѓ)(1 ┬▒ c/log n) ,

where C > 0 and C 0 Рѕѕ [1/2, 1] are constants and R is the constraint from Eq. (1).

                                                                                                               (L)
Proof. The proof strategy is similar to that of part one of the theorem. Note that R1 fi                             (X) in
Lemma A.10 is Lipschitz with constant
                                                 v
                              1 (L)                    2
                                                 u           X
                                fi (X)        РЅцt
                                                 u                 2.
                                                                 ¤ёij
                              R           Lip       deg(i)2
                                                                           jРѕѕ[n]



                                                          23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Since h(Xj ) are mutually independent for j Рѕѕ [n], by Gaussian concentration (Vershynin, 2018,
Theorem 5.2.2) we have that for a fixed i Рѕѕ [n],
                                                                                  !
                                                                  ╬┤ 2 deg(i)2

                 1 (L)              (L)
           Pr     |f (X) Рѕњ E[fi (X)]| > ╬┤ | A РЅц 2 exp Рѕњ 2 P                         .
                 R i                                            4¤Ѓ             2
                                                                        jРѕѕ[n] ¤ёij

We refer to the event from Proposition A.2 as B. Note that since the graph density assumption
                        2
is stronger than Рёд( logn n ), Proposition A.1 trivially holds in this regime, hence, the degrees also
concentrate strongly around Рѕє = n2 (p + q). On event B, we have that
                  №БФ                 №БХ2               №БФ                №БХ2
              X X aik ajk
                                    №БИ = 1
  X                                             X       X
        2
       ¤ёij =      №БГ                                  №БГ        aik ajk №БИ (1 ┬▒ on (1))
                          deg(k)           Рѕє2
 jРѕѕ[n]       jРѕѕ[n] kРѕѕ[n]                       jРѕѕ[n] kРѕѕ[n]
                 №БФ                                       №БХ
              1    X                   X
           = 2№БГ        |Ni РѕЕ Nj |2 +        |Ni РѕЕ Nj |2 №БИ (1 ┬▒ on (1))
             Рѕє     jРѕ╝i                 j i
                 №БФ                                        №БХ
              1 №БГX   n 2               2 X
                                                        2
           = 2              (p + q 2 ) +         (npq) №БИ (1 ┬▒ on (1))         (using Proposition A.2)
             Рѕє     jРѕ╝i
                          2                  j i
                    2
                                                                     n3

               n    n 2          2 2     2 2 2
                                                                          p4 + q 4 + 6p2 q 2 (1 ┬▒ on (1)).

           =           (p   +  q  )  + n  p  q    (1 ┬▒  o n (1)) =
             2Рѕє2 4                                                  8Рѕє2
Therefore, under this event we have that
                                 v                          s
             1 (L)                     2                       4(p4 + q 4 + 6p2 q 2 )
                                 u             X
               fi (X)         РЅцt
                                 u
                                                   ¤ё 2 =                              (1 ┬▒ on (1)).
                                                     ij
             R            Lip        deg(i)2                        n(p + q)4
                                                 jРѕѕ[n]

                               4       4   2 2
                                                                                               (L)
Note that K = K(p, q) = 4(p +q +6p q )
                            (p+q)4     РЅц 4. We now define Q(t) to be the event that |fi              (X) Рѕњ
   (L)
E[fi (X)]| РЅц t for all i Рѕѕ [n]. Then we have
                                                                           nt2

                  c                c                      c
        Pr [Q(t) ] = Pr [Q(t) РѕЕ B] + Pr [Q(t) РѕЕ B ] РЅц 2n exp Рѕњc
                                                                                    + 2nРѕњc .
                                                                         2K 2 ¤Ѓ 2
                        q
We now choose t = ¤Ѓ 2K(c+1)n
                              log n
                                    to obtain that with probability at least 1 Рѕњ 4nРѕњc , the following
holds for all i Рѕѕ [n]:
                                    r       !                                          r         !
   (L)              (L)               log n         R      X                               log n
  fi (X) = E[fi (X)] ┬▒ O R¤Ѓ                    =               ¤ёij Eh(Xj ) ┬▒ O R¤Ѓ                  .
                                        n         deg(i)                                     n
                                                                  jРѕѕ[n]

Note that we have
                                       Рѕџ
                                                №БФ                     №БХ
        1    X                         2╬Х(╬│/2¤Ѓ) №БГ X           X
               ¤ёij Eh(Xj ) =                           ¤ёij Рѕњ      ¤ёij №БИ      (using Lemma A.4)
      deg(i)                           deg(i)
              jРѕѕ[n]                              jРѕѕC1        jРѕѕC0
                                     Рѕџ
                                                №БФ                                         №БХ
                                       2╬Х(╬│/2¤Ѓ) №БГ X X aik ajk            X X aik ajk
                                   =                                  Рѕњ                   №БИ
                                       deg(i)                deg(k)                deg(k)
                                                 jРѕѕC1 kРѕѕ[n]             jРѕѕC0 kРѕѕ[n]
                                     Рѕџ
                                                №БФ               №БФ                      №БХ№БХ
                                       2╬Х(╬│/2¤Ѓ) №БГ X aik №БГ X                    X
                                   =                                    ajk Рѕњ      ajk №БИ№БИ
                                       deg(i)          deg(k)
                                                 kРѕѕ[n]            jРѕѕC1        jРѕѕC0
                                     Рѕџ                                        !
                                       2╬Х(╬│/2¤Ѓ)╬Њ(p, q) X              X
                                   =                          aik Рѕњ       aik (1 + on (1))
                                          deg(i)
                                                         kРѕѕC1        kРѕѕC0
                                     Рѕџ
                                   = 2╬Х(╬│/2¤Ѓ)╬Њ(p, q)2 (1 + on (1)).


                                                         24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


In the last two equations above, we used Proposition A.1 to replace, respectively,
                          №БФ                     №БХ
                     1       X          X
                          №БГ      akj Рѕњ      akj №БИ = (2╬хk Рѕњ 1)╬Њ(p, q)(1 + on (1)),
                  deg(k)
                            jРѕѕC1       jРѕѕC0
                           №БФ                    №БХ
                      1 №БГX              X
                                 aik Рѕњ      aik №БИ = (2╬хk Рѕњ 1)╬Њ(p, q)(1 + on (1)).
                   deg(i)
                                jРѕѕC1       jРѕѕC0

Therefore, we obtain that
                                                                              r           !
                   (L)                                                            log n
                  fi (X) = C¤ЃR╬Х(╬│/2¤Ѓ)╬Њ(p, q)2 (1 + on (1)) ┬▒ O           R¤Ѓ
                                                                                    n
                           = C¤ЃR╬Х(╬│/2¤Ѓ)╬Њ(p, q)2 (1 + on (1)),
                                                        q
                                          2 ╬│              log n
where in the last equation we used ╬Њ(p, q) ╬Х( /2¤Ѓ) = ¤Ѕ       n    .

Recall that the loss for node i is given by
                   (i)                                    (L)
                  `╬И (A, X) = log(1 + exp((1 Рѕњ 2╬хi )fi          (X)))
                                                  РѕњC¤ЃR╬Х(╬│/2¤Ѓ)╬Њ(p, q)2 (1 ┬▒ o

                                = log 1 + exp                                  n (1))        .
                                 (i)                                             0
The total loss is n1
                       P
                          iРѕѕ[n] `╬И (A, X). Now, using Fact A.5 we have for some C Рѕѕ [ /2, 1] that
                                                                                     1

                                        0                          2

                         `╬И (A, X) = C exp РѕњC¤ЃR╬Х(╬│/2¤Ѓ)╬Њ(p, q) (1 ┬▒ on (1)) .

A.8    A NALYSIS FOR A SIMPLER CASE

Although Theorem 2 encapsulates the general condition for networks with up to two graph convolu-
tions to achieve perfect classification, let us discuss the meaning of the theorem in a simplified setting
where ╬Њ(p, q) = Рёд(1). In this regime, one can analyze two cases for both parts of the theorem:
      1. Case ╬│ = Рёд(¤Ѓ): Using part two of Lemma A.4 implies that ╬Х(╬│/¤Ѓ) = Рёд( ¤Ѓ╬│ ). Hence, for
                                                                      q
                                                                          log n                    ╬│
         one graph convolution, the condition ╬Њ(p, q)╬Х(╬│/2¤Ѓ) = ¤Ѕ         n(p+q) is satisfied when ¤Ѓ =
            q                                   q
                log n                                 log n
         ¤Ѕ     n(p+q) , implying that ╬│ = ¤Ѕ ¤Ѓ                  . Similarly, for two graph convolutions,
                                             q n(p+q)                                 q
                                                log n                                    log n
         the condition ╬Њ(p, q)2 ╬Х(╬│/2¤Ѓ) = ¤Ѕ       n      is satisfied when   ╬│ =  ¤Ѕ  ¤Ѓ     n     .
                                                                                                 2
      2. Case ╬│ = o(¤Ѓ): Using part three of Lemma A.4 implies that ╬Х(╬│/¤Ѓ) = Рёд( ¤Ѓ╬│ 2 ). Hence,
                                                                          q
                                                                               log n
         for one graph convolution, the condition ╬Њ(p, q)╬Х(╬│/2¤Ѓ) = ¤Ѕ          n(p+q) is satisfied when
                      q                                q
           ╬│ 2            log n                               log n

           ¤Ѓ   =¤Ѕ        n(p+q) , implying that ╬│ = ¤Ѕ ¤Ѓ
                                                          4
                                                             n(p+q) . Similarly, for two graph convo-
                                                     q                                     q
                                       2 ╬│              log n                                  4 log n
         lutions, the condition ╬Њ(p, q) ╬Х( /2¤Ѓ) = ¤Ѕ       n      is satisfied when ╬│ = ¤Ѕ ¤Ѓ         n     .

Combining both cases, we find that the theorems imply perfect classification if the following holds:
                          №Б▒   Рѕџ
                          №Б▓Рёд Рѕџ   ¤Ѓ log n
                                              for networks wth one graph convolution,
                          №Б┤
                                 4
       ╬│ = k┬х Рѕњ ╬йk2 =            Рѕџn(p+q)
                          №Б│Рёд ¤Ѓ Рѕџ
                          №Б┤         log n
                                   4 n        for networks with two graph convolutions.

B     A DDITIONAL EXPERIMENTS
For all synthetic and real-data experiments, we used PyTorch Geometric (Fey & Lenssen, 2019),
using public splits for the real datasets. The models were trained on an Nvidia Titan Xp GPU, using
the Adam optimizer with learning rate 10Рѕњ3 , weight decay 10Рѕњ5 , and 50 to 500 epochs varying
among the datasets.


                                                     25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


B.1                      S YNTHETIC DATA

In this section we show additional results on the synthetic data. First, we show that placing a graph
convolution in the first layer makes the classification task difficult since the means of the convolved
data collapse towards 0. This is shown in Fig. 4.

                   1.0
                                                                                                                 0.7


                   0.9
                                                                                                                 0.6
   Test Accuracy


                   0.8


                                                                                                    Test Loss
                                                                                                                 0.5
                   0.7

                                                                                                                 0.4
                   0.6
                                                      MLP without GC                                                   MLP without GC
                                                      2 layer net with 1 GC at layer 1                                 2 layer net with 1 GC at layer 1
                                                      2 layer net with 1 GC at layer 2                           0.3   2 layer net with 1 GC at layer 2
                   0.5
                                                      2 layer net with 2 GCs at layers 1 and 2                         2 layer net with 2 GCs at layers 1 and 2
                                                      Threshold for MLP                                                Threshold for MLP
                   0.4                                Threshold for 1 graph convolution                          0.2   Threshold for 1 graph convolution

                                                     100                                                                                                                        100
                                           Рђќu Рѕњ vРђќ                                                                                                                 Рђќu Рѕњ vРђќ2
                                         K= ¤Ѓ 2                                                                                                               K=      ¤Ѓ


                                  (a) Test accuracy.                                                                                                (b) Test loss.

Figure 4: Comparing the accuracy and loss for various networks with and without graph convolutions,
averaged over 50 trials. Networks with a graph convolution in the first layer (red and orange) fail
to generalize even for a large distance between the means of the data. For this experiment, we set
n = 400 and d = 4, with ¤Ѓ 2 = 1/d.


Next, we show experiments for two sets of values of p < q to demonstrate that graph convolutions
also work in this setting. In Figs. 5a and 5b we have ╬Њ(p, q) РЅѕ 0.82, while in Figs. 5c and 5d we have
a lower signal in the graph, ╬Њ(p, q) РЅѕ 0.66. We observe that in the latter case that there is less gap in
the performance of networks with one graph convolution and those with two graph convolutions. In
comparison to Fig. 2, we observe similar trends about the performance of all the networks in different
regimes of interest. In particular, networks with one graph convolution perform mutually similarly,
and networks with two graph convolutions perform mutually similarly, as claimed in Theorem 2.

                   1.0                                                                                           1.0

                   0.9                                                                                           0.9
Test Accuracy


                                                                                                 Test Accuracy


                   0.8                                                                                           0.8
                                                                                                                                                                              MLP without GC
                                                                                                                                                                              3 layer net with 1 GC at layer 2
                   0.7                                                                                           0.7                                                          3 layer net with 1 GC at layer 3
                                                           MLP without GC                                                                                                     3 layer net with 2 GCs at layer 2
                                                           2 layer net with 1 GC at layer 2                                                                                   3 layer net with 2 GCs at layer 3
                                                           2 layer net with 2 GCs at layer 2                                                                                  3 layer net with 1 GC each at layers 2 and 3
                   0.6                                                                                           0.6
                                                           O( logn): Threshold for MLP                                                                                        O( logn): Threshold for MLP
                                                           O( logn/deg1/4): Threshold for 1 GC                                                                                O( logn/deg1/4): Threshold for 1 GC
                   0.5                                     O( logn/n1/4): Threshold for 2 GCs                    0.5                                                          O( logn/n1/4): Threshold for 2 GCs
                                           100                                                                                                                    100
                                              u v2
                                         K=                                                                                                                   K= u v 2
               (a) Two-layer networks with (p, q) = (0.02, 0.2).                                         (b) Three-layer networks with (p, q) = (0.02, 0.2).
                   1.0                                                                                           1.0


                   0.9                                                                                           0.9
Test Accuracy


                                                                                                 Test Accuracy


                   0.8                                                                                           0.8                                                          MLP without GC
                                                                                                                                                                              3 layer net with 1 GC at layer 2
                                                                                                                                                                              3 layer net with 1 GC at layer 3
                   0.7                                     MLP without GC                                        0.7                                                          3 layer net with 2 GCs at layer 2
                                                           2 layer net with 1 GC at layer 2                                                                                   3 layer net with 2 GCs at layer 3
                                                           2 layer net with 2 GCs at layer 2                                                                                  3 layer net with 1 GC each at layers 2 and 3
                   0.6                                     O( logn): Threshold for MLP                           0.6                                                          O( logn): Threshold for MLP
                                                           O( logn/deg1/4): Threshold for 1 GC                                                                                O( logn/deg1/4): Threshold for 1 GC
                                                           O( logn/n1/4): Threshold for 2 GCs                                                                                 O( logn/n1/4): Threshold for 2 GCs
                   0.5                                                                                           0.5
                                           100                                                                                                                    100
                                              u v2
                                         K=                                                                                                                   K= u v 2
                   (c) Two-layer networks with (p, q) = (0.1, 0.5).                                        (d) Three-layer networks with (p, q) = (0.1, 0.5).

Figure 5: Averaged accuracy (over 50 trials) for various networks with and without graph convolutions
on the XOR-CSBM data model with n = 400, d = 4 and ¤Ѓ 2 = 1/d for p < q. The x-axis denotes
the ratio K = k┬х Рѕњ ╬йk2 /¤Ѓ on a logarithmic scale. The vertical lines indicate the classification
thresholds mentioned in part two of Theorem 1 (red), and in Theorem 2 (violet and pink).


                                                                                                 26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Finally, in Fig. 6, we show the trends for the accuracy of various networks with and without graph
convolutions, for different values of ╬Њ(p, q). For cases where ╬Њ(p, q) is relatively larger, networks
with graph convolutions perform much better than a standard MLP (see Figs. 6a to 6d), while for the
cases where ╬Њ(p, q) is much smaller, the networks with graph convolutions degrade in performance
(see Figs. 6e to 6h). The intuition behind this behaviour is that a smaller value of ╬Њ(p, q) represents
more noise in the data, thus, networks with graph convolutions gather roughly an equivalent amount
of information from nodes in both the classes, making the feature representations noisy.


 (a) Two layers, (p, q) = (0.1, 0.01), ╬Њ(p, q) РЅѕ 0.82.       (b) Three layers, ╬Њ(p, q) РЅѕ 0.82.


 (c) Two layers, (p, q) = (0.8, 0.1), ╬Њ(p, q) РЅѕ 0.78.        (d) Three layers, ╬Њ(p, q) РЅѕ 0.78.


 (e) Two layers, (p, q) = (0.2, 0.1), ╬Њ(p, q) РЅѕ 0.33.        (f) Three layers, ╬Њ(p, q) РЅѕ 0.33.


 (g) Two layers, (p, q) = (0.5, 0.4), ╬Њ(p, q) РЅѕ 0.11.        (h) Three layers, ╬Њ(p, q) РЅѕ 0.11.

Figure 6: Test accuracy of various networks with with and without graph convolutions (GCs) for
various values of p and q, on the XOR-CSBM data model. Note that networks with graph convolutions
degrade in performance as ╬Њ(p, q) (attributed to the signal in the graph) decreases.



                                                        27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


B.2   R EAL - WORLD DATA

This section contains additional experiments on real-world data. In Fig. 7, we plot the accuracy
of the networks measured on the three benchmark datasets, averaged across 50 different trials
(random initialization of the network parameters). This corresponds to the plots in Fig. 3 that show
the maximum accuracy across all trials. Next, we evaluate the performance of the original GCN


                                                 (a) CORA.


                                                 (b) Pubmed.


                                                 (c) CiteSeer.

Figure 7: Averaged accuracy (percentage) over 50 trials for various networks. A network with k
layers and j1 , . . . , jk convolutions in each of the layers is represented by the label kL-j1 . . . jk .

                                             1          1
normalization (Kipf & Welling, 2017), DРѕњ 2 ADРѕњ 2 instead of DРѕњ1 A, and show that we observe the
same trends about the number of convolutions and their placement. These results are shown in Figs. 8
and 9. Note the two general trends that are consistent: first, networks with two graph convolutions
perform better than those with one graph convolution, and second, placing all graph convolutions in
the first layer yields worse accuracy as compared to networks where the convolutions are placed in
deeper layers.
Similar to the results in the main paper, we observe that there are differences within the group of
networks with the same number of convolutions, however, these differences are smaller in magnitude
as compared to the difference between the two groups of networks, one with one graph convolution
and the other two graph convolutions. We also note that in some cases, three-layer networks obtain a


                                                      28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


worse accuracy, which we attribute to the fact that three layers have a lot more parameters, and thus
may either be overfitting, or may not be converging for the number of epochs used.


                                               (a) CORA.


                                              (b) Pubmed.


                                              (c) CiteSeer.

Figure 8: Maximum accuracy (percentage) over 50 trials for various networks with the original GCN
                   1      1
normalization DРѕњ 2 ADРѕњ 2 . A network with k layers and j1 , . . . , jk convolutions in each of the layers
is represented by the label kL-j1 . . . jk .


Furthermore, we perform the same experiments on relatively larger datasets, OGBN-arXiv and
OGBN-products (Hu et al., 2020). We observe similar trends in these experiments. First, we observe
that networks with a graph convolution perform better than a simple MLP, and that two convolutions
perform better than a single convolution. Furthermore, three graph convolutions do not have a
significant advantage over two graph convolutions. This observation agrees with Lemma A.3, where
one can compute ¤Ђ(2) and ¤Ђ(3) and realize that they are of the same order in n, i.e., the variance
reduction offered by two graph convolutions is of the same order as three graph convolutions for
sufficiently dense graphs. We present the results of these experiments in Fig. 10.


                                                   29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                               (a) CORA.


                                              (b) Pubmed.


                                              (c) CiteSeer.

Figure 9: Averaged accuracy (percentage) over 50 trials for various networks with the original GCN
                   1      1
normalization DРѕњ 2 ADРѕњ 2 . A network with k layers and j1 , . . . , jk convolutions in each of the layers
is represented by the label kL-j1 . . . jk .


                                                   30
  Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                 80                                                   71.46        71.31            71.43        71.49             71.61        71.51            71.3
                                       68.11       68.01
                 70
Accuracy (avg)

                 60   55.59
                 50
                 40
                 30
                 20
                 10
                 0
                       MLP2            2L-01        2L-10             2L-02        2L-20            2L-11         2L-03            2L-30        2L-12            2L-21
                                                                                           Model
                                                           (a) OGBN-arXiv with two-layer networks.
                 80                                          71.84      71.68    71.68      71.93     71.84    71.8       72.06      71.97   71.83      72.37     71.6
                              68.4        68.88   67.97
                 70
Accuracy (avg)


                 60
                      55.69
                 50
                 40
                 30
                 20
                 10
                 0
                      MLP3    3L-001     3L-010   3L-100     3L-011     3L-110   3L-002    3L-020     3L-111   3L-021     3L-012    3L-102   3L-003     3L-030    3L-300
                                                                                           Model
                                                       (b) OGBN-arXiv with three-layer networks.
                 80                                                   72.69        70.5             72.93        72.34             70.29        72.99            72.85
                                       69.16       67.59
                 70
Accuracy (avg)


                 60
                 50   42.8
                 40
                 30
                 20
                 10
                 0
                       MLP2            2L-01        2L-10             2L-02        2L-20            2L-11         2L-03            2L-30        2L-12            2L-21
                                                                                           Model
                                                     (c) OGBN-products with two-layer networks.

                 80                       71.05               74.35      73.65    73.97     73.39      74.47    74.26      74.42     74.02    74.19      73.05     71.19
                               70.76               69.04
                 70
Accuracy (avg)


                 60
                 50   43.93
                 40
                 30
                 20
                 10
                  0
                      MLP3    3L-001     3L-010   3L-100     3L-011     3L-110   3L-002    3L-020     3L-111   3L-021     3L-012    3L-102   3L-003     3L-030    3L-300
                                                                                           Model
                                                    (d) OGBN-products with three-layer networks.

  Figure 10: Averaged accuracy (percentage) for OGB datasets arXiv and products, over 10 trials
  for various networks. A network with k layers and j1 , . . . , jk convolutions in each of the layers is
  represented by the label kL-j1 . . . jk , while MLP3 denotes a three-layer MLP. Note that all models
  with one GC (in red) perform mutually similarly, while models with two GCs (in blue) and three GCs
  (in green) perform mutually similarly and better than models with one GC.


                                                                                          31
