Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A MULTI - SCALE STRUCTURE - PRESERVING HETEROL -
OGOUS IMAGE TRANSFORMATION ALGORITHM BASED
ON CONDITIONAL ADVERSARIAL NETWORK LEARN -
ING

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT
         Image transformation model learning is a basic technology for image enhance-
         ment, image super-resolution, image generation, multimodal image fusion, etc.
         which uses deep convolutional networks as a representation model for arbitrary
         functions, and uses fitting optimization with paired image training sets to solve the
         transformation model between images in the different sets. Affected by the com-
         plex and diverse changes of the 3D shape of the actual scene and the pixel-level
         optical properties of materials, the solution of the heterologous image conversion
         model is an ill-posed problem. In recent years, most of the proposed conditional
         adversarial learning methods for image transformation networks only consider the
         overall consistency loss constraint of the image, and the generated images often
         contain some pseudo-features or local structural deformations. In order to solve
         this problem, using the idea of multi-scale image coding and perception, this pa-
         per proposes a multi-scale structure-preserving heterologous image transforma-
         tion method based on conditional adversarial network learning. First, using the
         idea of multi-scale coding and reconstruction, a multi-scale, step by step genera-
         tor lightweight network structure is designed. Then, two image multi-scale struc-
         ture loss functions are proposed, and combined with the existing overall consis-
         tency loss, a loss function for generative adversarial learning is designed. Finally,
         test experiments are performed on the KAIST-MPD-set1 dataset. The experimen-
         tal results show that, compared with the state-of-the-art algorithms, the proposed
         algorithm can better suppress the local structural distortion, and has significant
         advantages in evaluation indicators such as RMSE, LPIPS, PSNR, and SSIM.


1   I NTRODUCTION
Heterologous image conversion is a process of generating a modal B image of the same scene from
a modal A image by constructing a pixel conversion model from modality A to modality B. Early
heterogeneous image conversion requires 3D scene models and complete material information to
manually design pixel conversion models. However, in practical applications, the construction of
3D models of actual scenes is difficult, the composition of materials is complex, and the acquisition
of imaging characteristics of materials is difficult, which makes the solution of heterogeneous image
conversion models an ill-posed problem with low efficiency and low applicability.
In recent years, deep learning has led the trend in the field of computer vision, and image transla-
tion model learning is a new solution for solving heterogeneous image translation models. Image
transformation model learning is an image generation technique for image super-resolution, image
enhancement, and multimodal image fusion. It uses a deep convolutional network as a representa-
tion model for an arbitrary function, and solves a transition model between images of two modalities
by using a fitting optimization on a training set of paired images. The most mainstream way to learn
image conversion models is Conditional Generative Adversarial Nets (CGAN) proposed by Mirza
& Osindero (2014). Since CGAN can model the semantic information of images and constrain the
output results, CGAN is currently used for Image transformation has become a research hotspot in
the field of computer vision and the latest heterogeneous image transformation methods are based
on it.


                                                  1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Image conversion model learning relies on a large amount of training data. This paper uses the Mul-
tispectral Pedestrian Detection (MPD) dataset published by the Korea Advanced Institute of Science
and Technology (KAIST)(Hwang & Jaesik Park, 2015), referred to as the KAIST-MPD dataset,
which is currently the only publicly available dataset that contains a large number of visual and in-
frared approximate common aperture images of multiple scenes. Although the heterogenous image
pairs of this dataset have viewing angle deviation and the view field of visual image is smaller, the
viewing angle deviation is small and the size of the view field remains fixed, so it is feasible to use
this dataset to solve the transformation model. The research in this paper is to solve the heteroge-
neous image conversion model from infrared to visual based on the KASIT-MPD dataset, as shown
in the figure below. The contributions of this paper are summarized as:
1.A new four-layer multi-scale encoder generator is proposed, in which the images are down-
sampled three times, and then they are encoded and decoded from small to large in turn. Such a
network structure can make full use of the structural information in the input images;
2.Two structure-sensitive loss functions are proposed to solve the problem that L1 loss and genera-
tive adversarial loss cannot effectively constrain the structural information of a single image.

                                                         Real infrared image                              Simulated visual image


                                           Infrared                              Heterologous image
                                         sensor array                           transformation model


                           Common
         Real world
                           aperture                                            Model parameter learning
           scene
                        imaging system
                                                          Real visual image


                                         Visual sensor
                                                                                    Loss function
                                             array


                      Figure 1: Heterologous image conversion from infrared to visual.



2   R ELATED WORK

Following the development of deep learning, generative adversarial learning has also achieved rapid
development. The original Generative Adversarial Nets (GAN) (Goodfellow et al., 2014) only used
the feedback of the discriminator D to adjust the generator G parameters. The discriminator D
replaced the method of manually designing the loss function and became a dynamic measure, but
the training process of the discriminator D itself is uncontrollable and has few constraints, making
it difficult to generate high-quality images. Mirza & Osindero (2014) then proposed Conditional
Generative Adversarial Nets (CGAN), which sends the input images to the discriminator, and the
discriminator needs to distinguish whether the two input images constitute a mapping relationship.
This improvement enables the generation of the results are more purposeful.However, the details of
the images generated by CGAN are still not clear enough, and there are obvious distortions in the
images. In 2018, Isola et al. (2017) sorted out the idea of the image conversion model at that time,
and proposed a universal pix2pix model, which uses the widely recognized ResNet (He et al., 2016)
and U-net(Ronneberger et al., 2015) networks as general generators, added L1 loss, and used the
PatchGAN discriminator. Different from the previous single-output discriminator, the PatchGAN
discriminator will output a discrimination result for each pixel block, and finally form a discriminant
surface. Experiments show that this can effectively improve the texture features of the output image,
and the picture is clearer. However, pix2pix inevitably has distortion and artifacts, which cannot
be effectively constrained by L1 loss and discriminative loss.The evolutionary version of pix2pix,
pix2pixHD (Wang et al., 2018), is dedicated to generating larger resolution images. The model has
several contributions to improve the quality of generated images: First, a new two-layer generator
is built, which down-samples the input image to the lower-layer generator, and generates images
from small to large; Second, the L1 loss is removed, and the Perceptual Loss (PL) (Zhang et al.,
2018a) and the Feature Match (FM) loss are introduced, both of which calculate the L2 distance of


                                                                2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


the feature block inside the discriminator. The difference is that the PL loss is used as a ”third party
inspection” with a discriminator pretrained on other large datasets, the mapping of the discriminator
depends on the pretrained dataset, and the discriminator parameters are fixed and unchanged, while
The FM loss is a ”self-check”, the mapping of the discriminator depends on the task training set,
the parameters of the discriminator change continuously with the learning process, and the mapping
also changes; Finally, the discriminator is multi-scaled, the output image is down-sampled twice,
and the three images are sent to the three discriminators respectively. The experimental results show
that pix2pixHD can generate clear images with resolutions above 1080P, but there are also inevitable
artifacts and distortions.
At present, some domestic and foreign scholars have applied generative adversarial learning to solve
heterologous image transformation models. For the application of infrared face recognition, Zhang
et al. (2018b) introduced the face recognition information as part of the loss function to increase
the recognizability of the generated face image. However, compared with the real visual image, the
generated face image has obvious differences in facial features, which reduces the reliability of face
recognition. Babu[11] added the cycle consistency constraints of infrared and visual faces on the
basis of pix2pixHD, and trained both forward and reverse generators at the same time. Although the
generation quality has been improved, the problems of distortion and artifacts are still unavoidable.
Based on the pix2pix model, Kuang et al. (2020) introduced the PL loss and added the Total Variation
(TV) loss as a regular term to make the generated image smoother, but the image distortion and
artifacts were not improved.
In general, most of the existing generative adversarial methods consider texture authenticity and
image consistency constraints, but ignore the loss constraints on image structure, resulting in the
generated images often contain some pseudo features or local structure deformation. Therefore,
how to design a loss function that pays more attention to the image structure and allow the generator
to better capture the structural information of the image has become the key to overcoming the
pseudo-features and local distortion of the generated image.

3     A LGORITHM
Since multi-scale images contain local structures at different scales, this paper proposes improve-
ments from two aspects, generator model and loss function, to form a multi-scale structure-
preserving heterogeneous image transformation scheme: First, using the idea of multi-scale encod-
ing and decoding, a more reasonable multi-scale encoding generator with fewer parameters is pro-
posed to fully guarantee the structural reliability of the generated image; Then, two losses sensitive
to the local structure of the image are designed and introduced into the loss function to effectively
suppress the deformation of the local structure of the generated image.

3.1   G ENERATOR

The human visual system’s cognition of target images is a process of multi-scale structural cogni-
tion. In the research of image super-resolution, this idea is often used to design a network of gradual
synthesis from small scales to large scales to obtain high-resolution images(Guo et al., 2020). In-
spired by such ideas, a four-layer generator structure is designed in this paper, as shown in Figure
2 . Conv in the figure refers to the convolutional layer; The parameter k refers to the width of the
convolution kernel; d refers to the dilation parameter, its default value is 1; s refers to stride param-
eter, default 1; T ranConv refers to transposed convolution, which enlarges the length and width
of the feature block to 2 times. The output feature blocks of all modules are 64 channels, and by
default all convolutional layers contain instance normalization(Ulyanov et al., 2016) and activation
functions. It is noted that Sitzmann et al. (2020) used the sine activation function to improve the
effect of generating images. In this paper, the sine activation function with learning parameters is
used as the activation function, and the formula is as follows:
                                      SIN E(x) = sin(ωx + θ)                                         (1)
where x is the input feature block, and angular frequency ω and phase θ are learnable parameters.
Input the image into the generator, the generator firstly down-samples the image three times in a
row to obtain three images of smaller size, and then starts from the image of the smallest size, the
generator extracts the features and encodes them. The input of every layer of encoding network is
also used to generate heterogenous images of the same scale. The generated images are up-sampled


                                                   3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


using the nearest neighbor method and pixel-wise added to the higher-layer generated image.
The down-sampling process of the image can reduce noise and image texture, and preserve the
structural information of different scales. Multi-scale coding can make full use of the structural
information of each scale in the input image. A single pixel in the 1/8-size image corresponds
to the 8*8 pixel area in the original image, so the bottom-up working mode of the generator is
actually a synthesis process of constructing large-scale features first, and then gradually adding
small-scale features. The generator proposed in this paper strengthens the correlation between multi-
scale structures, and experiments in subsection4.2 will also verify the superiority of the generator.


                  input                       Layer 1                      Layer 1               Layer 1                                        output
                infrared                      feature     +                feature                image                  +                      visual
                 image                       extraction                   encoding            reconstruction                                    image
                            down-sample                                                                                      up-sample
                                1/2           Layer 2                      Layer 2               Layer 2                               1/2
                             infrared         feature     +                feature                image                  +          generated
                              image          extraction                   encoding            reconstruction                          image
                            down-sample                                                                                      up-sample
                                1/4           Layer 3                      Layer 3               Layer 3                               1/4
                             infrared         feature     +                feature                image                  +          generated
                              image          extraction                   encoding            reconstruction                          image
                            down-sample                                                                                      up-sample
                                1/8           Layer 4                      Layer 4               Layer 4                               1/8
                             infrared         feature                      feature                image                             generated
                              image          extraction                   encoding            reconstruction                          image


              feature                                      feature                                        image
                                                                                                                                         ResNetBlock
             extraction         input                     encoding                                    reconstruction

                                                                input                                           input
                                                                                                                                                输入


               Conv k3 d1   Conv k3 d2     Conv k3 d3
                                                           ResNetBlock
                                                                                                               Conv k3                        Conv k3

                                                                                       34                      Conv k3                        Conv k3
                               catch                       ResNetBlock               layers

                                                           ResNetBlock
                                                                                                                                                 +
                             Conv k1 s2                       TransConv


                               output                           output                                          output                         output


                                          Figure 2: Model structure of generator.



3.2     L OSS FUNCTION

Common loss functions for image generation are used in this paper, including L1 loss, PL loss,
FM loss, GAN loss and CGAN loss. L1 loss, PL loss, and FM loss are recorded as LL1 , LP L ,
LF M . Both GAN loss and CGAN loss adopt the dual form in pix2pixHD, that is, when training the
generator, the generated image is True, and when training the discriminator, the real image is True,
and the optimization goal is to reduce the loss at any time. The GAN loss is recorded as LGAN G
when training the generator and LGAN D when training the discriminator. Similarly, the CGAN loss
is recorded as LCGAN G and LCGAN D respectively. Other common loss formulas are the same as
those in pix2pix and pix2pixHD, and will not be repeated in this article.

3.2.1    C OSINE LOSS

The L1 loss calculates the pixel-level image distance, and lacks the correlation constraint between
pixels; GAN and CGAN loss is based on probability to distinguish the authenticity of the image,
and it is more inclined to generate high-frequency image content, resulting in severe distortion of
dynamic targets. It is worth noting that when the human visual cognition system observes an image,
no matter the overall color of the image is bright or dark, as long as the ratio of the values between
pixels remains unchanged, people can obtain almost the same cognition, so the ratio of pixel values
can represent the content information of the image data. Therefore, in this paper, each image is
abstracted into a vector with the dimensions of the number of pixels × the number of channels, and
then the cosine angle of the vector is used to measure the similarity between the images. The cosine


                                                                         4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


loss is defined as follows:
                                                              Mp (Ivis , G(Iinf ))
                                            LCOS = −                                                         (2)
                                                               ∥Ivis ∥ ∗ ∥Iinf ∥
where Ivis represents the visual image; Iinf represents the infrared image; G(·) represents the
generator; ∥ · ∥ represents the vector modulus of image; Mp (·) represents multiplying the images in
pixels, and then summing all pixel values of the result. When the vector angle between the generated
visual image and the target visual image is 0, the cosine loss reaches the minimum value, that is,
the generated image is a pixel-wise scaling of the real image. Both cosine loss and L1 loss directly
calculate the image distance, but unlike the L1 loss, where each pixel is calculated independently,
the cosine loss calculates the overall structure of the image, and the feedback gradient information
represents the global optimization direction. It can guide the network parameter adjustment more
effectively.


3.2.2   T OTAL VARIATION LOSS OF DIFFERENCE
Although the Total Variation (TV) loss can describe the noise level of the image and is added to
the loss function as a regular term for suppressing noise, the image can only be a completely flat
monochrome image when the TV loss obtains the optimal solution. Therefore, if the ratio parameter
of TV loss is too large, it will inevitably lead to a lot of blurs in the generated image, and the edge
information in the image is lost, which can describe the target better than color, so the introduction
of TV loss is obviously flawed. In order to make the image smooth and keep the edge structure of
the image better, total variation of difference (TVD) is proposed, which is defined as follows:

                   LT V D = Ep (∇2x (G(Iinf ) − Ivis )) + Ep (∇2y (G(Iinf ) − Ivis ))                        (3)
where ∇2x represents calculating the difference map of the image in the x direction, and then squar-
ing by pixels; ∇2y represents calculating the difference map of the image in the y direction, and
then squaring by pixels; Ep (·) represents calculating the average pixel value. Figure 3 shows the
calculation method of the difference maps in the x and y directions in this paper.

                                row 1 to row n-1

                    input                                                                    x-direction
                                                 sub image 1             sub image 2
                   image                                                                  difference map
                                               (n-1 × m pixels)        (n-1 × m pixels)
               (n × m pixels)                                                             (n-1 × m pixels)

                                             row 2 to row n
                         column 1 to column m-1

                    input                                                                   y-direction
                                                 sub image 3             sub image 4
                   image                                                                  difference map
                                               (n × m-1 pixels)        (n × m-1 pixels)
               (n × m pixels)                                                             (n × m-1 pixels)

                                         column 2 to column m


                                          Figure 3: Get the difference map.


3.2.3   T OTAL LOSS FUNCTION
The total loss function of the algorithm is as follows:
        LG = λ1 (L1 + LCOS + LT V D ) + λ2 (LGAN G + LCGAN G ) + λ3 (LF M + LP )                             (4)
                            LD = λ2 (LGAN D + LCGAN D )                                                      (5)
where LG represents the loss function used for training the generator; LD represents the loss
function for training the discriminator; In this paper, losses are classified into three categories, and
losses of the same kind use the same scaling factor: λ1 is scaling factor of pixel class; λ2 is the
scaling factor of discriminator class; λ3 is the scaling factor of feature distance class.



                                                                  5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                    Table 1: Pseudo code of algorithm
                                                      Code

                    G = generator in this paper;
                    D = 5layers multi-scale PatchGAN;
                    C = 5layers multi-scale PatchGAN;
                    P = VGG19(layer 1 1 to layer 5 1);
                    Initialize G, D, C, P;
                    Import P pretraining data;
                    While(Do not meet training termination condition){
                          Import image pairs: Iinf and Ivis ;
                          Generate image Ig = G(Iinf );
                          Calculate generator loss LG ;
                          Backpropagates and updates the parameters of G;
                          Generate image Ig = G(Iinf );
                          Calculate discriminator loss LD ;
                          Backpropagates and updates the parameters of D and C;
                    }


3.3   OVERALL STRUCTURE AND PROCESS

The overall structure of the algorithm is shown in Figure 4 below, and the pseudocode of the al-
gorithm flow is shown in Table 1. The generator G adopts the generator model in this paper. The
discriminators D and C both use the multi-scale PatchGAN network, the used code of which is the
same as the code in pix2pixHD, and the perception network P adopts the layer 1 1, 2 1, 3 1, 4 1 and
5 1 of pre-trained VGG19 to calculate perceived loss of output features.

           real
                                        generated                discriminator
         infrared     generator G                                                       GAN loss
                                       visual image                    D
          image
                                                                                        FM loss
                                         L1 loss
                                                                 discriminator
                                        COS loss                                        CGAN loss
                                                                       C
                                        TVD loss
                                                                                        FM loss
                                                                  perceptual
                                           real
                                                                   network              PL loss
                                       visual image
                                                                      P



                              Figure 4: Overall structure of the algorithm.



4     E XPERIMENT

The experiments in this paper use the set01 subset of the KASIT-MPD dataset, and the 10th pair is
selected as the test set for every 10 pairs of images, and the rest are used as the training set. There
are 7227 pairs of infrared-visual images in the training set and 802 pairs of images in the test set. To
reduce computational power consumption, all infrared and visual images were down-sampled and
resized to 256×256 pixels.
In the experiment, all networks are trained for 200 epochs, using the ADAM optimizer, the param-
eters of which are (0.5, 0.999). The learning rate is 2e-4 initially, which in the first 100 epochs
remains unchanged, but decreases linearly to 1/101 of the initial learning rate in the last 100 epochs.
λ1 , λ2 , and λ3 are respectively 100, 1, and 10. In the experiment, the first 5 layers of the VGG19
model provided by pytorch are used to calculate LPIPS, which is the same as the network structure


                                                       6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Table 2: Evaluation metrics for different algorithms.The bold number indicates the best result and
the number with asterisk indicates the second best result.
                                         The smaller the better The bigger the better
                Net        Param(M) RMSE              LPIPS     PSNR        SSIM
              pix2pix        11.37       10.88*       12.96     17.03*      0.62*
            pix2pixHD        45.59        13.70       11.76     16.01        0.60
            TICCGAN          45.85        12.29      11.39*      16.57       0.61
             PCSGAN          11.37        10.93       12.63     16.98        0.61
               Ours          10.81        8.61        10.30     18.11        0.69



for calculating perceptual loss, and all use the pre-training data provided by pytorch. The metrics of
the generated image quality are RMSE, LPIPS, PSNR and SSIM.

4.1   C OMPARATIVE EXPERIMENTS

The algorithm in this paper is compared with the general algorithms pix2pix(Isola et al., 2017),
pix2pixHD(Wang et al., 2018) and the open source algorithms TICCGAN(Kuang et al., 2020) and
PCSGAN(Babu & Dubey, 2020) for infrared to visual image conversion. The generated image com-
parison is shown in Figure 5, the index calculation is shown in Table 2, and the detailed comparison
is shown in Figure 6. In Figure 5, the scenes in rows 2, 3, and 4 have a lot of repetition in the dataset,
so all existing methods can achieve good background generation results in these scenes. But when
the scene changes drastically (the scene in the first row is obtained when the car turns quickly), or
when there are dynamic objects such as people and cars, the images generated by the existing algo-
rithms suffer from a lot of distortions and false features. The reason for this image degradation is
that the constraints designed in the reference algorithm do not fully utilize the pixel-related informa-
tion within a single image. Algorithms that rely too heavily on the discriminator to improve image
quality tend to generate more frequent information, such as static scenes, and ignore less frequent
information, such as pedestrians and cars. It can be seen from the comparison that the algorithm in
this paper focuses on the utilization of the information between the pixel values within a single im-
age, better maintains the structural information, and makes the edges of moving objects clearer and
more reliable. The algorithm in this paper outperforms the reference algorithm in every evaluation
index, and the generator proposed in this paper has fewer parameters.


              Figure 5: Comparison of multi-scene generation of different algorithms.



                                                    7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                Figure 6: Comparison of vehicle generation of different algorithms.


4.2   A BLATION EXPERIMENT

The ablation experiments are carried out for the effectiveness of the network and loss functions
proposed in this paper. The experimental results are shown in Figure 7, the evaluation indicators
are shown in Table 3, and the detailed comparison is shown in Figure 8. In the ablation experiments
discussing the effectiveness of the network structure, the 9-layer ResNet generator adpoted in
pix2pix is used as an alternative generator G, which is similar to the network proposed in this paper
in the number of parameters
According to the comparison in Figure 7 and Figure 8, the lack of any of the three improvements
proposed in this paper will make the cars and people in the image more distorted, and the structural
information of the image will be lost more. The evaluation indicators also prove the effectiveness
of the improvements.


                          Figure 7: Comparison of Ablation Experiment.


5     C ONCLUSION

This paper proposes a network structure for multi-scale encoding and two loss functions sensitive
to image structure information. Experiments on paired infrared-visual dataset show that the
algorithm proposed in this paper generates fewer image distortions and pseudo-features than the


                                                 8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


 Table 3: Evaluation indicators for ablation experiment.The bold number indicates the best result.
                                            The smaller the better   The bigger the better
                Net           Param(M)      RMSE        LPIPS        PSNR        SSIM
               Ours             10.81        8.61        10.30       18.11        0.69
          use ResNet as G       11.37        9.35        11.54       17.68        0.66
           without COS          10.81        9.16        10.71       17.84        0.67
           without TVD          10.81        9.01        10.68        17.9        0.67


               Figure 8: Comparison of vehicle generation in Ablation Experiment.


state-of-the-art algorithm, and has obvious advantages in all evaluation indicators of image quality.



R EFERENCES
Kancharagunta Kishan Babu and Shiv Ram Dubey. Pcsgan: Perceptual cyclic-synthesized genera-
  tive adversarial networks for thermal and nir to visible image transformation. Neurocomputing,
  413:41–50, 2020.

Ian Goodfellow, Jean Pouget-Abadie, Mehdi Mirza, Bing Xu, David Warde-Farley, Sherjil Ozair,
  Aaron Courville, and Yoshua Bengio. A fast learning algorithm for deep belief nets. Advances in
  neural information processing systems, 27, 2014.

Yong Guo, Jian Chen, Jingdong Wang, Qi Chen, Jiezhang Cao, Zeshuai Deng, Yanwu Xu, and
  Mingkui Tan. Closed-loop matters: Dual regression networks for single image super-resolution.
  Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 5407–
  5416, 2020.

Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image recog-
  nition. Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp.
  770–778, 2016.

Soonmin Hwang and Yukyung Choi Jaesik Park, Namil Kim. Multispectral pedestrian detection:
  Benchmark dataset and baseline. Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and
  pattern recognition, pp. 1037–1045, 2015.

Phillip Isola, Jun-Yan Zhu, Tinghui Zhou, and Alexei A Efros. Image-to-image translation with
  conditional adversarial networks. Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and
  pattern recognition, pp. 1125–1134, 2017.


                                                  9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Xiaodong Kuang, Jianfei Zhu, Xiubao Sui, Yuan Liu, Chengwei Liu, Qian Chen, and Guohua Gu.
  Thermal infrared colorization via conditional generative adversarial network. Infrared Physics &
  Technology, 107, 2020.
Mehdi Mirza and Simon Osindero.         Conditional generative adversarial nets.    arXiv preprint
 arXiv:1411.1784, 2014.
Olaf Ronneberger, Philipp Fischer, and Thomas Brox. U-net: Convolutional networks for biomed-
  ical image segmentation. International Conference on Medical image computing and computer-
  assisted intervention, pp. 234–241, 2015.
Vincent Sitzmann, Julien Martel, Alexander Bergman, David Lindell, and Gordon Wetzstein. Im-
  plicit neural representations with periodic activation functions. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 33:7462–7473, 2020.
Dmitry Ulyanov, Andrea Vedaldi, and Victor Lempitsky. Instance normalization: The missing in-
 gredient for fast stylization. arXiv preprint arXiv:1607.08022, 2016.
Ting-Chun Wang, Ming-Yu Liu, Jun-Yan Zhu, Andrew Tao, Jan Kautz, and Bryan Catanzaro. High-
  resolution image synthesis and semantic manipulation with conditional gans. Proceedings of the
  IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 8798–8807, 2018.
Richard Zhang, Phillip Isola, Alexei A Efros, Eli Shechtman, and Oliver Wang. The unreasonable
  effectiveness of deep features as a perceptual metric. Proceedings of the IEEE conference on
  computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 586–595, 2018a.
Teng Zhang, Arnold Wiliem, Siqi Yang, and Brian Lovell. Tv-gan: Generative adversarial network
  based thermal to visible face recognition. 2018 international conference on biometrics (ICB), pp.
  174–181, 2018b.


                                                10
