Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


N EURAL R EPRESENTATIONS IN M ULTI -TASK
L EARNING GUIDED BY TASK -D EPENDENT C ONTEXTS
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT
         The ability to switch between tasks effectively in response to external stimuli is a
         hallmark of cognitive control. Our brain is able to filter and integrate external in-
         formation to accomplish goal-directed behavior. Task switching occurs rapidly
         and efficiently, allowing us to perform multiple tasks with ease. In a similar
         way, artificial neural networks can be tailored to exhibit multi-task capabilities
         and achieve high performance across domains. In terms of explainability, un-
         derstanding how neural networks make predictions is crucial in many real-world
         applications, for instance, in guiding clinical decisions.
         In this study, we delve into neural representations learned by multi-tasking ar-
         chitectures. Concretely, we compare individual and parallel networks with task-
         switching networks. Task-switching networks leverage task-dependent contexts to
         learn disentangled representations without hurting the overall task accuracy. We
         show that task-switching networks operate in an intermediate regime between in-
         dividual and parallel networks. In addition, we show that shared representations
         are produced by the emergence neurons encoding multiple tasks. Furthermore, we
         study the role of contexts across network processing and show its role at aligning
         the task with the relevant features. Finally, we investigate how the magnitude of
         contexts affects the performance in task-switching networks.


1   I NTRODUCTION
Living involves constantly gauging and selecting the optimal task to perform. This decision is the
result of the interaction of different elements, such as our current goals, external circumstances, or
the stimulus context (Monsell, 2003). In the brain, task switching and cognitive control has been as-
sociated principally with the prefrontal cortex (PFC), which provides top-down regulation to other
cortical brain areas Johnston et al. (2007). In this sense, PFC controls the activation of multiple
neural pathways that are activated or deactivated to ultimately result in task execution. Neural path-
ways are formed by collections of neurons that cooperate to yield a specific effect. Although single
neurons have been historically regarded as centre of processing in the brain, now we are moving to-
wards a framework in which neural networks conform the functional processing unit of the nervous
system Yuste (2015). In the visual cortex, where subpopulations of neurons are responsible of the
processing of different visual field features for correct object recognition DiCarlo et al. (2012).
According to the gating theory (Miller et al., 2001), context-dependent top-down inputs from the
PFC regulate the activation of neural pathways. The encoding of relationships between stimulus
and contexts can be facilitated by tuning neural activity to multiple tasks. In the PFC of monkeys,
it has been observed that single neurons exhibit nonlinear responses to multiple stimuli (Rigotti
et al., 2013). This behavior, or mixed selectivity, favors high-dimensional representation of neural
activation, which allows linear readouts to generate a vast number of responses, in opposition to
low-dimensional representations (Fusi et al., 2016).
Recently, artificial neural networks have been revisited as models of neural computation, many
findings suggesting their practicality for assessing brain theories Richards et al. (2019). For example,
the internal representations learned by neural networks have been associated with representations in
the brain in multi-tasking settings (Ito et al., 2022; Ito & Murray, 2021; Flesch et al., 2022a;b).
In this paper, we investigate the neural representations learned by feedforward multi-tasking archi-
tectures. Neural networks have been designed to be capable of processing multiple tasks in parallel,


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


which is beneficial for the network performance (Caruana, 1997) to achieve high performance across
domains Ruder (2017). Here, we focus on neural networks using contexts to switch attention be-
tween tasks. We use population analysis tools to investigate how neural computations are associated
with task stimulus Kriegeskorte et al. (2008); Jazayeri & Ostojic (2021) and describe the advantages
of learning representations using task-switching networks.

1.1   R ELATED W ORK

Neural networks with contexts have been used as models to study cognitive control in machines
and humans. Mante et al. (2013) reproduced PFC dynamics from monkeys using recurrent neural
networks with sensory contexts. Similarly, Ardid & Wang (2013) analyzed task-switching behavior
effects, such as switch and congruency, emerging from network attractor dynamics. In Musslick
et al. (2017), authors studied the learning efficiency of neural networks in multi-tasking with contexts
and tasks with ranging degrees of overlapping. Flesch et al. (2022a) analyzed the geometry of
representations learned by neural networks and humans in a task-switching schedule. Later, Flesch
et al. (2022b), modified the stochastic gradient descent algorithm to strengthen task-relevant features
in a continual learning setting. More recently, Ito et al. (2022) studied the generalization of new tasks
by composing old tasks using different rule-based contexts. In Ito & Murray (2021), authors used a
neural network to investigate the transformation mapping between visual and motor representations
occurring in the brain. They used representational similarity analysis to study the geometry of neural
codes in multi-tasking Kriegeskorte et al. (2008); Kriegeskorte & Kievit (2013).
Contexts have been used to alleviate catastrophic forgetting in continual learning. Masse et al. (2018)
showed that adding context to parameter stabilization methods improved accuracy when compared
to parameter stabilization alone. Serra et al. (2018) implemented gating by using task-based attention
mechanisms to help preserving information of previous tasks without compromising learning new
tasks. In Grewal et al. (2021), authors combined synaptic intelligence with active dendrites and
sparse activations to reduce catastrophic forgetting. The idea of recruiting multiple subnetworks for
continual learning was previously explored in Wortsman et al. (2020).
In addition, Li et al. (2016) proposed multi-bias non-linear activations to improve feature extraction
in convolutional neural networks, and for semantic segmentation, task-switching networks using
task embeddings were introduced by (Sun et al., 2021) to promote learning common parameters
across the tasks using the same network.

1.2   O UR C ONTRIBUTIONS

The main contributions of this paper are two-fold:

      1. Firstly, we investigate the representations learned by three different variations of feedfor-
         ward networks. We find that task-switching network operate in an intermediate regime
         between individual and parallel networks and the performance on all tasks is improved
         when parameter sharing is present (section 3.1).
      2. Secondly, we expand previous analyses involving multi-task learning with contexts and
         mixed selectivity (section 3.3) and report new findings on the impact of contexts location
         and magnitude at different stages of processing (sections 3.2, 3.4, 3.5).

2     M ETHODS
2.1   A RCHITECTURES

We conducted different experiments with three variants of the feedforward network (Rumelhart
et al., 1986), (Goodfellow et al., 2016) in multi-task learning:

      1. Individual Networks: Each task is learned by an independent network. Multi-tasking is
         performed by combining the outputs of the networks. An individual network is parameter-
         ized as yt = ft (x; θt ), where t ∈ T denotes the task in the set T = {TA , TB , ..., TN } of N
         tasks, θt denotes the weights and biases specific for each task, Wt and bt for each layer.
         Parameters here are independent, hence not shared across tasks.


                                                   2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                 Individual                            Parallel                Task Switching
                                                                           TA TB


                                                                             TA TB


          TA                    TB                     TA    TB


               Figure 1: Architectures for multi-task learning addressed in this paper.


      2. Parallel Networks: Tasks are processed simultaneously and the output layer accounts for
         independent responses for each of the tasks. The parallel processing regularizes the net-
         work and allows overall better performance than the individual networks Caruana (1997).
         A parallel network is defined as y = ft (x; θ). The parameters in hidden layers are ex-
         actly the same for both tasks, hence fully shared. The only independent parameters in this
         network are the ones present in the output layer.
      3. Task-switching Networks: Each task is processed individually, but parameters, other
         than the context biases, are fully shared. The output of a task-switching network is
         yt = ft (x; W, bt ). Weights are co-optimized for all tasks, but bias vectors are differ-
         ent. We define a task-switching network to be a composition of layers, which can the
         context bias for each task, y = WT x + bt or not y = WT x. A task-switching network
         requires at least one context layer with bias. We train task-switching networks following
         the interleaved task-switching schedule (Flesch et al., 2018).

Architectures are depicted in figure 1. The detailed description of the training conditions are de-
scribed in section A.1.

2.2   TASKS

In this study, we created five binary tasks using the MNIST database (LeCun et al., 1998). The main
task pair we use throughout the study corresponds to parity and value. Parity defines a digit as either
even or odd, whereas value defines a digit being smaller or equal to four, or larger. We analyzed
the impact of congruency in learning representations. For two different tasks, a stimulus (digit) is
congruent if the output labels for both are the same. The opposite is referred as incongruency. The
detailed list of tasks and outputs is explained in section A.2.

3     R ESULTS AND D ISCUSSION
3.1   TASK - SWITCHING NETWORKS OPERATE IN AN INTERMEDIATE REGIME BETWEEN
      INDIVIDUAL AND PARALLEL NETWORKS

The first experiment consisted in analyzing the neural representations of three different multi-task
learning networks. Similarly to (Caruana, 1997), we compared multi-tasking using individual neural
networks and parallel neural networks. In addition, we included task-switching networks, where
tasks are informed by binary context inputs.
To analyze the representations learned by each network, we used the representational similarity
analysis (RSA) Kriegeskorte et al. (2008). We build the representational dissimilarity matrix (RDM)
by grouping, in terms of digit images, the neural activations of each layer. For each digit, we
averaged the neural activity and computed their dissimilarity. We repeated this process for different
tasks and calculated the dissimilarity between class labels (digits). Finally, we assembled the RDM.
Section A.3 addresses the calculation of the RDM in detail.
For individual and task-switching networks, calculating the dissimilarity between tasks can be done
directly. For individual networks, we have specific activity patterns from each network performing


                                                  3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


 a                    Layer 1   Layer 2   Layer 3   Layer 4       Layer 5
                                                                                     Representational Dissimilarity

      Individual
                                                                                            Matrix (RDM)
                                                                                                                      1


                                                                            Parity


                                                                                                                      Dissimilarity
      Parallel


                                                                            Value
     Task Switching


                                                                                                                      0

                                                                                          Parity        Value



 b                                                            c

                                                                                                             *
                                                                                                         *


Figure 2: (a) Average RDM for the parity/value task-switching schedule for the three architectures
for 10 different runs. (b) Pearson correlation coefficient between RDMs. (c) Accuracy of the differ-
ent models.


each task, and for task-switching networks, we have specific activity patterns originated from the
same network under each task context. For parallel networks, since the internal processing for both
tasks is exactly the same, the resulting neural representations are entangled. Then, we construct the
RDM by simply repeating the same activation patterns.
Figure 2a shows the average RDM for the three models after training with parity and value. Individ-
ual networks do not share representations between tasks (off-diagonal). Parallel networks separate
partially the congruent and incongruent digits to resolves the active task in the output layer. Task-
switching networks behave similarly to parallel networks in the first layers but resolves the task
before the output layer, similarly as the individual networks. Importantly, we can reconstruct the
task goal from the activity of both individual and task-switching networks. However, we can only
reconstruct the task congruency from parallel networks. Additionally, in comparison to individual
networks, task-switching networks share representations between tasks. To quantify the degree of
similarity between representations, we calculated the Pearson correlation coefficient between RDMs
for different runs. Results in figure 2b reinforce the previous assessment: task-switching networks
behave similarly to parallel networks in the first stage of processing, but ends significantly more
similar to the individual networks.
Finally, we assessed the performance of networks and analyzed the performance in terms of the
accuracy achieved across runs for both tasks. Figure 2c shows a similar performance of the three
networks for the two tasks, yet significant differences appeared between individual and parallel net-
works, as well as between individual and task-switching networks, when performance was evaluated
simultaneously for the two tasks (Wilcoxon Signed Rank Test, p < 0.05). In contrast, parameter
sharing between tasks in parallel and task-switching networks regularizes the network performance.


                                                         4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


We conducted the same analysis of figure 2 using 5 different tasks. The results are shown in figure
7.

3.2   TASK - SWITCHING NETWORKS PERFORM MULTIPLE TASKS BY EXTRACTING TASK
      CONGRUENCY INFORMATION

The second experiment consisted in analyzing the representations learned by task-switching net-
works when contexts were removed after training. Tasks share a common pool of neural activations
that is biased towards resolving one task or another depending on the context. To study this com-
mon computation, first we investigate the RSA by calculating the correlation between RDMs of
three variants of the task-switching network: only context in the first layer (first), context in all lay-
ers (all), and trained with all contexts but removed at inference time (removed). Figure 3a shows
the RSA between these networks. The removed and all networks have similar representations in
the first layers, only to diverge as we approach the output layer. Contrarily, first and all start with
lower correlation but by layer 5 they reach maximum correlation. The drop of correlation in the first
layers is caused by the interference of the only context with the feature extraction of digits in the
first network.
To further analyze the representations, we computed multidimensional scaling (MDS) on the RDMs
(Jazayeri & Ostojic, 2021). For implementations details see section A.4. Figure 3b shows the
MDS for the three first layers and the last two. Digits are represented differently for both tasks
in the first network, since the context bias has been introduced early in the processing. Here, the
network is forced to resolve the task before the context input dissapears. In layer 3 of the all and
removed networks, we see the projection of digits into almost orthogonal dimensions: one dimension
represents incongruent stimuli, whereas the other represents congruent stimuli.
In addition to MDS, we used a generalized linear model to decode the activations in the original
dimensional space (see section A.5). Figure 3d shows the performance of the classifier when we
tested the linearity of digit, task and congruency. In high-dimensional space, digit is decoded with
high accuracy in the first layers. For all three models, the accuracy collapses in the last layers. The
removed and all networks are slightly better than first, possibly due to the context interference in the
first layer. Task information is already present in the first layer of the first network. The all network
shows low accuracy in the first layers, as if the contexts where not acting before the third layer (more
about weight importance in section 3.4). Finally, to test the hypothesis that task-switching networks
extract congruency information, we evaluated the performance on congruency itself. The removed
network is capable of decoding perfectly congruency across layers in the high-dimensional space
defined by the neural activations. Here, the first network shows the greatest decrease in accuracy
when approaching the last layers. This plot confirms the hypothesis that contexts bias neural activity
towards the goal of the task. During training, both tasks are being optimized together, reaching
some local minima that reduces the loss for both tasks. Congruency is the midpoint between the
optimization of both task and determines the amount of shared representations. In the extreme case
of two identical tasks, the overlapping is maximum and the bias signals would converge, reducing
then the multi-tasking problem to a single-task problem, with contexts working as regular activation
biases.

3.3   M IXED SELECTIVITY EMERGES FOR RESOLVING TASK EXECUTION

After having inspected the behavior of neural populations in single layers, we wanted to investigate
the role of single units, specially in the last layer, where the network needs to predict the appropriate
output. We hypothesized that neurons have to organize to drive collectively the dynamics towards the
task goal. Mixed selectivity has been previously observed in artificial neural networks with a single
hidden layer and contexts in the first layer (Flesch et al., 2022a). Here, we analyzed the activations
of neurons in last layer and performed agglomerative hierarchical to cluster neural activity. The
method employed is detailed in section A.6.
The results of clustering are shown in figure 4. The different plots represent the mean activity of
the different clusters for each task when presented with one of the digits. We used two networks
from the previous section, all and removed. The activity was normalized to a maximum of 1 (radius
of the plot). We observed the existence of two different clustering patterns. In both, we found a
cluster of silent units that is not active for any of the numbers. The first row of the plot represents


                                                    5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


       a
             Removed            All                                               First    All


                     First      All
                                                                                 Removed   All


       b                     Layer 1   Layer 2   Layer 3               Layer 9      Layer 10
           First
           All
           Removed


                                                     Parity    Value


       c


Figure 3: (a) Mean and standard deviation of RSA between first, all and removed network for
10 different runs. (b) Multidimensional scaling (MDS) of the representational dissimilarity matrix
(RDM). (c) Mean accuracy and standard deviation of the linear decoder of neural activity for 10
different runs.


the first pattern. In this pattern of activation, there is a single cluster that responds to even digits
in parity and values less than or equal to four in the value task. When contexts are removed the
cluster responded only to the even digits and values less than or equal to four, entailing that context
increases the activity for 6 and 8 in parity and 1 and 3 in value, that is, for the incongruent digits.
For the other digits, the network thresholds neural activity. For example, odd digits in the parity task
show silent activity.
The second pattern of activation is showed in the second row of figure 4. We found two main
clusters of activity. The first cluster accounts for even digits and values less than or equal to four,
the second cluster for odd digits and values greater than four. When contexts were removed, clusters
only encoded the congruent digits. These patterns of activations show how neurons are tuned to


                                                           6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                           Parity                           Value                      Removed


        Pattern 1
       Pattern 2


                                                Neural Cluster 1    Neural Cluster 2


                    Figure 4: Neural clustering for the parity/value task-switching schedule.


different tasks depending on the current active stimulus. In the brain, neurons that are responsive to
multiple tasks are said to exhibit mixed selectivity (Rigotti et al., 2013). We repeated the experiment
using five tasks and found that the majority of patterns resembled pattern number two. These results
appear in figure 7 in the appendix.

3.4   C ONTEXT STRENGTH IS MAXIMIZED AT INTERMEDIATE LAYERS

After observing the impact of context in the first layer in the previous section, we hypothesized
that context location could be essential for proper input feature extraction and to drive the activity
towards the task goal. Flesch et al. (2022a) observed anticorrelation in the contexts of tasks situated
in the first layer in networks with one hidden layer. Here, we run a series of experiments to assess
the strength of contexts varying their position across the network. Figure 5 shows the results. Each
row represents a different context configuration and each column is the index of the layer (we fixed
the maximum number of layers to 10). A cell colored according to the heatmap means that the
network has a context at that position. A gray cell means that the network has a layer but no context.
A white cell denotes the absence of the layer, and thus the network is shallower. We tried four
different settings: adding contexts from the first layer (5a), adding contexts starting from the last
layer (5b), adding a single context at different layers (5c) and adding contexts and layers at the same
time (5d). In the two first heatmaps we show the Frobenius norm of the weights associated with the
corresponding task. Then we calculated the correlation between contexts of different tasks at the
same location. Finally, we show the average accuracy (and standard error) of the networks in the
same row. The dashed line in the accuracy plot represents the mean accuracy achieved by a network
of 10 layers and 10 contexts (control case).
Results show that context location is not trivial. Largest context strength is achieved at intermediate
layers, where the norm of contexts is higher. At the same time, the anticorrelation between contexts
of different tasks is higher. Context have positive correlation if located at the end of networks with
multiple contexts. In addition, adding context at the beginning or at the end of networks are asso-
ciated with the largest magnitude of context strength. It is explained by the fact that the network is
constrained to digit processing and task separation in the former case, and task separation and output
mapping in the latter. When assessing the accuracy, the presence of contexts in intermediate layers
achieved the same overall performance to that of the control case. Finally, we compared the biases


                                                            7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


           a                     Parity        Value       Correlation       Accuracy


           b   Network Index
               Network Index


           c
               Network Index


           d
               Network Index


                               Layer Index   Layer Index       Layer Index



Figure 5: Mean magnitude and correlation between contexts using different network architectures
for 10 different runs. (a) Context are added from the first layer. (b) Context are added from the last
layer. (c) One context per network. (d) Networks have different number of layers.


between individual and task-switching in figure 9 and show that large magnitude at intermediate
layers is exclusive for task-switching networks.

3.5   TASK - SWITCHING NETWORKS GENERALIZE REPRESENTATIONS BETWEEN TASKS

The last analysis involved the study of the neural representations when the magnitude of contexts
was modified from the values of training. For each task, since we use binary (one-hot) encoding, the
contexts have a default value of 1 if the task is to be executed and 0 otherwise. Values between 0 and
1 can be for instance related to task uncertainty, either normalized to sum 1 or independently from
one another. Hence, many contexts could be activated at the same time. We used a 10 layer network
with contexts in all layers. In a last experiment, we analyze the behavior of the task-switching
network against abnormal context values (>1), which interest is to analyze task performance under
aberrant context modulations, such as those that could be originated from abnormal activity in PFC.
In these scenarios, we inspect the neural representations to gain insight of how networks perform
tasks.
First, we studied the how is the transition from one task to another. To do so, we interpolated the
values of contexts between the two tasks, passing by an intermediate value of 0.5. The total sum of
the contexts was kept to 1, and values are complimentary. As mentioned earlier, this could be related
to task uncertainty in a normalized fashion. Figure 6 shows the accuracy for the different values of
the context. We moved from task value to task parity. Results show that the transition between tasks
is smooth: there is not a hard threshold at 0.5, but a progressive change from one task to the other.
The neural representations at 0.5 show an intermediate state between tasks. The baseline accuracy
is 0.6 since it is the level of congruency between tasks. The accuracy at 0.5 is close to 0.8, which is
the random chance once the congruency baseline is considered.
Next, we wanted the strength of opposition between tasks. We incremented the value of both con-
texts simultaneously from 0 to 1. This is a way to parametrically analize performance according


                                                           8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


           a                                        b


           c                                           d


Figure 6: Mean accuracy of tasks as functions of context intensities for 10 different runs. Shaded
area denotes standard deviation. (a) The total context strength is kept fixed between tasks. (b) Both
tasks are increased simultaneously. (c, d) Contexts are increased and evaluated independently (no
interaction).


to context strength when both tasks are equally probable. Figure 6b shows the accuracy values for
both tasks. The accuracy begins at 0.8 and slightly diverges when reaching a value of 1 for each
task, which is a slight preference of the networks for the task parity. The internal representations
however, show that the network operates in an intermediate step between tasks as observed in figure
6a when both tasks had contexts of 0.5.
Finally, we wanted to analyze how the network performed each single task separately when the
values of the contexts were less or greater than one. As mentioned earlier, the former can be related
to non-normalized task uncertainty, whereas the latter is useful to infer behavior against aberrant
context inputs. In figure 6c, we swept each task independently from 0 to 1, and represented the
values in the same plot. Results indicate that networks do not need to fully certain of the magnitude
of context to operate at highest performance. Concretely, we observe that with contexts close to
0.5, the networks reach the maximum accuracy. We took each network and created the RDM. The
results show that the neural representations for binary (full certain) contexts are already present
for uncertain contexts if their strength is greater than 0.5. Figure 6d shows the accuracies for the
independent tasks when the values of contexts are up to 30-fold of those in training. When the
context dramatically increases, there is an asymmetry between digit extraction and task information
that leads to a decrease of accuracy. It is like the network is very clear about the task to perform but
has lost most of the information about the digit. Hence, the dissimilarity between mean activations
becomes close to zero.

4   C ONCLUSIONS
In this study, we have conducted a series of experiments with multi-task networks primarily focus-
ing on task-switching networks, which leverage contexts to switch between tasks. We have seen that
task-switching networks learn disentangled shared representations that allow to reconstruct the map-
ping between task and goal. Task-switching networks encode congruency to resolve multi-tasking.
Contexts can either improve feature extraction or interfere with the network processing, depending
on their position in the network. Finally, we have shown that task-switching networks generalize
representations between tasks.


                                                   9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT
We attached int a ZIP file the code to train and generate the figures together with the submission of
this paper.

R EFERENCES
Salva Ardid and Xiao-Jing Wang. A tweaking principle for executive control: neuronal circuit
  mechanism for rule-based task switching and conflict resolution. Journal of Neuroscience, 33
  (50):19504–19517, 2013.
Rich Caruana. Multitask learning. Machine learning, 28(1):41–75, 1997.
James J DiCarlo, Davide Zoccolan, and Nicole C Rust. How does the brain solve visual object
  recognition? Neuron, 73(3):415–434, 2012.
Timo Flesch, Jan Balaguer, Ronald Dekker, Hamed Nili, and Christopher Summerfield. Comparing
  continual task learning in minds and machines. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
  115(44):E10313–E10322, 2018.
Timo Flesch, Keno Juechems, Tsvetomira Dumbalska, Andrew Saxe, and Christopher Summerfield.
  Orthogonal representations for robust context-dependent task performance in brains and neural
  networks. Neuron, 110(7):1258–1270, 2022a.
Timo Flesch, David G Nagy, Andrew Saxe, and Christopher Summerfield. Modelling continual
  learning in humans with hebbian context gating and exponentially decaying task signals. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2203.11560, 2022b.
Stefano Fusi, Earl K Miller, and Mattia Rigotti. Why neurons mix: high dimensionality for higher
  cognition. Current opinion in neurobiology, 37:66–74, 2016.
Xavier Glorot, Antoine Bordes, and Yoshua Bengio. Deep sparse rectifier neural networks. In
  Proceedings of the fourteenth international conference on artificial intelligence and statistics, pp.
  315–323. JMLR Workshop and Conference Proceedings, 2011.
Ian Goodfellow, Yoshua Bengio, Aaron Courville, and Yoshua Bengio. Deep learning, volume 1.
  MIT Press, 2016.
Karan Grewal, Jeremy Forest, Benjamin P Cohen, and Subutai Ahmad. Going beyond the point
  neuron: Active dendrites and sparse representations for continual learning. bioRxiv, 2021.
Takuya Ito and John D Murray. Multi-task representations in human cortex transform along a
  sensory-to-motor hierarchy. bioRxiv, 2021.
Takuya Ito, Tim Klinger, Douglas H Schultz, John D Murray, Michael W Cole, and Mattia Rig-
  otti. Compositional generalization through abstract representations in human and artificial neural
  networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.07431, 2022.
Mehrdad Jazayeri and Srdjan Ostojic. Interpreting neural computations by examining intrinsic and
 embedding dimensionality of neural activity. Current opinion in neurobiology, 70:113–120, 2021.
Kevin Johnston, Helen M Levin, Michael J Koval, and Stefan Everling. Top-down control-signal
  dynamics in anterior cingulate and prefrontal cortex neurons following task switching. Neuron,
  53(3):453–462, 2007.
Diederik P Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1412.6980, 2014.
Nikolaus Kriegeskorte and Rogier A Kievit. Representational geometry: integrating cognition, com-
  putation, and the brain. Trends in cognitive sciences, 17(8):401–412, 2013.
Nikolaus Kriegeskorte, Marieke Mur, and Peter A Bandettini. Representational similarity analysis-
  connecting the branches of systems neuroscience. Frontiers in systems neuroscience, pp. 4, 2008.


                                                  10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Yann LeCun, Léon Bottou, Yoshua Bengio, and Patrick Haffner. Gradient-based learning applied to
  document recognition. Proceedings of the IEEE, 86(11):2278–2324, 1998.
Hongyang Li, Wanli Ouyang, and Xiaogang Wang. Multi-bias non-linear activation in deep neural
  networks. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 221–229. PMLR, 2016.
Valerio Mante, David Sussillo, Krishna V Shenoy, and William T Newsome. Context-dependent
  computation by recurrent dynamics in prefrontal cortex. nature, 503(7474):78–84, 2013.
Nicolas Y Masse, Gregory D Grant, and David J Freedman. Alleviating catastrophic forgetting
  using context-dependent gating and synaptic stabilization. Proceedings of the National Academy
  of Sciences, 115(44):E10467–E10475, 2018.
Earl K Miller, Jonathan D Cohen, et al. An integrative theory of prefrontal cortex function. Annual
  review of neuroscience, 24(1):167–202, 2001.
Stephen Monsell. Task switching. Trends in cognitive sciences, 7(3):134–140, 2003.
Sebastian Musslick, Andrew Saxe, Kayhan Özcimder, Biswadip Dey, Greg Henselman, and
  Jonathan D Cohen. Multitasking capability versus learning efficiency in neural network archi-
  tectures. Cognitive Science Society, 2017.
Adam Paszke, Sam Gross, Francisco Massa, Adam Lerer, James Bradbury, Gregory Chanan, Trevor
  Killeen, Zeming Lin, Natalia Gimelshein, Luca Antiga, et al. Pytorch: An imperative style, high-
  performance deep learning library. Advances in neural information processing systems, 32, 2019.
F. Pedregosa, G. Varoquaux, A. Gramfort, V. Michel, B. Thirion, O. Grisel, M. Blondel, P. Pretten-
   hofer, R. Weiss, V. Dubourg, J. Vanderplas, A. Passos, D. Cournapeau, M. Brucher, M. Perrot, and
   E. Duchesnay. Scikit-learn: Machine learning in Python. Journal of Machine Learning Research,
   12:2825–2830, 2011.
Blake A Richards, Timothy P Lillicrap, Philippe Beaudoin, Yoshua Bengio, Rafal Bogacz, Amelia
  Christensen, Claudia Clopath, Rui Ponte Costa, Archy de Berker, Surya Ganguli, et al. A deep
  learning framework for neuroscience. Nature neuroscience, 22(11):1761–1770, 2019.
Mattia Rigotti, Omri Barak, Melissa R Warden, Xiao-Jing Wang, Nathaniel D Daw, Earl K Miller,
 and Stefano Fusi. The importance of mixed selectivity in complex cognitive tasks. Nature, 497
 (7451):585–590, 2013.
Sebastian Ruder. An overview of multi-task learning in deep neural networks. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1706.05098, 2017.
David E Rumelhart, Geoffrey E Hinton, and Ronald J Williams. Learning representations by back-
  propagating errors. nature, 323(6088):533–536, 1986.
Joan Serra, Didac Suris, Marius Miron, and Alexandros Karatzoglou. Overcoming catastrophic
  forgetting with hard attention to the task. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp.
  4548–4557. PMLR, 2018.
Guolei Sun, Thomas Probst, Danda Pani Paudel, Nikola Popović, Menelaos Kanakis, Jagruti Patel,
  Dengxin Dai, and Luc Van Gool. Task switching network for multi-task learning. In Proceedings
  of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 8291–8300, 2021.
Pauli Virtanen, Ralf Gommers, Travis E Oliphant, Matt Haberland, Tyler Reddy, David Cournapeau,
  Evgeni Burovski, Pearu Peterson, Warren Weckesser, Jonathan Bright, et al. Scipy 1.0: funda-
  mental algorithms for scientific computing in python. Nature methods, 17(3):261–272, 2020.
Mitchell Wortsman, Vivek Ramanujan, Rosanne Liu, Aniruddha Kembhavi, Mohammad Rastegari,
 Jason Yosinski, and Ali Farhadi. Supermasks in superposition. Advances in Neural Information
 Processing Systems, 33:15173–15184, 2020.
Rafael Yuste. From the neuron doctrine to neural networks. Nature reviews neuroscience, 16(8):
  487–497, 2015.


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A     A PPENDIX
A.1   N ETWORK T RAINING

For each architecture, we trained two different models with 5 (section 3.1) and 10 layers (sections
3.2, 3.3, 3.4, 3.5). Networks were trained for a total number of 50 epochs. The number of hidden
units per layer was fixed to 100. We selected ReLU as the activation function Glorot et al. (2011) and
                                                                                    √      √
initialized weights and biases following a uniform distribution in the range (−1/ N , 1/ N ), where
N is the number of inputs to the layer. We used the Adam optimizer for training (Kingma & Ba,
2014) with learning rate 0.001, β1 = 0.9 and β2 = 0.999 and the cross entropy loss function. The
models were implemented in PyTorch Paszke et al. (2019). We collected statistics over 10 different
runs and controlled the random number generator for reproducibility and hypothesis testing. The
code to reproduce the results is attached in a ZIP file with the submission of this paper.

A.2   B INARY TASKS

We designed five main tasks using MNIST. For all tasks, we split the images into a training set of
50,000 images and a test set of 10,000. The batch size was fixed to 100 images. The following table
denotes the names of the task and the expected output of the network (0, first output unit, 1 second
output unit):

                                                           Number
                       Task Name
                                       0   1      2    3     4   5    6    7   8   9
                       Parity          1   0      1    0     1   0    1    0   1   0
                       Value           1   1      1    1     1   0    0    0   0   0
                       Prime           0   0      1    1     0   1    0    1   0   0
                       Fibonacci       1   1      1    1     0   1    0    0   1   0
                       Multiple 3      0   0      0    1     0   0    1    0   0   1

The total congruency between tasks is represented in the following table:

                                Parity     Value      Prime      Fibonacci     Multiple 3
                    Parity        1         0.6        0.3           0.5           0.4
                    Value        0.6         1         0.5           0.7           0.4
                    Prime        0.3        0.5         1            0.6           0.5
                  Fibonacci      0.5        0.7        0.6            1            0.3
                  Multiple 3     0.4        0.4        0.5           0.3            1


A.3   R EPRESENTATIONAL D ISSIMILARITY M ATRIX (RDM)

For each layer, we construct an activation matrix consisting of NT × Ntest rows and Nhidden
columns, where NT is the number of tasks, Ntest is the test set size, 10,000 and Nhidden the number
of hidden units of a layer. For each label of MNIST, we will calculate the average activation for
the hidden units in the layer. For each task, we create a matrix of dimension 10 × Nhidden . This
matrix represent the average unit response to each of the possible stimulus of the dataset. Finally,
we calculate the dissimilarity between row vectors, denoting the dissimilarity between the average
of two numbers for two different tasks. We calculate the dissimilarity between vectors as 1 − r/2,
where r is the Pearson correlation coefficient.

A.4   M ULTIDIMENSIONAL S CALING (MDS)

To construct the multidimensional scaling embedding we create first the RDM of a layer. The RDM
is a distance matrix where a position ij denotes the distance between i and j. We project this high-
dimensional points into a two-dimensional embedding using MDS. We used the scikit-learn module
to implement MDS Pedregosa et al. (2011). The maximum iteration was set to 1000 to guarantee
convergence. The tolerance was set to 10−5 .


                                                      12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A.5   L INEAR D ECODER

We used multiclass logistic regression as linear decoder of neural activations across layers. We used
the scikit-learn module to implement the logistic regression model Pedregosa et al. (2011). The
maximum iteration was set to 5000 to guarantee convergence. The tolerance was set to 10−3 . We
used L2 regularization and cross entropy as loss function.
We constructed an activation matrix consisting of NT × Ntest rows and Nhidden columns, where
NT is the number of tasks, Ntest is the test set size, 10,000 and Nhidden the number of hidden units
of a layer to decode. We divided the rows into a train set and test set following a 90/10 split. We
used the labels of numbers to create the task and congruency labels. We assembled the activation
matrix for each layer of a network and averaged the results of the 10 different runs.

A.6   AGGLOMERATIVE H IERARCHICAL C LUSTERING

Similarly as in the assembling of the RDM, we average the neural activity for the 10 numbers,
having a matrix of size 10 × Nhidden . Here we gather the averages of activity for the different tasks
to construct a matrix of size Nhidden × 10 · NT . Each independent row conforms the averages of
activations across tasks for a single hidden unit. We normalize the activity to be maximum of 1. We
apply hierarchical clustering to create the dendrogram of hidden units using the centroid method in
SciPy (Virtanen et al., 2020). The we find the cluster of each hidden unit. Finally, we calculate the
average activity of each cluster.


                                                 13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


B    S UPPLEMENTARY F IGURES


Figure 7: (a) Average RDM for the parity/value/prime/fibonacci/multiple3 task-switching schedule
for the three architectures for 10 different runs. (b) Pearson correlation coefficient between RDM
(mean of 10 runs with standard deviation). (c) Accuracy of the different models.


                                               14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


               Parity                            Value                      Fibonacci


               Prime                          Multiple 3                    Removed


                                     Neural Cluster 1    Neural Cluster 2


Figure 8: Neural clustering for the parity/value/prime/fibonacci/multiple3 task-switching schedule.

 a


 b


Figure 9: Magnitude and correlation between biases in individual (a) and task-switching networks
(b). We show mean and standard deviation over 10 runs.


                                                    15
