Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2022


I S S TOCHASTIC G RADIENT D ESCENT
N EAR O PTIMAL ?
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT

         The success of neural networks over the past decade has established them as effec-
         tive models for many relevant data generating processes. Statistical theory on neu-
         ral networks indicates graceful scaling of sample complexity. For example, Jeon
         & Van Roy (2022) demonstrate that, when data is generated by a ReLU teacher
         network with W parameters, an optimal learner needs only Õ(W/ϵ) samples to
         attain expected error ϵ. However, existing computational theory suggests that,
         even for single-hidden-layer teacher networks, to attain small error for all such
         teacher networks, the computation required to achieve this sample complexity is
         intractable. In this work, we fit single-hidden-layer neural networks to data gener-
         ated by single-hidden-layer ReLU teacher networks with parameters drawn from a
         natural distribution. We demonstrate that stochastic gradient descent (SGD) with
         automated width selection attains small expected error with a number of samples
         and total number of queries both nearly linear in the input dimension and width.
         This suggests that SGD nearly achieves the information-theoretic sample com-
         plexity bounds of Jeon & Van Roy (2022) in a computationally efficient manner.
         An important difference between our positive empirical results and the negative
         theoretical results is that the latter address worst-case error of deterministic algo-
         rithms, while our analysis centers on expected error of a stochastic algorithm.


1   I NTRODUCTION

Over the past decade, deep neural networks have produced groundbreaking results. To name a
few, they have demonstrated impressive performance on visual classification tasks (He et al., 2016),
parsing and synthesizing natural language (Devlin et al., 2018; Brown et al., 2020), and super-human
performance in various games (Mnih et al., 2013). These achievements establish neural networks as
effective models for many relevant data generating processes.
Statistical theory on neural networks indicate graceful scaling of sample complexity. For example,
when the data is generated by a ReLU teacher network with W parameters, Jeon & Van Roy (2022)
demonstrate that the sample complexity of an optimal learner is Õ(W ).
However, existing computational theory suggests that, even for single-hidden-layer teacher net-
works, the computation required to achieve this sample complexity is intractable. For example, Goel
et al. (2020); Diakonikolas et al. (2020) establish that, for batched stochastic gradient descent with
respect to squared or logistic loss to achieve small generalization error for all single-hidden-layer
teacher networks, the number of samples or number of gradient steps must be superpolynomial in
input dimension or network width. Furthermore, current theoretical guarantees for all computation-
ally tractable algorithms proposed for fitting single-hidden-layer teacher networks with parameters
drawn from natural distributions only bound sample complexity by high-order polynomial (Janza-
min et al., 2015; Ge et al., 2017) or exponential (Zhong et al., 2017; Fu et al., 2020) functions of
input dimension or width.
In this work, we aim to reconcile the gap between these negative theoretical results and the apparent
practical success of stochastic gradient descent (SGD) in training performant neural networks. To
do so, we fit single-hidden-layer neural networks to data generated by single-hidden-layer ReLU
teacher networks with parameters drawn from a natural distribution. We demonstrate that SGD with
automated width selection attains small expected error with a number of samples and total number of


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2022


queries both nearly linear in the input dimension and width. This suggests that SGD nearly achieves
the information-theoretic sample complexity bounds established in Jeon & Van Roy (2022); Bartlett
et al. (2019) in a computationally efficient manner.
An important difference between our empirical results and the negative theoretical results of Goel
et al. (2020); Diakonikolas et al. (2020) is that the latter address worst-case error of deterministic
algorithms, while our analysis centers on expected error. The focus on expected error is more in
line with the information-theoretic sample complexity bounds of Jeon & Van Roy (2022). Our
results suggest that such expected-error analyses may be better-suited for understanding empirical
properties of neural network learning.


2     R ELATED W ORK

Our work contributes to the literature on the sample and computational complexity of single-hidden-
layer networks. To put our work in context, we review related work in this area, grouped into several
categories.

2.1   S TOCHASTIC Q UERY L OWER B OUNDS

Most lower bounds on the sample and computational complexity of single-hidden-layer neural net-
works have been established through the stochastic query framework (Goel et al., 2020; Diakoniko-
las et al., 2020; Song et al., 2017). A stochastic query algorithm accesses an oracle that returns the
expectation of a query function within some tolerance. The literature focuses on query functions that
enable gradient descent with respect to common loss functions, with one query per gradient descent
step.
Aside from the results of Goel et al. (2020); Diakonikolas et al. (2020), which were discussed in the
introduction, Song et al. (2017) show that in a setting where the number of samples is less than the
product of the input dimension and the width, exponentially many stochastic queries are required.

2.2   S AMPLE C OMPLEXITY U PPER B OUNDS

Jeon & Van Roy (2022); Bartlett et al. (2019) study the sample complexity of optimal learning from
data generated by teacher networks, without addressing algorithms or computational complexity.
Bartlett et al. (2019) establish upper and lower bounds on the VC dimension (see Vapnik & Chervo-
nenkis (1971)) of noiseless neural networks. For piece-wise linear activation functions, their work
shows that the VC dimension of a network with W parameters and L layers is upper bounded by
O(W L log W ) and that there exist networks with W parameters and L layers with VC dimension
lower bounded by Ω(W L log(W/L)). These bounds on the VC dimension translate to both upper
and lower bounds on the sample complexity of any probably approximately correct (PAC) learning
algorithm (Valiant, 1984). Results in Hanneke (2016) show that for a PAC algorithm that learns         up
                                                                               1            1

to within tolerance ϵ and failure rate at most δ, the sample complexity is Θ   ϵ (VC +  log δ )  . In our
context, this implies O 1ϵ (W L log W + log 1δ ) sample complexity

                                                                        for all teacher networks with
W weights and L layers and Ω 1ϵ (W L log(W/L) + log 1δ ) for some of these teacher networks.


Jeon & Van Roy (2022) use information theory to study the number of samples required to learn from
a noisy teacher network such that the expected error is small. Instead of relying on VC dimension,
their bounds scale linearly in the rate-distortion function of the neural network. For networks with
ReLU or sign activations, their results imply an Õ(W/ϵ) sample complexity bound, where W is the
total number of parameters, and ϵ is the expected error.
For single-hidden-layer ReLU teacher networks, both works suggest an upper bound on sample
complexity that is linear in the number of parameters, up to logarithmic factors. However, no prac-
tical algorithm is given. The VC dimension upper bound implies PAC-learnability, and Jeon &
Van Roy studies the expected performance of an optimal Bayesian learner. An important difference
between these results and the negative stochastic query results is that the latter analyze worst-case
performance.


                                                   2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2022


2.3   C ONCRETE A LGORITHMS

A segment of the literature offers concrete algorithms for learning from single-hidden-layer teacher
networks (Zhong et al., 2017; Fu et al., 2020; Janzamin et al., 2015; Ge et al., 2017).
In Zhong et al. (2017), to fit the data generated by a noiseless single-hidden-layer ReLU network, the
weights are first initialized by a tensor method, which guarantees linear convergence under gradient
descent with high probability. However, the sample complexity is exponential in the input dimension
and the number of hidden neurons when the weights are i.i.d. Gaussians, as we assume in this paper
(see Appendix D for details). Fu et al. (2020) adapts the tensor initialization of Zhong et al. (2017)
and provides similar results for cross entropy loss, instead of L2 loss.
Ge et al. (2017) design an alternate objective function G such that using SGD to minimize G can
recover the parameters of the single-hidden-layer teacher network with high probability. The sample
and computational complexity are high-order polynomials in the input dimension and width.
Janzamin et al. (2015) use tensor factorization, Fourier analysis, and ridge regression to fit the data
generated by single-hidden-layer teacher networks with high probability. In the case of Gaussian
inputs, the sample and computational complexity are high-order polynomial in input dimension and
width. Note that the results in Ge et al. (2017); Janzamin et al. (2015) do not contradict the results of
Goel et al. (2020); Diakonikolas et al. (2020), since the former construct algorithms that work with
high probability.
Results from a couple papers that focus on networks with multiple hidden layers bear additional im-
plications if specialized to single-hidden-layer networks. Arora et al. (2014) propose an algorithm
that learns a distribution generated by a sparse neural network with sign activation units and random
edge weights. When specialized to a single hidden layer this gives rise to an Õ(M 3 ) sample com-
plexity bound, where M is the width. Zhang et al. (2016) propose an algorithm for which sample
complexity depends exponentially on maximum among neurons of L1 norms of incoming weights
for particular activation units.

3     P RELIMINARIES
In this section we give necessary definitions for our experiments, much of which is directly adapted
from Jeon & Van Roy (2022).

3.1   T EACHER N ETWORK

We assume that the training algorithm is given a set S of N i.i.d samples
                            S = {(x1 , y1 ), ..., (xN , yN )} ⊂ Rd × R.
The input X ∼ N (0, Id ), and the output Y is produced by a random single-hidden-layer teacher
network g with noise W :
                                  Y = g(X) + W : Rd → R.
The random single-hidden-layer teacher network g is parametrized by (a, b, θ):
                                             M
                                             X
                                   g(X) =          θi relu(aTi X + bi ),
                                             i=1
where M is the width of the hidden layer and relu(x) = max(0, x). For the learnable parameters,
                                      iid      1              iid     1              iid    1
we assume that for all i ∈ [M ], ai ∼ N (0, d+1   Id ), bi ∼ N (0, d+1  ), and θi ∼ N (0, M   ). The
choice of variances keeps the variance of g(x) relatively fixed across different d and M . We further
assume that the noise W ∼ N (0, σ 2 ). We denote the hyperparameters for this teacher network by
γ := (d, M, σ). Note that this is a special case of the ReLU data generating process from Jeon &
Van Roy (2022).

3.2   E RROR

We define test error as dKL (PY ∥PŶ ), the KL-divergence from the predictive distribution of Y (PŶ )
to its true distribution PY . We assume that the predictive distribution of Y is Gaussian with the same


                                                     3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2022


variance as the real distribution of Y , i.e., Ŷ ∼ N (ĝS (X), σ 2 ), where ĝS is the model trained on S.
Then, the KL-divergence simplifies to L2 error with respect to the noiseless teacher network scaled
inversely by the noise (see section 2.6 of Jeon & Van Roy (2022)):
                                                   h                           i
                                                                        2
                                                  E (ĝS (X) − g(X)) |g, S
                            dKL (PY ∥PŶ ) =                                     .                      (1)
                                                             2σ 2

3.3   S AMPLE C OMPLEXITY

Our definition of sample complexity is adapted from Definition 4. in Jeon & Van Roy (2022). For
any ϵ > 0, we defined the sample complexity Nϵ of a training procedure as the minimal number of
samples N such that after training on N samples, the expected error is at most ϵ:
                                           h                   i      
                                                              2
                                         E (ĝS (X) − g(X))           
                         Nϵ = min N :                             ≤  ϵ    ,
                                                   2σ 2               

where S is an iid set of N training samples, and ĝS is the model trained on this set. Here the
expectation is taken over both X and g; so this definition of sample complexity captures the expected
performance of a training algorithm.

3.4   C OMPUTATIONAL C OMPLEXITY

We use the total number of queries to the training data points as a proxy for computational com-
plexity, which we denote by T . More concretely, if the algorithm is trained on m batches of size
n, then the number of queries to the training data points would be nm. When each data point is
queried, it generates a forward pass and a backward pass. So the actual computation complexity of
the algorithm is a product of T and a scaling factor that depends on the fitting model size.

4     E XPERIMENT S ETUP
In this section we describe how the experiments are conducted. We first describe the experiment
pipeline and then discuss the various components.

4.1   E XPERIMENT P IPELINE

The experiment pipeline is outlined in Algorithm 1, and the corresponding code is available on-
line (Appendix A). The definition of various parameters and the respective values chosen for the
experiments are summarized in Table 1.

                           Table 1: Summary of Parameters in Experiment

         Parameter           Descriptions                      Values Chosen
      γ = (d, M, σ) ∈ Γ      Hyperparameters of Teacher
                             Network
              d              Input Dimension                   {1, 2, 4, ..., 27 = 128}
              M              Number of Hidden Neurons          {1, 2, 4, ..., 27 = 128}
              σ              Standard Deviation of Noise       {0.1, 0.2}
                                                                   1 to 0.01 for d, M ≤ 26 = 64
               ϵ             Target Test Error
                                                               1 to 0.1 for max(d, M ) = 27 = 128
           N ∈N              Number of Samples                 Successive powers of two to reach
                                                               all target ϵ
          num trials         Number of trials to run for       At least 32
                             each configuration

To experimentally verify the the dependence of sample and computational complexity on d and
M , we generate teacher-networks where d and M are increasing powers of two: (d, M ) ∈


                                                    4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2022


Algorithm 1 Experimental Data Generation Algorithm
 1: for each data generation hyperparameter γ ∈ Γ do
 2:     for each sample number N ∈ N do
 3:         for i ∈ [num trials] do
 4:             g ← sample g(γ)
 5:             Sample N i.i.d. (x1 , x2 , ..., xN ) according to N (0, Id )
 6:             ∀j ∈ [N ], calculate yj noiseless ← g(xj )
                                                                                iid
 7:               ∀j ∈ [N ], calculate yj ← yj noiseless + wj , where wj ∼ N (0, σ 2 ).
 8:               Set S ← {(xj , yj )|j ∈ [N ]}
 9:               ĝS ← train(γ, S), logging the number of queries to data points Tγ,N,i .
10:               Evaluate error according to equation 1:
                                                  h                          i
                                                                      2
                                                E (ĝS (X) − g(X)) |g, S
                                  errorγ,N,i ←
                                                             2σ 2
11:            end for
12:             Average over experiments: let
                                                  1          X
                                 errorγ,N ←                          errorγ,N,i
                                              num trials
                                                          i∈[num trials]

      and
                                                1             X
                                    Tγ,N ←                                 Tγ,N,i .
                                             num trials
                                                          i∈[num trials]

13:         end for
14:         Calculate Nγ,ϵ :
                                    Nγ,ϵ ← min{N ∈ N : errorγ,N ≤ ϵ}
15: end for


{1, 2, 4, ..., 128}2 . Then, we estimate the sample complexity Nϵ for target error ϵ spanning two or-
ders of magnitude (ϵ ∈ {1, 0.1, 0.01}) with a training algorithm that automatically tunes the width.
We run the training algorithm on samples S of increasing size N until the test error is below the
specified ϵ, and set the smallest such N as Nϵ . By choosing N to double each time, we estimate Nϵ
within a factor of 2. The above procedure is performed for noise σ = 0.1 and σ = 0.2; and for each
configuration, at least 32 trials are performed to reduce the noise in gathered data.

4.2     T RAINING

We split the samples S into an internal training set St and a validation set Sv using a 80/20 ratio. We
train single-hidden-layer neural networks of different widths on St using golden-section search, and
select the model with the best performance on the validation set Sv . Various details are described
below.

4.2.1       A RCHITECTURE OF F ITTING N ETWORK
The fitting network is an single-hidden-layer ReLU network, the same as the teacher network, but
with different widths (number of hidden neurons). No explicit form of regularization like dropout
or weight decay is used.
To find the best width, we perform golden-section
                                             √         search (scipy.optimize.golden) on
widths ranging from 2 to 32 + 8 · max(N, dM + max(d, M )). This maximum width is chosen
to allow ample over-fitting, considering either the number of provided samples, or the architecture
of the teacher network. Golden-section search is performed on the logarithm (base 2) of the width,
with tolerance set to 0.25. The motivation behind this scheme is to get close to a good width by
searching few points. For example, at most 8 steps are needed to search through widths from 2 to
1000 in this scheme (the number of steps is at most ln(initial range/tolerance)
                                                                ln(ϕ)           ). We believe that model


                                                     5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2022


performance should roughly be a unimodal function of width. So golden-section search should find
widths near the optimum. The number of queries T is the sum of the number of queries for each
searched width.

4.2.2     O PTIMIZATION
To train the network, we use Adam (Kingma & Ba, 2015) with respect to L2 loss. Aside from the
learning rate, We use the default parameters from the PyTorch implementation (β1 = 0.9, β2 =
0.999). As empirical evidence suggests that small batch sizes generalize better (for example, see
Keskar et al. (2017)), we set the batch size to 64 for a balance between model performance and
training speed.
To automatically set the initial learning rate, we adapt the method first proposed in Smith (2017).
We start with a very small learning rate (1e-8) and exponentially increase it until the model starts to
diverge. We adapt three methods implemented in the fastai library1 to estimate the best learning rate
2
  , and use their medium as the initial learning rate. The queries to the data points in the phase are
included in the calculation of T .
During training, we reduce the learning rate by a factor of 10 when the validation loss plateaus using
ReduceLROnPlateau from PyTorch (mode=‘min’ and patience=12).
We stop training whenever the best validation loss fails to decrease relatively by more than 1% in 24
epochs, and use the model corresponding to the best validation loss. For each fitting network, there
is a hard cap of 1500 epochs of training, which is typically never reached.

5       R ESULTS AND D ISCUSSION

5.1     S AMPLE C OMPLEXITY
                                                    Nϵ
In Figure 1, we plot ϵNϵ against dM (left) and dM       against ϵ−1 (right) for the different choices of
noise (σ = 0.1, 0.2). In these plots, ϵ is the average test error, and Nϵ is the corresponding number
of samples provided. Both the horizontal axis and the vertical axis are drawn in log scale, with equal
aspect ratio. In all plots, we included a scatter plot of the points, and a reference line of unit slope
in the log plot, which corresponds to a linear fit of the data. In the plots on the left, we also plotted
lines corresponding to the median, the mean, and the 95 and 5 percentiles. In the plots on the right,
we use locally weighted smoothing (Cleveland, 1979) to estimate the trend, and the 95% confidence
interval is produced by bootstrap resampling two-thirds of the data.
As we can see in the plots, ϵNϵ is almost proportional to dM , for a wide range of d, M , and ϵ. Both
Bartlett et al. (2019) and Jeon & Van Roy (2022) predict the theoretical sample complexity to be
proportional to dM ϵ , up to log factors. So our results indicate that SGD on neural networks (with
automatic width selection) can achieve the theoretical sample complexity of “optimal” learners in
the case of single-hidden-layer teacher network.
We note that while the dependence of Nϵ on dM is very close to linear for big dM , the dependence
of Nϵ on ϵ−1 is noticeably worse than linear for very small ϵ. Additional plots of the dependence of
Nϵ on d and M for fixed ϵ can be found in Appendix B.

5.2     C OMPUTATIONAL C OMPLEXITY

We plot the number of queries T against the number of samples N in Figure 2. As in the previous
plots, both the horizontal and vertical axis are in log scale and have equal aspect ratio. We include a
reference line of unit slope in the log plot, which corresponds to a linear fit of the data.
From Figure 2 we can see that the dependence of T on N is slightly less than linear and so T =
O(N ). In the previous section, we demonstrated that Nϵ , the number of samples necessary to
achieve test error within ϵ tolerance, appears to be O( dM
                                                         ϵ ). Therefore, Tϵ , the total number of

    1
    https://docs.fast.ai/
    2
    steep, where the loss as the steepest descent; minimum, for a learning rate 1/20 of where the loss is the
smallest; and valley, when the loss is in the middle of its longest valley


                                                     6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2022


                                 (a) Sample complexity when σ = 0.1


                                 (b) Sample complexity when σ = 0.2

Figure 1: Sample complexity is almost linear in dM ϵ for wide range of d, M , and ϵ. ϵ is the average
test error, and Nϵ is the corresponding sample size. All vertical and horizontal axises are in the log
scale, with equal aspect ratio. A unit slope reference is provided to indicate a linear relationship in
the log scale. For σ = 0.1 (top), the reference lines correspond to ϵNϵ = 1.79dM ; for σ = 0.2
(bottom), the reference lines correspond to ϵNϵ = 1.11dM . The confidence intervals on the right
are generated by bootstrap resampling of two-thirds of the data.


queries to datapoints to achieve ϵ tolerance, is also approximately proportional to dM
                                                                                     ϵ . This implies
that for all N , the average number of times each single data point is queried is bounded above by a
constant.
In our experiments, the width of the fitting network is O(d + M ). Since each query of a data
point corresponds to at most one forward pass and one backward pass, the overall computational
complexity is O(N d(d + M )) = Õ(d2 M (d + M )) for fixed ϵ. We hypothesize that by tightening


                                                  7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2022


the upper bound on the fitting network’s width to O(M ), the current results would still hold, and the
corresponding computational complexity could be improved to Õ(d2 M 2 ).


        (a) Computational complexity when σ = 0.1               (b) Computational complexity when σ = 0.2

Figure 2: Total number of queries to datapoints is sublinear in sample size. All vertical and hor-
izontal axises are in the log scale, with equal aspect ratio. A unit slope reference is provided to
indicate a linear relationship in the log scale. For σ = 0.1 (left), the reference line corresponds to
T = 1940N ; for σ = 0.2 (right), the reference line corresponds to T = 1622N . The sublinear
relationship indicates that the average number of times each single data point is queried is O(1) for
all N .



6       C OMPARISON WITH E XISTING R ESULTS

6.1       C OMPARISON WITH THEORETICAL RESULTS

In the case of single-hidden-layer neural networks, both Bartlett et al. (2019)  and Jeon & Van Roy
(2022) give theoretical upper bounds on the sample complexity that is Õ dN   ϵ
                                                                                ϵ
                                                                                  . As for lower bounds
on sample complexity, the result in Bartlett et al. (1998) implies the existence of single-hidden-layer
neural networks3 with sample complexity at least linear in the total number of weights. However,
to the best of our knowledge, there is no tight theoretical lower bound on sample complexity when
the teacher network is assumed to be drawn from a distribution, and even for single-hidden-layer
teacher networks this seems to remain an open problem.
We empirically demonstrate that for single-hidden-layer teacher networks, running SGD on neural
networks with adequate hyper-parameters achieves the best known theoretical bounds on sample
complexity, with very manageable run time – the average number of queries per datapoint is con-
stant. SGD empirically works well in terms of sample and computational complexity in spite of
negative theoretical results in the stochastic query framework (Goel et al., 2020; Diakonikolas et al.,
2020). The discrepancy between theory and practice is best explained by the analysis framework.
While Goel et al. (2020); Diakonikolas et al. (2020) analyze the worst case performance of algo-
rithms and prove that either sample or computational complexity must be super-polynomial, our
empirical work studies the average performance of SGD. The focus on average case performance
is also more in line with the actual uses of neural networks – in practice, people don’t necessarily
need guarantees that SGD on neural networks works for all datasets, as long as practical algorithms
succeed with high probability.

    3
        Mild constraints are imposed on the activation functions. Sigmoid, for example, satisfies the constraints.


                                                          8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2022


6.2   C OMPARISON WITH OTHER ALGORITHMS

Zhong et al. (2017); Fu et al. (2020); Janzamin et al. (2015); Ge et al. (2017) all construct algo-
rithms to fit single-hidden-layer teacher networks with provable guarantees on sample complexity,
computational complexity, and error. Here we highlight some differences between their works and
ours:

       • While our results indicate sample complexity linear in number of parameters, the men-
         tioned works either have high-order polynomial (Janzamin et al., 2015; Ge et al., 2017)
         or exponential (Zhong et al. (2017); Fu et al. (2020), see Appendix D for details) sample
         complexity.
       • Our work uses standard machine learning tools (Adam, random weight initialization, early
         stopping, learning rate decay), while the mentioned works use algorithms not commonly
         found in practice. Zhong et al. (2017); Fu et al. (2020) uses a tensor method to initialize
         the weights before applying SGD; Janzamin et al. (2015) use tensor factorization, Fourier
         analysis, and ridge regression instead of SGD; and Ge et al. (2017) designs an alternate
         objective function.

7     C ONCLUSIONS
In this work, we empirically demonstrate that to reach a small expected error for single-hidden-layer
teacher networks, SGD with automatic width tuning can nearly achieve theoretic sample complex-
ity bounds in a computationally efficient manner. This helps bridge a gap that previously existed
between theoretic sample complexity upper bounds and the absence of algorithms that achieve
this upper bound computationally efficiently. In addition, the near optimal sample and computa-
tion complexity of SGD on neural networks opens up the possibility of modelling it as an optimal
Bayesian learner. We hope that this new perspective contributes to the general understanding of
performance of SGD on neural networks. Investigating whether our results extend to multiple-
hidden-layer teacher networks remains an interesting question for future research.

Reproducibility Statement      We provide the source code for reproducing the experiments (Ap-
pendix A).

R EFERENCES
Sanjeev Arora, Aditya Bhaskara, Rong Ge, and Tengyu Ma. Provable bounds for learning some deep
  representations. In Proceedings of the 31st International Conference on International Conference
  on Machine Learning - Volume 32, ICML’14, pp. I–584–I–592. JMLR.org, 2014.
Peter Bartlett, Vitaly Maiorov, and Ron Meir. Almost linear vc dimension bounds for piecewise
  polynomial networks. Advances in neural information processing systems, 11, 1998.
Peter L. Bartlett, Nick Harvey, Christopher Liaw, and Abbas Mehrabian. Nearly-tight vc-dimension
  and pseudodimension bounds for piecewise linear neural networks. Journal of Machine Learning
  Research, 20(63):1–17, 2019. URL http://jmlr.org/papers/v20/17-612.html.
Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
  Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. Language models are
  few-shot learners. Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:1877–1901, 2020.
William S Cleveland. Robust locally weighted regression and smoothing scatterplots. Journal of the
 American statistical association, 74(368):829–836, 1979.
Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. Bert: Pre-training of deep
  bidirectional transformers for language understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.04805, 2018.
Ilias Diakonikolas, Daniel M. Kane, Vasilis Kontonis, and Nikos Zarifis. Algorithms and SQ lower
   bounds for PAC learning one-hidden-layer relu networks. CoRR, abs/2006.12476, 2020. URL
   https://arxiv.org/abs/2006.12476.


                                                 9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2022


Haoyu Fu, Yuejie Chi, and Yingbin Liang. Guaranteed recovery of one-hidden-layer neural networks
  via cross entropy. IEEE Transactions on Signal Processing, 68:3225–3235, 2020. doi: 10.1109/
  TSP.2020.2993153.
Rong Ge, Jason D Lee, and Tengyu Ma. Learning one-hidden-layer neural networks with landscape
  design. arXiv preprint arXiv:1711.00501, 2017.
Surbhi Goel, Aravind Gollakota, Zhihan Jin, Sushrut Karmalkar, and Adam Klivans. Superpoly-
  nomial lower bounds for learning one-layer neural networks using gradient descent, 2020. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/2006.12011.
Steve Hanneke. The optimal sample complexity of pac learning. The Journal of Machine Learning
  Research, 17(1):1319–1333, 2016.
Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image recog-
  nition. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp.
  770–778, 2016.
Majid Janzamin, Hanie Sedghi, and Anima Anandkumar. Generalization bounds for neural networks
 through tensor factorization. CoRR, abs/1506.08473, 2015. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/
 1506.08473.
Hong Jun Jeon and Benjamin Van Roy. An information-theoretic framework for supervised learning,
  2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2203.00246.
Nitish Shirish Keskar, Dheevatsa Mudigere, Jorge Nocedal, Mikhail Smelyanskiy, and Ping Tak Pe-
  ter Tang. On large-batch training for deep learning: Generalization gap and sharp minima. In
  International Conference on Learning Representations, 2017. URL https://openreview.
  net/forum?id=H1oyRlYgg.
Diederik P. Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. In ICLR (Poster),
  2015. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1412.6980.
Roi Livni, Shai Shalev-Shwartz, and Ohad Shamir. On the computational efficiency of training
  neural networks. Advances in neural information processing systems, 27, 2014.
Volodymyr Mnih, Koray Kavukcuoglu, David Silver, Alex Graves, Ioannis Antonoglou, Daan Wier-
  stra, and Martin Riedmiller. Playing atari with deep reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1312.5602, 2013.
Behnam Neyshabur, Zhiyuan Li, Srinadh Bhojanapalli, Yann LeCun, and Nathan Srebro. To-
  wards understanding the role of over-parametrization in generalization of neural networks. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1805.12076, 2018.
Leslie N. Smith. Cyclical learning rates for training neural networks. In 2017 IEEE Winter Con-
  ference on Applications of Computer Vision (WACV), pp. 464–472, 2017. doi: 10.1109/WACV.
  2017.58.
Le Song, Santosh Vempala, John Wilmes, and Bo Xie. On the complexity of learning neural net-
  works. In I. Guyon, U. Von Luxburg, S. Bengio, H. Wallach, R. Fergus, S. Vishwanathan, and
  R. Garnett (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 30. Curran As-
  sociates, Inc., 2017. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2017/file/
  a78482ce76496fcf49085f2190e675b4-Paper.pdf.
Leslie G Valiant. A theory of the learnable. Communications of the ACM, 27(11):1134–1142, 1984.
V. N. Vapnik and A. Ya. Chervonenkis. On the uniform convergence of relative frequencies of
  events to their probabilities. Theory of Probability & Its Applications, 16(2):264–280, 1971. doi:
  10.1137/1116025. URL https://doi.org/10.1137/1116025.
Yuchen Zhang, Jason D Lee, and Michael I Jordan. l1-regularized neural networks are improperly
  learnable in polynomial time. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 993–1001.
  PMLR, 2016.


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2022


                 Table 2: Maximum widths for different number of hidden layers.

             Number of hidden layers      Maximum width
                                                      √
             1                            32 + 8 min T, dM + max(d, M )
                                                      √     √
             2                            32 + 2 min 2 T , 2 dM + 2 max(d, M )
                                                      √     √
             3                            16 + 2 min 2 T , 2 dM + 2 max(d, M )



Kai Zhong, Zhao Song, Prateek Jain, Peter L Bartlett, and Inderjit S Dhillon. Recovery guaran-
  tees for one-hidden-layer neural networks. In International conference on machine learning, pp.
  4140–4149. PMLR, 2017.



A    C ODE FOR RUNNING EXPERIMENTS

We anonymously uploaded the source code to https://anonymous.4open.science/r/
sample-complexity-4B45/README.md, and will share the git repository upon publication.


B    A DDITIONAL P LOTS O N S AMPLE C OMPLEXITY

For σ = 0.1 and σ = 0.2, we plotted the dependence of Nϵ on d and M for ϵ = 1, 0.1, 0.01 (see
Figure 3 and Figure 4, respectively). Both the horizontal axis and the vertical axis are drawn in
log scale, with equal aspect ratio. The dependence on M for different d is shown on the left, and
             on d for different
the dependence                       M is shown on the right. We use error bars  to indicate the range
                 E[(ĝS (X)−g(X))2 ]                    E[(ĝS (X)−g(X))2 ]
from max N :              2σ 2       > ϵ to min N :              2σ 2       ≤ ϵ . Since we only run
experiments where the sample size N is a power of 2, these two different N s always differ by a
factor of 2.
From the plots we can see that the dependence of Nϵ on d eventually becomes linear (unit slope in
our plots) for big M . For big d, the dependence of Nϵ on M eventually becomes slightly worse than
linear, but no worse than quadratic (corresponds to slope being 2 in our plots). In addition, these
observations hold for ϵ that spans more than two orders of magnitude.


C    A RCHITECTURE OF F ITTING N ETWORK

In this section we study how different fitting network architectures influence performance.

C.0.1   N UMBER OF LAYERS

We study the performance of the fitting algorithm when the number of hidden layers in the fitting
network is 1, 2, and 3. When the number of hidden layers is 2 or 3, we set the number of neurons in
each hidden layer to be the same. In all cases, we use golden-section search to find the best width.
The minimal width is 2, and the maximum widths are given in Table 2. Again, the maximum width
are chosen to allow ample over-fitting, considering either the number of provided samples, or the
architecture of the teacher network.
The results are plotted in Figure 5, and summary statistics are shown in Table 3. We see that on
average, having only one hidden layer in the fitting network has slightly better performance than
having two hidden layers, which in turn has slightly better performance than having three hidden
layers. This corresponds well with the idea that the fitting network should have similar architecture
as the teacher network.


                                                 11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2022


            Dependence of N1 on M for different d        Dependence of N1 on d for different M
                                  (a) Sample complexity when ϵ = 1


           Dependence of N0.1 on M for different d Dependence of N0.1 on d for different M
                                 (b) Sample complexity when ϵ = 0.1


          Dependence of N0.01 on M for different d Dependence of N0.01 on d for different M
                                 (c) Sample complexity when ϵ = 0.01

Figure 3: Sample complexity Nϵ is almost linear in d and M for different ϵ when σ = 0.1. All
vertical and horizontal axises are in log scale, with equal aspect ratio. The error bars indicate that
the estimate of the sample complexity Nϵ is within a factor of 2.



C.0.2   W IDTH OF HIDDEN LAYER

In this part, we fix the fitting network to have only one hidden layer and study the performance of
the fitting algorithm for different widths (number of hidden neurons). We use four different schemes
to select the width of the fitting network, which we describe in Table 4.


                                                    12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2022


            Dependence of N1 on M for different d        Dependence of N1 on d for different M
                                  (a) Sample complexity when ϵ = 1


           Dependence of N0.1 on M for different d Dependence of N0.1 on d for different M
                                 (b) Sample complexity when ϵ = 0.1


          Dependence of N0.01 on M for different d Dependence of N0.01 on d for different M
                                 (c) Sample complexity when ϵ = 0.01

Figure 4: Sample complexity Nϵ is almost linear in d and M for different ϵ when σ = 0.2. All
vertical and horizontal axises are in log scale, with equal aspect ratio. The error bars indicate that
the estimate of the sample complexity Nϵ is within a factor of 2.


We set the width tuning scheme as the baseline, and plot the relative performance of the other
schemes in Figure 6, with summary statistics given in Table 5.
The width tuning scheme consistently has the best performance, followed by the 4M and best
schemes. The same scheme has the worst performance. These results are consistent with empir-
ical observations that over-parametrization is essential in training neural networks (Ge et al., 2017;


                                                    13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2022


                     Table 3: Geometric mean and median of test error ratio

                          Noise      Value        Geometric mean    Median
                                     ϵ2 /ϵ1           1.22           1.21
                         σ = 0.1
                                     ϵ3 /ϵ1           1.38           1.39
                                     ϵ2 /ϵ1           1.14           1.16
                         σ = 0.2
                                     ϵ3 /ϵ1           1.25           1.25


                Table 4: Different schemes of selecting the fitting network width.

         Name    Description
         same    The width of the fitting network is M , same as in the teacher network.
          4M     The width of the fitting network is 4M , corresponding to 4x over-
                 parametrization.
         tune    The width of the fitting network is tuned using golden-section search on
                 the logarithm of the width. The range of widths searched is
                                                     √
                               [2, 32 + 8 · max(N, dM + max(d, M ))].

         best    Use the median of the widths found by the tune method across trials.


                        Table 5: Effect of different width tuning schemes

                        Noise         Value        Geometric mean    Median
                                   ϵsame /ϵtune        2.77           1.51
                       σ = 0.1     ϵ4M /ϵtune          1.48           1.38
                                   ϵbest /ϵtune        1.59           1.21
                                   ϵsame /ϵtune        1.97           1.23
                       σ = 0.2     ϵ4M /ϵtune          1.26           1.18
                                   ϵbest /ϵtune        1.28           1.10


                                                    14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2022


              2-hidden-layer test error.                             3-hidden-layer test error.
                   (a) Effect of number of hidden layers in fitting network when σ = 0.1.


              2-hidden-layer test error.                             3-hidden-layer test error.
                   (b) Effect of number of hidden layers in fitting network when σ = 0.2.

Figure 5: Fitting networks with single hidden layer perform better than those with multiple hidden
layers. We plot the inverse of the test error when fitting network has multiple hidden layers (ϵ−1  2 for 2
hidden layers, and ϵ−1
                     3  for 3) against  the inverse of the test error when  fitting network  has one hidden
layer (ϵ−1
        1  ). All axises are in log  scale,  with equal  aspect  ratio. A reference   line corresponding to
equal error is plotted. The region below the line corresponds to single-hidden-layer fitting networks
having superior performance. The confidence intervals are generated by bootstrap resampling of
two-thirds of the data. In all cases multiple-hidden-layer fitting networks perform slightly worse
than single-hidden-layer fitting networks, especially when the test error is small.


Livni et al., 2014; Neyshabur et al., 2018). Perhaps surprisingly, the performance difference between
tune and best also indicates that for optimal performance, the architecture of the fitting networks
needs to be tuned to the particular instantiation of the teacher network, not just to its architecture
and number of samples.


                                                    15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2022


      same scheme test error.              4M scheme test error.                best scheme test error.
                             (a) Effect of width of fitting network when σ = 0.1.


      same scheme test error.              4M scheme test error.                best scheme test error.
                             (b) Effect of width of fitting network when σ = 0.2.

Figure 6: The tune scheme has best performance, followed by the best and 4M schemes. The same
scheme has worst performance. We plot the inverse of the test error when using different schemes
                                                     −1    −1
to select the width of the fitting network (ϵ−1
                                             same , ϵ4M , ϵbest ) against the inverse of the test error when
                                                    −1
fitting network automatically tunes its width (ϵtune ). All axises are in log scale, with equal aspect
ratio. A reference line corresponding to equal error is plotted. The region below the line corresponds
to the width tuning scheme having superior performance. The confidence intervals are generated by
bootstrap resampling of two-thirds of the data.


D     S AMPLE C OMPLEXITY IN Z HONG ET AL . (2017); F U ET AL . (2020) FOR
      IID G AUSSIAN WEIGHTS

The sample and computational complexity of the algorithms in Zhong et al. (2017); Fu et al. (2020)
all have a polynomial dependence on a parameter λ, which depends exponentially on d and M in
our setup. 4
                 Qk
λ is defined as ( i=1 σi )/σkk , where σi (W ) is the i-th singular value of the weight matrix W ∈
Rd×M of the teacher network. Since Zhong et al. (2017) considers teacher networks where the
outer coefficients (our θi ) are either 1 or −1, we need to multiply the outer coefficients inside the
activation functions. So with our teacher network, W would be a d × M Gaussian, with variance
1/d, multiplied (with broadcasting) with a 1 × M Gaussian, with variance 1/M .
We set d = 2M and plot λ versus M for 1000 trials in Figure 7. The vertical axis is in log scale,
and we can clearly see that λ depends exponentially on M .



    4
      Zhong et al. (2017) mentions that in the worst case λ depends exponentially on the number of hidden units
in Remark 4.3.


                                                      16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2022


                    Figure 7: λ depends exponentially on M when d = 2M .


                                             17
