Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Q UANTILE R ISK C ONTROL : A F LEXIBLE F RAME -
WORK FOR B OUNDING THE P ROBABILITY OF H IGH -
L OSS P REDICTIONS
 Jake C. Snell∗                           Thomas P. Zollo                   Zhun Deng
 Princeton University                     Columbia University               Columbia University
 js2523@princeton.edu                     tpz2105@columbia.edu              zd2322@columbia.edu

 Toniann Pitassi                                             Richard Zemel
 Columbia University                                         Columbia University
 & University of Toronto                                     & University of Toronto
 toni@cs.columbia.edu                                        zemel@cs.columbia.edu



                                                  A BSTRACT

             Rigorous guarantees about the performance of predictive algorithms are neces-
             sary in order to ensure their responsible use. Previous work has largely focused
             on bounding the expected loss of a predictor, but this is not sufficient in many risk-
             sensitive applications where the distribution of errors is important. In this work,
             we propose a flexible framework to produce a family of bounds on quantiles of
             the loss distribution incurred by a predictor. Our method takes advantage of the
             order statistics of the observed loss values rather than relying on the sample mean
             alone. We show that a quantile is an informative way of quantifying predictive per-
             formance, and that our framework applies to a variety of quantile-based metrics,
             each targeting important subsets of the data distribution. We analyze the theoret-
             ical properties of our proposed method and demonstrate its ability to rigorously
             control loss quantiles on several real-world datasets.


1       I NTRODUCTION

Learning-based predictive algorithms have a great opportunity for impact, particularly in domains
such as healthcare, finance and government, where outcomes carry long-lasting individual and so-
cietal consequences. Predictive algorithms such as deep neural networks have the potential to au-
tomate a plethora of manually intensive tasks, saving vast amounts of time and money. Moreover,
when deployed responsibly, there is great potential for a better decision process, by improving the
consistency, transparency, and guarantees of the system. As just one example, a recent survey found
that a majority of radiologists anticipated that AI-based solutions will lead to fewer medical errors,
less time spent on each exam, and more time spent with patients (Waymel et al., 2019). In order
to realize such benefits, it is crucial that predictive algorithms are rigorously yet flexibly validated
prior to deployment. The validation should be rigorous in the sense that it produces bounds that can
be trusted with high confidence. It should also be flexible in several ways. First, we aim to provide
bounds on a variety of loss-related quantities (risk measures): the bound could apply to the mean
loss, or the 90th percentile loss, or the average loss of the 20% worst cases. Furthermore, the guar-
antees should adapt to the difficulty of the instance: easy instances should have strong guarantees,
and as the instances become harder, the guarantees weaken to reflect the underlying uncertainty. We
also want to go beyond simply bounding the performance of a fixed predictor and instead choose the
optimal predictor from a set of candidate hypotheses that minimizes some target risk measure.
Validating the trustworthiness and rigor of a given predictive algorithm is a very challenging task.
One major obstacle is that the guarantees output by the validation procedure should hold with re-
spect to any unknown data distribution and across a broad class of predictors including deep neural
    ∗
        Work done while at University of Toronto and Vector Institute.


                                                         1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


    (a) Bounding multiple QBRMs with F̂n−1 (p).       (b) Selecting the optimal h∗ with a target risk measure.

Figure 1: An overview of our quantile risk control framework. Given n validation samples
X1 , . . . , Xn drawn i.i.d. from the loss distribution with CDF F we produce a upper confidence
bound F̂n−1 (p) on the true quantile function F −1 (p) ≜ inf{x : F (x) ≥ p}. (a). The same
bound on the quantile function can be used to bound multiple quantile-based risk measures. (b).
An upper bound F̂n−1,h is computed for the quantile function of the loss distribution of each pre-
dictor h ∈ H and the one minimizing an upper confidence bound on the target risk measure
  +
              R1
R̂ψ (h) = 0 ψ(p)F̂n−1,h (p) dp is selected. Here the target measure is the β-VaR.


networks and complicated black-box algorithms. Recent work has built upon distribution-free uncer-
tainty quantification to provide rigorous bounds for a single risk measure: the expected loss (Bates
et al., 2021; Angelopoulos et al., 2021). However, to our knowledge there has been no work that
unifies distribution-free control of a set of expressive risk measures into the same framework.
Our key conceptual advancement is to work with lower confidence bounds on the cumulative distri-
bution function (CDF) of a predictor’s loss distribution as a fundamental underlying representation.
We demonstrate that a lower bound on the CDF can be converted to an upper bound on the quan-
tile function. This allows our framework to seamlessly provide bounds for any risk measure that
can be expressed as weighted integrals of the quantile function, known as quantile-based risk mea-
sures (QBRM) (Dowd & Blake, 2006). QBRMs are a broad class of risk measures that include
expected loss, value-at-risk (VaR), conditional value-at-risk (CVaR) (Rockafellar & Uryasev, 2000),
and spectral risk measures (Acerbi, 2002). Our approach inverts a one-sided goodness-of-fit statistic
to construct a nonparametric lower confidence bound on the loss CDF for each candidate predictor.
Furthermore, our confidence lower bounds hold simultaneously across an entire set of candidate
predictors, and thus can be used as the basis for optimization of a target risk measure. For example,
our approach can be used to choose a threshold or set of thresholds on the scores produced by a
complicated black-box prediction algorithm. Figure 1 illustrates an overview of our framework.
We conduct experiments on real-world datasets where the goal is to tune the threshold of a deep
neural network with respect to four representative risk measures. (1). The expected loss is the mean
loss over the test distribution. (2). The β-VaR measures the maximum loss incurred on a specific
quantile, after excluding a 1 − β proportion of high-loss outliers. (3). The β-CVaR measures the
mean loss for the worst 1 − β proportion of the population. (4), Finally, the VaR-interval can be
interpreted as optimizing an uncertain loss quantile that belongs to a known range, i.e., for a range
of β values. We compare various methods for controlling these risk measures, including a novel
one that is tailored to the CVaR and VaR-interval settings, and show that our approach bounds the
loss CDF well across all scenarios. We also demonstrate how our framework can be used to achieve
fairness by equalizing a target risk measure across groups within the population.
Our work unifies the rigorous control of quantile-based risk measures into a simple yet expres-
sive framework grounded in lower confidence bounds on the loss CDF. Unlike previous approaches
which only target a single risk measure, our approach provides a flexible and detailed understand-
ing of how a predictive algorithm will perform after deployment. We provide a family of bounds
that hold for any quantile-based risk measure, even those not optimized for prior to deployment.
Practitioners using our method can thus easily and confidently respond to inquiries from regulators
and other key stakeholders, thereby building trust between organizations deploying predictive algo-
rithms and the individuals whose lives are affected by them. This rigorous and flexible validation is
an important step towards the responsible use of predictive algorithms in order to benefit society.


                                                  2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


2     BACKGROUND & R ELATED W ORK
Distribution-free uncertainty quantification. This line of work originated with conformal pre-
diction (Vovk et al., 2005; Shafer & Vovk, 2008), which seeks to produce coverage guarantees:
prediction sets or prediction intervals that are guaranteed to contain the target output with high prob-
ability. Conformal prediction offers a lightweight algorithm that can be applied on top of complex
predictors to obtain provable coverage guarantees. Recent work has generalized conformal predic-
tion to bounding the expected loss with respect to more complex loss functions (Bates et al., 2021;
Angelopoulos et al., 2021). Like these works, we also are interested in provable distribution-free
guarantees for general loss functions. While previous work focuses on bounding the expected loss,
part of our contribution lies in bounding the loss for quantiles of the data distribution. Angelopoulos
& Bates (2022) offer an accessible overview of distribution-free uncertainty quantification.
Empirical processes. Several methods consider the relationship between the empirical and true
CDF. The DKW inequality (Dvoretzky et al., 1956) generates CDF-based confidence bounds. Later
variants (Massart, 1990; Naaman, 2021) provide tighter bounds or generalize to wider settings. The
confidence bound provided by the DKW inequality is closely related to the Kolmogorov–Smirnov
(KS) test (Massey, 1951) – a classic test of goodness of fit. The KS test has low power for detecting
deviations in the tails and so other variance-weighted tests of goodness of fit address this, e.g.,
Anderson & Darling (1952); Cramér (1928). In order to handle extreme tails, Berk & Jones (1979)
propose a statistic which looks for the most statistically significant deviation. Moscovich et al.
(2016) and Moscovich (2020) study properties of the Berk-Jones statistics and provide methods for
fast computation. To our knowledge, none of these techniques have been used as in our work, to
produce bounds on quantiles of the loss distribution incurred by a predictor. For more background on
quantile functions, the reader may refer to (Shorack, 2000, Chapter 7). For an overview of empirical
processes, Shorack & Wellner (2009) is a comprehensive reference.
Risk metrics. A number of approaches have been used to estimate confidence intervals for es-
timated risk measures. Our focus is on a broad class of quantile-based risk measures (QBRMs),
which includes VaR, CVaR, and spectral risk measures. The value-at-risk at the β level (β-VaR) has
long been used to express the risk associated with an investment and represents the maximum loss
that the investment will incur with probability β. Conditional value-at-risk (CVaR) (Rockafellar &
Uryasev, 2000) represents the mean loss incurred in the tail of the distribution. The work of Dowd
(2010) inspires us; it presents a general approach for estimating confidence intervals for any type
of quantile-based risk measure (QBRM). Here we construct confidence bounds on the loss CDF in
order to bound such measures for the general problem of predictor selection.

3     P RELIMINARIES
In this section, we introduce our problem formulation and briefly discuss previous approaches that
rigorously bound the expected loss. We then review quantile-based risk measures (QBRMs), an
expressive class of risk measures that includes VaR, CVaR, and spectral risk measures.

3.1   P ROBLEM S ETUP & N OTATION

We assume the presence of a black-box predictor h : Z → Ŷ that maps from an input space Z to a
space of predictions Ŷ. We also assume a loss function ℓ : Ŷ × Y → R that quantifies the quality
of a prediction Ŷ with respect to the target output Y . Let (Z, Y ) be drawn from an unknown data
distribution D over Z × Y and define the random variable X ≜ ℓ(h(Z), Y ) to be the loss induced
by h on D. Recall that the cumulative distribution function (CDF) of a random variable X is defined
as F (x) ≜ P (X ≤ x). Our goal is to produce rigorous upper bounds on the risk R(F ) for a rich
class of risk measures R ∈ R, given a set of validation loss samples X1:n = {X1 , . . . , Xn }. For a
detailed summary of the notations we used in this paper, please refer to Table 4 in Appendix A.

3.2   D ISTRIBUTION -F REE C ONTROL OF E XPECTED L OSS

Previous work has investigated distribution-free rigorous control of the expected loss. Recall that
F is the CDF of the loss r.v. X. Expected loss may be defined as R(F ) ≜ E[X]. These methods


                                                   3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023



                                                                                          Pn
typically involve constructing a confidence region based on the sample mean X̄ ≜ n1 i=1 Xi
within which the true expected loss will lie with high probability. For example, suppose that X ∈
[0, 1] and let µ ≜ E[X]. Hoeffding’s inequality states that P (µ − X̄ ≥ ε) ≤ exp(−2nε2 ). This may
be inverted to provide an upper confidence
                                 q          bound on the expected loss: P (R(F ) ≤ R̂+ (X1:n )) ≥
                                      1
1 − δ, where R̂+ (X1:n ) = X̄ + 2n      log 1δ . More sophisticated concentration inequalities, such as
the Hoeffding-Bentkus inequality (Bates et al., 2021), have also been used to control the expected
loss. Methods in this class differ primarily in how they achieve simultaneous control of multiple
predictors: RCPS (Bates et al., 2021) does so by assuming monotonicity of the loss with respect to a
one-dimensional space of predictors and Learn then Test (LTT) (Angelopoulos et al., 2021) applies
a Bonferroni correction to δ in order to achieve family-wise error rate control (Lehmann & Romano,
2008, Sec. 9.1).

3.3   Q UANTILE - BASED R ISK M EASURES

Unlike previous work that considers only expected loss, we consider a class of risk measures known
as quantile-based risk measures (QBRMs) (Dowd & Blake, 2006). Recall that the quantile function
is defined as F −1 (p) ≜ inf{x : F (x) ≥ p}.
Definition 1 (Quantile-based Risk Measure). Let ψ(p) be a weighting function such that ψ(p) ≥ 0
     R1
and 0 ψ(p) dp = 1. The quantile-based risk measure defined by ψ is
                                             Z 1
                                   Rψ (F ) ≜     ψ(p)F −1 (p) dp.                               (1)
                                                0

Several representative QBRMs are shown in Table 1. The expected loss targets the overall ex-
pectation across the data distribution, whereas the VaR targets the maximum loss incurred by the
majority of the population excluding a (1 − β) proportion of the population as outliers. CVaR on
the other hand targets the worst-off/highest loss tail of the distribution. Finally, the VaR-Interval is
valuable when the precise cutoff for outliers is not known. Other QBRMs, e.g., spectral risk mea-
sures (Acerbi, 2002), can easily be handled by our framework, but we do not consider them here.


                Risk Measure                  Weighting Function ψ(p)
                Expected loss                 1
                β-VaR                         δβ (p)    (
                                                             1
                                                            1−β ,    p≥β
                 β-CVaR                       ψ(p) =
                                                            0,       otherwise
                                                        (
                                                                 1
                                                            βmax −βmin ,   βmin ≤ p ≤ βmax
                [βmin , βmax ]-VaR-Interval   ψ(p) =
                                                            0,             otherwise

Table 1: Several quantile-based risk measures and their corresponding weight functions (see Defini-
tion 1). See Figure 1 for visualizations. The Dirac delta function centered at β is denoted by δβ .



4     Q UANTILE R ISK C ONTROL
In this section we introduce our framework Quantile Risk Control (QRC) for achieving rigorous con-
trol of quantile-based risk measures (QBRM). QRC inverts a one-sided goodness-of-fit test statistic
to produce a lower confidence bound on the loss CDF. This can subsequently be used to form a
family of upper confidence bounds that hold for any QBRM. More formally, specify a confidence
level δ ∈ (0, 1) and let X(1) ≤ . . . ≤ X(n) denote the order statistics of the validation loss samples.
QRC consists of the following high-level steps:

      1. Choose a one-sided test statistic of the form S ≜ min1≤i≤n si (F (X(i) )), where F is the
         (unknown) CDF of X1 , . . . , Xn .


                                                    4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


      2. Compute the critical value sδ such that P (S ≥ sδ ) ≥ 1 − δ.
      3. Construct a CDF lower confidence bound                     F̂n    defined    by   coordinates
         (X(1) , b1 ), . . . , (X(n) , bn ), where bi ≜ s−1
                                                         i (sδ ).

      4. For any desired QBRM defined by weighting function ψ, report Rψ (F̂n ) as the upper con-
         fidence bound on Rψ (F ).

We show below that in fact P (Rψ (F ) ≤ Rψ (F̂n )) ≥ 1 − δ for any QBRM weighting function ψ.
If the target weighting function is known a priori, this information can be taken into account when
choosing the statistic S. QRC can also be used to bound the risk of multiple predictors simultane-
ously by setting the critical value to δ ′ ≜ δ/m, where m is the number of predictors.
Novelty of QRC. There are two primary novel aspects of QRC. The first is the overall framework
that uses nonparametric CDF lower confidence bounds as an underlying representation to simultane-
ously bound any QBRM. Previous works in distribution-free uncertainty quantification have targeted
the mean and VaR, but to our knowledge none have focused on either the CVaR or VaR-interval. On
the other hand, Dowd (2010) shows how to bound QBRMs given a CDF estimate but does not pro-
vide the tools to bound the CDF from a finite data sample. QRC brings these two ideas together by
leveraging modern goodness-of-fit test statistics to produce high-quality nonparametric CDF lower
bounds from finite data. The second novel aspect of QRC is our proposed forms of a truncated
Berk-Jones statistic (Appendix C), which refocus the statistical power of standard Berk-Jones to
target either the CVaR (one-sided truncation) or VaR-interval (two-sided truncation).

4.1   CDF L OWER B OUNDS ARE R ISK U PPER B OUNDS

We begin by establishing that a lower bound G on the true loss CDF F incurred by a predictor can
be used to bound Rψ (F ) for any quantile-based risk measure weighting function. However, when
we only have access to a finite sample X1:n , it need to consider lower confidence bounds (LCB)
on the CDF. For CDFs F and G, let F ⪰ G denote F (x) ≥ G(x) for all x ∈ R. We call F̂n a
(1 − δ)-CDF-LCB if for any F , P (F ⪰ F̂n ) ≥ 1 − δ, where F̂n is a function of X1:n ∼iid F .
Theorem 1. Let F and G be CDFs such that F ⪰ G. Then Rψ (F ) ≤ Rψ (G) for any weighting
function ψ(p) as defined in Definition 1. Moreover, suppose that F̂n is a (1 − δ)-CDF-LCB. Then
P (Rψ (F ) ≤ Rψ (F̂n )) ≥ 1 − δ.

4.2   I NVERTING G OODNESS - OF - FIT S TATISTICS TO C ONSTRUCT CDF L OWER B OUNDS

Our technique centers around producing a set of lower confidence bounds on the uniform order
statistics, and using these to bound F . Let U1 , . . . , Un ∼iid U(0, 1) and let U(1) ≤ . . . ≤ U(n)
denote the corresponding order statistics. Consider a one-sided minimum goodness-of-fit (GoF)
statistic of the following form:
                                        S ≜ min si (U(i) ),                                       (2)
                                              1≤i≤n

where s1 , . . . , sn : [0, 1] → R are right continuous monotone nondecreasing functions. This statistic
can be used to determine a set of constraints on a CDF as follows.
Theorem 2. Let sδ = inf r {r : P (S ≥ r) ≥ 1 − δ}, where δ ∈ (0, 1) and S is defined above. Let
X1 , . . . , Xn ∼iid F , where F is an arbitrary CDF and let X(1) ≤ . . . ≤ X(n) be the corresponding
order statistics. Then P (∀i : F (X(i) ) ≥ s−1                                     −1
                                                  i (sδ )) ≥ 1 − δ, where ∀s ∈ R, si (s) ≜ inf u {u :
si (u) ≥ s} is the generalized inverse of si .

We use the constraints given by Theorem 2 to form a (1 − δ)-CDF-LCB via conservative completion
of the CDF. An illustration of the process can be found in Figure 2.

4.3   C ONSERVATIVE CDF C OMPLETION

Here we show how to use constraints generated by Theorem 2 to form a lower bound on F via the
so-called conservative completion of the CDF (Learned-Miller & Thomas, 2020). This defines the
“lowest lower bound” of F given constraints.

                                                   5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 2: Example illustrating the construction of a distribution-free CDF lower bound by bound-
ing order statistics. On the left, order statistics U(1) , . . . , U(n) are drawn from a uniform distri-
bution. On the right, order statistics X(1) , . . . , X(n) are drawn from an arbitrary distribution (in
this case a gamma distribution), and the corresponding Berk-Jones CDF lower confidence bound
is shown as G. Our distribution-free method gives bound bi on each sorted order statistic such
that the bound depends only on i, as illustrated in the plots for i = 9 (shown in orange). On the
left, 1000 realizations of U(1) , . . . , U(n) are shown in blue. On the right, 1000 empirical CDFs
F̄n (x) ≜ n1 i=1 1{Xi ≤ x} are shown in blue, and the true CDF F is shown in red.
            Pn


Theorem 3. Let F be an arbitrary CDF satisfying F (xi ) ≥ bi for all i ∈ {1, . . . , n}, where x1 ≤
. . . ≤ xn and 0 ≤ b1 ≤ . . . ≤ bn < 1. Let us denote x = (x1 , x2 , · · · , xn ) and b = (b1 , b2 , · · · , bn )
and let x+ ∈ R ∪ ∞ be an upper bound on X ∼ F , i.e. F (x+ ) = 1. Let G(x,b) (x) be defined as
0 if x < x1 ; bi if xi ≤ x < xi+1 for i ∈ {1, 2, · · · , n − 1}; bn if xn ≤ x < x+ ; and 1 if x+ ≤ x.
Then, F ⪰ G(x,b) .
Corollary 1. Let S be a test statistic defined as equation 2 and recall sδ = inf r {r : P(S ≥ r) ≥
1 − δ}. Let X1 , . . . , Xn ∼iid F , where F is an arbitrary CDF and let X(1) ≤ . . . ≤ X(n) be the
corresponding order statistics. Then with probability at least 1 − δ, F ⪰ G(X(1:n) ,s−1 (sδ )) , where
                                                                                                1:n

X(1:n) ≜ (X(1) , . . . , X(n) ) and s−1            −1                −1
                                     1:n (sδ ) ≜ (s1 (sδ ), . . . , sn (sδ )).

Thus we now have a way to construct a lower confidence bound on F given the order statis-
tics of a finite sample from F that is defined by a set of functions s1 , . . . , sn . In other words,
F̂n ≜ G(X(1:n) ,s−1 (sδ )) is a (1 − δ)-CDF-LCB and can be used to select a predictor to minimize
                  1:n
a risk measure as in Section 4.4. We also refer to sδ as the critical value and it can be computed
efficiently by bisection using software packages, e.g. Moscovich (2020), that compute the one-sided
non-crossing probability.
Several standard tests of uniformity may be viewed as instances of the minimum-type statistic S
defined in equation 2. For example, the one-sided Kolmogorov-Smirnov (KS) statistic and the Berk-
Jones statistic, which achieves greater tail sensitivity. In later sections, we use the term Order Stats
to refer to a modified Berk-Jones statistic where only a single order statistic is used. This method
along with some classical ones (e.g. DKW inequality) can be adapted to handle a VaR interval
combined with Bonferroni correction. Please see more detailed discussion in Appendix B.

4.4   B OUNDING M ULTIPLE P REDICTORS S IMULTANEOUSLY

We now suppose that we have a finite set of predictors H defined by a set of functions applied to
the output of a complex algorithm such as a deep neural network. Let ϕ be an arbitrary black box
function and let t1 , . . . , tm be a set of functions, e.g. different thresholding operations. Then the set
of predictors is H = {t1 ◦ ϕ, . . . , tm ◦ ϕ}. The loss r.v. for a random predictor h ∈ H is denoted by
X h ∼ F h and the corresponding validation loss samples are X1:n        h
                                                                           .
Theorem 4. Suppose that F̂n is a (1 − δ/|H|)-CDF-LCB. Then P (∀h ∈ H : F h ⪰ F̂nh ) ≥ 1 − δ.

Theorem 4 implies that we can simultaneously produce a lower confidence bound on each predictor’s
loss function with probability at least 1 − δ, given that F̂n is a (1 − δ/|H|)-CDF-LCB. From the set
of predictors H, our framework selects h∗ψ with respect to a target weighting function ψ(p) as
                                           h∗ψ ≜ arg min Rψ (F̂nh ).                                         (3)
                                                    h∈H


                                                        6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                            ∗             h∗
By Theorem 1, P (Rψ′ (F hψ ) ≤ Rψ′ (F̂n ψ )) ≥ 1 − δ, including ψ ′ ̸= ψ. This means that we are
able to bound any quantile-based risk metric, even if it was not targeted during optimization.
Remark 1. One of our main contributions concerns novel goodness-of-fit statistics. We introduce
two forms of a truncated Berk-Jones statistic that are useful for targeting specific ranges of quantiles.
These are discussed in detail in Appendix C.

5       E XPERIMENTS
We perform experiments to investigate our Quantile Risk Control framework as well as our particular
novel bounds. First, we test the value of the flexibility offered by QRC by studying the consequences
of optimizing for a given target metric when selecting a predictor. This motivates the need for strong
bounds on a rich set of QBRMs, and thus we next examine the strength of our novel truncated
Berk-Jones method for bounding quantities like the VaR Interval and CVaR. Finally, we present
experimental results across the complete canonical set of metrics (Mean, VaR, Interval, and CVaR)
in order to understand the effects of applying the full Quantitative Risk Control framework.
Our comparisons are made using the point-wise methods: Learn Then Test-Hoeffding Bentkus
(LttHB); RCPS with a Waudby-Smith-Ramdas bound (RcpsWSR); DKW; and Order Statistics
(Order Stats). We also compare goodness of fit-based methods: Kolmogorov-Smirnov (KS); Berk-
Jones (BJ); and truncated Berk-Jones (One-sided BJ, Two-sided BJ); all as described in previous
sections. Our experiments span a diverse selection of real-world datasets and tasks. First, we in-
vestigate our framework in the context of common image tasks using state of the art computer
vision models and the MS-COCO (Lin et al., 2014) and CIFAR-100 (Krizhevsky, 2009) datasets.
MS-COCO is a multi-label object detection dataset, where the presence of 80 object classes are
detected and more than one class may be present in a single instance. CIFAR-100 is a single-label
image recognition task, which we perform in the challenging zero-shot classification setting using
CLIP (Radford et al., 2021). In addition, we conduct a natural language processing experiment us-
ing the Go Emotions (Demszky et al., 2020) dataset and a fine-tuned BERT model (Devlin et al.,
2018), where the goal is to recognize emotion in text and a single instance may have multiple la-
bels. Finally, we evaluate the interaction between our method and subgroup fairness using the UCI
Nursery dataset (Dua & Graff, 2017), where applicants are ranked for admissions to school. While
all methods are theoretically guaranteed, bounds on the true CDF or risk may be violated with some
probability given by δ. We analyze how these violations occur in Appendix E.6.4. Full details for all
datasets, models, and experiments can be found in Appendix E. All experiments focus on producing
prediction sets, as is typical in the distribution-free uncertainty quantification (DFUQ) setting (Vovk
et al., 2005; Shafer & Vovk, 2008; Bates et al., 2021; Angelopoulos et al., 2021), and are run for
1000 random trials with δ = 0.05. Code for our experiments is publicly available1 .

5.1      VALUE OF O PTIMIZING FOR TARGET M ETRIC

A main feature of the QRC framework is the flexibility to target a range of metrics, including:
Expected-value (Mean); β-VaR (VaR); [βmin , βmax ]-VaR-Interval (VaR-Interval); and CVaR. The
results presented here demonstrate the importance of that flexibility by showing that in order to
produce the best bound on a given risk measure, it is important to optimize for that metric when
selecting a predictor.
Using the MS-COCO, CIFAR-100, and Go Emotions classification tasks, we record the guaranteed
Mean, VaR, VaR Interval, and CVaR given by the Berk-Jones bound when targeting each of these
risk measures to choose a predictor. The bound is applied on top of a pre-trained model that produces
a per-class score, i.e. W = ϕ(Z), where W ∈ RK and K is the number of classes. A prediction set
is formed by selecting all classes with a score at least some value t: Ŷ = {k : Wk ≥ t}. Therefore
a predictor is described by its corresponding threshold, and our algorithms choose the predictor that
minimizes the target metric according to the bound produced by a given method. See Appendix E.7
for more details on the predictor space. Performance is measured using a balanced accuracy metric,
which evenly combines sensitivity and specificity measures, where sensitivity encourages larger
prediction set sizes and specificity encourages smaller set sizes (see Appendix E.2 for an exact
description). Refer to Table 2 for MS-COCO results and Appendix Table 5 for CIFAR-100 and Go
    1
        https://github.com/jakesnell/quantile-risk-control


                                                   7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 3: Results for bounding the quantities of the VaR for various methods. The average test loss
over all trials is plotted in red.


Emotions results. Targeting a given metric in predictor selection gives the tightest bounds on that
metric in all experiments. This highlights the significance of our QRC framework, which produces
bounds over predictors for a diverse set of targeted risk measures such as the VaR Interval or CVaR.

      Dataset      Target         Mean               VaR           Interval           CVaR
      MS-COCO      Mean       0.088 ± 0.003    0.203 ± 0.014    0.211 ± 0.011    0.472 ± 0.017
                   VaR        0.101 ± 0.006    0.179 ± 0.010    0.191 ± 0.011    0.460 ± 0.017
                   Interval   0.100 ± 0.007    0.181 ± 0.011    0.189 ± 0.011    0.458 ± 0.017
                   CVaR       0.107 ± 0.014    0.190 ± 0.016    0.197 ± 0.015    0.453 ± 0.015

Table 2: Results on MS-COCO illustrating trade-offs between targeting different metrics in predictor
selection and the guarantees that can be issued for each metric given by the selected bound. We use
the Berk-Jones bound, and bold results are best for a given metric.


5.2    T RUNCATED B ERK -J ONES VS . E XISTING M ETHODS

Next, we compare the strength of our truncated Berk-Jones bounds for the VaR-Interval and CVaR to
existing methods for bounding these quantities for hypothesis selection. As opposed to the previous
experiment, here we fix a single threshold prior to running the experiment, in order to isolate the
strength of the bounds from the randomness induced by multiple predictors. Results are shown in
Figure 3, Appendix Figure 5, and Figure 4, with further explanation below. The truncated Berk-
Jones method consistently gives the best bounds, especially on the CVaR.
Image and Text Classification. Our novel truncated Berk-Jones bounds can be used to control
the loss for a diverse range of tasks, datasets, and loss functions. Here we examine the strength of
these bounds for bounding quantities of the VaR on multi-label image (MS-COCO) and text (Go
Emotions) classification tasks, as well as single-label zero-shot image classification (CIFAR-100).
For MS-COCO object detection, VaR-Interval is evaluated in [0.85, 0.95], and CVaR is calculated
with β = 0.9. For zero-shot classification on CIFAR-100 and emotion recognition in Go Emotions,
the VaR-Interval is bounded in [0.6, 0.9]. Results are shown in Figure 3 and Appendix Figure 5.
Across all tasks and datasets, the modified Berk-Jones bound consistently gives a loss guarantee that
is lowest, and thus closest to the actual loss for this fixed predictor.
Fair Classification. Williamson & Menon (2019) proposed CVaR as a notion of fairness that can
be viewed as the worst-case mean loss for subgroups of a particular size. Thus we consider a
fairness problem, and show how our framework can be applied to generate a predictor that optimizes
CVaR, or worst-case outcomes, individually with respect to each group according to some protected
attribute. We employ the UCI Nursery dataset (Dua & Graff, 2017), a multi-class classification
problem where categorical features about families are used to assign a predicted rank to an applicant
Y ∈ {1, ..., 5} ranging from “not recommended” (Y = 1) to “special priority” (Y = 5). We
measure a class-dependent weighted accuracy loss. Our sensitive attribute is a family’s financial
status. Applicants are separated based on this sensitive attribute, and we apply the methods to and
evaluate each group (“convenient” and “inconvenient”) separately. Exact specifications of the loss
function, dataset, and other experiments details can be found in Appendix E.5. Results for the
fair classification experiment are reported in Figure 4, where Group 1 have convenient financial
standing and Group 2 have inconvenient. Applying the truncated Berk-Jones bound individually to
each group leads to the best CVaR among all methods for both groups.


                                                 8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


          Figure 4: Results for bounding the CVaR for each group in Nursery with β = 0.9.



5.3     MS-COCO E XPERIMENTS ON ALL R ISK M EASURES

For our final experiment we compare the performance of various bounding methods across the full
canonical set of metrics (Mean, VaR, Interval, and CVaR) when selecting a predictor. We perform
this experiment using MS-COCO and a balanced accuracy risk measure, and apply a Bonferroni
correction to δ according to the size of the predictor space.
Results bounding the CVaR and VaR Interval are reported in Table 3, while all results are shown in
Appendix Table 6. Tables include the target metric used to choose a predictor, bounding method,
guarantee returned on the validation set, and loss quantity observed on the test set. As expected,
RcpsWSR gives the tightest bound on the Mean, while the point-wise Order Statistics method out-
performs the GoF-based methods on bounding a single VaR metric. When bounding a VaR-Interval
or the CVaR, which is a focus of our work, the truncated Berk-Jones bounds achieves the lowest loss
guarantee. In general, the best guarantees have best actual loss, although the difference can be small
(or none) as all methods may choose the same or similar predictors around that which minimizes the
target risk measure on the validation set.


        Method          Guarantee         Actual                  Method          Guarantee         Actual
        DKW               1.0 ± 0.0    0.500 ± 0.000              DKW            0.744 ± 0.005   0.146 ± 0.012
        OrderStats     0.454 ± 0.015   0.208 ± 0.011              OrderStats     0.189 ± 0.011   0.138 ± 0.007
                                                       Interval
 CVaR


        KS             0.971 ± 0.002   0.228 ± 0.022              KS             0.581 ± 0.008   0.144 ± 0.013
        BJ             0.453 ± 0.015   0.208 ± 0.011              BJ             0.189 ± 0.011   0.138 ± 0.007
        One-sided BJ   0.419 ± 0.015   0.207 ± 0.010              One-sided BJ   0.183 ± 0.010   0.137 ± 0.006
                                                                  Two-sided BJ   0.182 ± 0.010   0.137 ± 0.006

Table 3: Results for experiments with MS-COCO Object Detection bounding CVaR and the VaR
Interval. Best results are in bold.


6       D ISCUSSION

Our experimental results (see Section 5 and Appendix E.6) show that: (1) in order to achieve a tight
bound on a target risk measure, a predictor should be selected based on that risk measure; and (2)
the truncated Berk-Jones bounds are more effective than previous methods for bounding the VaR-
Interval and CVaR. While methods that focus on the mean or a particular β-VaR value can give a
tighter bound when that target metric is known beforehand, a key advantage of Quantile Risk Control
comes from the flexibility to change the target metric post hoc, within some range, and still maintain
a valid bound. Though there are some ways to convert between these classes (e.g., Mean to Quantile
with Markov’s Inequality; CVaR is directly an upper bound on VaR), these are weak as shown by
our experiments. This makes QRC well-suited to scenarios in which a stakeholder may want to issue
a guarantee or several guarantees from a single predictor, or when an external auditor may change
system reporting requirements. A natural extension of this work is to consider returning multiple
predictors with our algorithm. In this case, while the target metric may not be known beforehand,
we could produce multiple predictors that optimally bound specific points in the range, instead of a
single predictor that gives the best bound on average over the range.


                                                   9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


E THICS S TATEMENT
Some care needs to be taken to ensure that the guarantees under our framework are clear, in that
they do not apply to every individual in the test distribution and only hold if test examples are drawn
from the same distribution as validation examples.

R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT
Our code is publicly available on Github. For all experiments, datasets and splits are specified, and
we use publicly available pre-trained models for feature extraction when possible.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors would like to thank Marc-Etienne Brunet, Anastasios Angelopoulos, and anonymous
reviewers for their useful comments. Resources used in preparing this research were provided, in
part, by the Province of Ontario, the Government of Canada through CIFAR, and companies spon-
soring the Vector Institute (https://vectorinstitute.ai/partners/). This project is
also supported by NSERC and Simons Foundation Collaborative Research Grant 733782.


R EFERENCES
Carlo Acerbi. Spectral measures of risk: A coherent representation of subjective risk aversion.
  Journal of Banking & Finance, 26(7):1505–1518, July 2002.

Theodore W. Anderson and Donald A. Darling. Asymptotic theory of certain “goodness of fit”
  criteria based on stochastic processes. The Annals of Mathematical Statistics, pp. 193–212, 1952.

Anastasios N. Angelopoulos and Stephen Bates. A Gentle Introduction to Conformal Prediction and
  Distribution-Free Uncertainty Quantification. arXiv:2107.07511, January 2022.

Anastasios N. Angelopoulos, Stephen Bates, Emmanuel J. Candès, Michael I. Jordan, and Lihua Lei.
  Learn then Test: Calibrating Predictive Algorithms to Achieve Risk Control. arXiv:2110.01052,
  November 2021.

Stephen Bates, Anastasios Angelopoulos, Lihua Lei, Jitendra Malik, and Michael Jordan.
  Distribution-free, risk-controlling prediction sets. J. ACM, 68(6), sep 2021. ISSN 0004-5411.
  doi: 10.1145/3478535. URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3478535.

Robert H. Berk and Douglas H. Jones. Goodness-of-fit test statistics that dominate the Kolmogorov
  statistics. Zeitschrift für Wahrscheinlichkeitstheorie und Verwandte Gebiete, 47(1):47–59, 1979.

Harald Cramér. On the composition of elementary errors: First paper: Mathematical deductions.
  Scandinavian Actuarial Journal, 1928(1):13–74, January 1928.

Dorottya Demszky, Dana Movshovitz-Attias, Jeongwoo Ko, Alan Cowen, Gaurav Nemade, and
  Sujith Ravi. GoEmotions: A dataset of fine-grained emotions. In Proceedings of the 58th An-
  nual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 4040–4054. Association for
  Computational Linguistics, July 2020.

Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. Bert: Pre-training of deep
  bidirectional transformers for language understanding. arXiv:1810.04805, 2018.

Kevin Dowd. Using Order Statistics to Estimate Confidence Intervals for Quantile-Based Risk
  Measures. Journal of Derivatives, 17(3):9–14, 2010.

Kevin Dowd and David Blake. After VaR: The Theory, Estimation, and Insurance Applications of
  Quantile-Based Risk Measures. Journal of Risk & Insurance, 73(2):193–229, June 2006.

Dheeru Dua and Casey Graff. UCI machine learning repository, 2017. URL http://archive.
  ics.uci.edu/ml.


                                                  10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Aryeh Dvoretzky, Jack Kiefer, and Jacob Wolfowitz. Asymptotic minimax character of the sample
  distribution function and of the classical multinomial estimator. The Annals of Mathematical
  Statistics, pp. 642–669, 1956.

Alex Krizhevsky. Learning multiple layers of features from tiny images. Technical report, University
  of Toronto, Department of Computer Science, 2009.

Erik Learned-Miller and Philip S. Thomas. A New Confidence Interval for the Mean of a Bounded
  Random Variable. arXiv:1905.06208, November 2020.

Erich L. Lehmann and Joseph P. Romano. Testing Statistical Hypotheses. Springer Texts in Statis-
  tics. Springer New York, New York, NY, 2008. ISBN 978-1-4419-3178-8.

Tsung-Yi Lin, Michael Maire, Serge Belongie, James Hays, Pietro Perona, Deva Ramanan, Piotr
  Dollár, and C. Lawrence Zitnick. Microsoft COCO: Common Objects in Context. In David Fleet,
  Tomas Pajdla, Bernt Schiele, and Tinne Tuytelaars (eds.), Computer Vision – ECCV 2014, volume
  8693, pp. 740–755. Springer International Publishing, 2014.

P. Massart. The Tight Constant in the Dvoretzky-Kiefer-Wolfowitz Inequality. The Annals of Prob-
   ability, 18(3):1269–1283, 1990.

Frank J. Massey, Jr. The Kolmogorov-Smirnov test for goodness of fit. Journal of the American
  Statistical Association, 46(253):68–78, 1951.

Amit Moscovich. Fast calculation of p-values for one-sided Kolmogorov-Smirnov type statistics.
 arXiv:2009.04954, 2020.

Amit Moscovich, Boaz Nadler, and Clifford Spiegelman. On the exact Berk-Jones statistics and
 their p-value calculation. Electronic Journal of Statistics, 10(2):2329–2354, 2016.

Michael Naaman. On the tight constant in the multivariate Dvoretzky–Kiefer–Wolfowitz inequality.
 Statistics & Probability Letters, 173:109088, 2021.

Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agar-
  wal, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, Gretchen Krueger, and Ilya
  Sutskever. Learning transferable visual models from natural language supervision. In Marina
  Meila and Tong Zhang (eds.), Proceedings of the 38th International Conference on Machine
  Learning, volume 139 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 8748–8763. PMLR,
  July 2021.

Tal Ridnik, Hussam Lawen, Asaf Noy, Emanuel Ben Baruch, Gilad Sharir, and Itamar Friedman.
  Tresnet: High performance gpu-dedicated architecture. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Winter
  Conference on Applications of Computer Vision (WACV), pp. 1400–1409, January 2021.

R. Tyrrell Rockafellar and Stanislav Uryasev. Optimization of conditional value-at-risk. The Journal
  of Risk, 2(3):21–41, 2000.

Glenn Shafer and Vladimir Vovk. A tutorial on conformal prediction. Journal of Machine Learning
  Research, 9(12):371–421, 2008.

Galen Shorack. Probability for Statisticians. Springer Texts in Statistics. Springer-Verlag, New
  York, 2000. ISBN 978-0-387-98953-2.

Galen R. Shorack and Jon A. Wellner. Empirical Processes with Applications to Statistics. Society
  for Industrial and Applied Mathematics, January 2009. ISBN 978-0-89871-684-9.

Vladimir Vovk, Alex Gammerman, and Glenn Shafer. Algorithmic learning in a random world.
  Springer Science & Business Media, 2005.

Q. Waymel, S. Badr, X. Demondion, A. Cotten, and T. Jacques. Impact of the rise of artificial
  intelligence in radiology: What do radiologists think? Diagnostic and Interventional Imaging,
  100(6):327–336, June 2019.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Robert Williamson and Aditya Menon. Fairness risk measures. In Kamalika Chaudhuri and Ruslan
  Salakhutdinov (eds.), Proceedings of the 36th International Conference on Machine Learning,
  volume 97 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 6786–6797. PMLR, June 2019.
Thomas Wolf, Lysandre Debut, Victor Sanh, Julien Chaumond, Clement Delangue, Anthony Moi,
  Pierric Cistac, Tim Rault, Rémi Louf, Morgan Funtowicz, Joe Davison, Sam Shleifer, Patrick
  von Platen, Clara Ma, Yacine Jernite, Julien Plu, Canwen Xu, Teven Le Scao, Sylvain Gugger,
  Mariama Drame, Quentin Lhoest, and Alexander M. Rush. Transformers: State-of-the-art natural
  language processing. In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
  Language Processing: System Demonstrations, pp. 38–45. Association for Computational Lin-
  guistics, October 2020.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A     N OTATION

 Symbol       Meaning
 Z            Input space.
 Y            Target output space.
 Ŷ           Prediction space.
 h            A predictor mapping from Z to Ŷ.
 D            Data distribution over Z × Y.
 (Z, Y )      Random variables representing input-target pairs drawn from D.
 ℓ(Ŷ , Y )   Loss incurred by predicting Ŷ ∈ Ŷ when the ground truth is Y ∈ Y.
 Xh           Random variable representing ℓ(h(Z), Y ). This is the loss incurred by applying pre-
              dictor h to input Z when the ground truth is Y . The superscript h may be dropped
              when the predictor being referred to is clear from context.
 Fh           The cumulative distribution function (CDF) of X h , also referred to as the loss CDF,
              defined as F h (x) ≜ P (X h ≤ x).
 F −1,h       Quantile function defined as F −1,h (p) ≜ inf{x : F h (x) ≥ p}.
 R(F )        Risk measure quantifying the risk associated with loss CDF F .
 ψ            Weighting function defining a quantile-based risk measure (see Definition 1).
 X1:n         A sequence of loss random variables X1 , . . . , Xn .
 X(i)         The i-th order statistic of X1:n . Order statistics satisfy X(1) ≤ . . . ≤ X(n) .
 ⪰            F ⪰ G denotes F (x) ≥ G(x) for all x ∈ R.
 F̂nh         A lower confidence bound on F h as a function of X1h , . . . , Xnh .
 F̂n−1,h      The upper confidence bound on F −1,h corresponding to F̂nh .

                        Table 4: Summary of the notation used in this paper.


B     I NTERPRETING S TANDARD T ESTS OF U NIFORMITY AS M INIMUM - TYPE
      S TATISTICS S
Several standard tests of uniformity may be viewed as instances of the minimum-type statistic S de-
fined in equation 2. For example, the one-sided Kolmogorov-Smirnov
                                                                        statistic with  the uniform
                                                                      (KS)
as the null hypothesis can be expressed as Dn+ ≜ max1≤i≤n ni − U(i) = − min1≤i≤n U(i) − ni ,
which can be viewed as Dn+ = −S, where si (u) = u − ni . The Berk-Jones statistic achieves
greater tail sensitivity by taking advantage of the fact that the marginal distribution of U(i) is
Beta(i, n − i + 1), which has lower variance in the tails. The one-sided Berk-Jones (BJ) statis-
tic is defined as Mn+ ≜ min1≤i≤n IU(i) (i, n − i + 1), where Ix (a, b) is the CDF of Beta(a, b)
evaluated at x. This can be recognized as S where si (u) = Iu (i, n − i + 1), the inverse of which
can be efficiently computed using standard software packages.
Standard distribution-free one-sided confidence bounds for quantiles involve selecting the minimal
order statistic that bounds the desired quantile level with high probability. We use the term Order
Stats to refer to a modified Berk-Jones statistic where only a single order statistic is used. An
analogous approach can be taken using the DKW inequality (see Appendix E.1 for details). These
methods can be adapted to handle a VaR interval by simultaneously bounding multiple quantile
levels, e.g. using a grid over the interval [βmin , βmax ], via Bonferroni correction.

C     N OVEL T RUNCATED B ERK -J ONES S TATISTICS
One of our main contributions concerns novel goodness-of-fit statistics. Here we introduce two
forms of a truncated Berk-Jones statistic, targeting a range of quantiles. The first form targets
a one-sided range of quantiles [βmin , 1). The key idea is to drop lower order statistics that do
                                                                                                +
not affect the bound on F −1 (βmin ). We define the truncated one-sided Berk-Jones as Mn,k          ≜
mink≤i≤n IU(i) (i, n − i + 1), which can be realized by using si (u) = Iu (i, n − i + 1) for k ≤ i ≤ n


                                                 13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


and si (u) = 1 otherwise. For a given βmin , define k ∗ (βmin ) ≜ min{k : s−1     k
                                                                             k (sδ ) ≥ βmin }, where
                                   +
sδ is the critical value of Mn,k . Bisection search can be used to compute k ∗ and thus the in-
 k
               +
version of Mn,k   ∗ (β
                       min )
                             provides a CDF lower bound targeted at quantiles βmin and above. The
truncated two-sided Berk-Jones variant targets a quantile interval [βmin , βmax ] and is defined as
   +
Mn,k,ℓ   ≜ mink≤i≤ℓ IU(i) (i, n − i + 1). It first computes k ∗ (βmin ) as in the one-sided case and
                                                                                              ∗
                                                                                   k ,ℓ
then removes higher order statistics using the upper endpoint of ℓ∗ ≜ min{ℓ : s−1
                                                                               ℓ (sδ    ) ≥ βmax },
         ∗
where skδ ,ℓ is the corresponding critical value.

D     P ROOFS
D.1    P ROOF OF T HEOREM 1

Proof. Consider G−1 (p). By the definition of the quantile function, G(G−1 (p)) ≥ p. By the
relationship between F and G, we therefore have F (G−1 (p)) ≥ G(G−1 (p)) ≥ p, where the first
inequality follows from F ⪰ G. Applying F −1 to both sides yields F −1 (F (G−1 (p))) ≥ F −1 (p).
But x ≥ F −1 ◦F (x) (see e.g. Proposition 3 on p. 6 of Shorack & Wellner (2009)) and thus G−1 (p) ≥
F −1 (p). Then we have Rψ (F ) ≤ Rψ (G) by Definition 1. The event that F ⪰ Ĝ(X1:n ) implies
that Rψ (F ) ≤ Rψ (G) by Theorem 1. Since the antecedent holds with probability at least 1 − δ, so
must the consequent.

D.2    P ROOF OF T HEOREM 2

Proof. For readability, we first discuss the case when the CDF F is continuous and strictly increas-
ing. After that, we demonstrate how to extend our argument to a more general case.

Continuous and strictly increasing F . If F is continuous and strictly increasing, we know F is
bijective and the inverse function F −1 (p) is well-defined. Moreover, for X ∼ F , we have F (X) is
of the same distribution as uniform random variable U . That is because
                                P (F (X) ≤ p) = P (X ≤ F −1 (p)) = p.
In addition, by the monotonicity of F , F preserves ordering, which means F (X(i) ) is of the same
distribution of U(i) for all i ∈ [n]. So, we have

                       P ∀i, F (X(i) ) ≥ s−1                         −1

                                             i (sδ ) = P ∀i, U(i) ≥ si (sδ ) .


Now recall that
                                           S ≜ min si (U(i) ).
                                                1≤i≤n

Given the definition of sδ , we know that
                                          P (S ≥ sδ ) ≥ 1 − δ.

In addition, by the definition s−1                                        −1
                                i , if S ≥ sδ , then we have that U(i) ≥ si (sδ ) for all i ∈ {1, . . . , n}.
Combined together, we have
          P ∀i, F (X(i) ) ≥ s−1                              −1

                                i (sδ ) = P ∀i, U(i) ≥ si (sδ ) ≥ P (S ≥ sδ ) ≥ 1 − δ.


General F . For general F , recall we define a generalized inverse function F −1 (p) ≜ inf{x :
F (x) ≥ p}. Notice that for a generalized inverse function F −1 , we have F −1 (U ) is of the same
distribution as X ∼ F . That is because
                              P (F −1 (U ) ≤ c) = P (U ≤ F (c)) = F (c).
We want to remark that the above formula holds for general F and the first equality directly follows
from the definition of the generalized inverse function F −1 . Moreover, F −1 preserves ordering (by
definition of the quantile function), i.e. F −1 (U(1) ) ≤ . . . ≤ F −1 (U(n) ). Thus, we have X(i) is of
the same distribution as F −1 (U(i) ).

                                                     14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


By Proposition 1, eq. 24 on p.5 of Shorack & Wellner (2009), we have that
                                            F ◦ F −1 (t) ≥ t
for any t ∈ [0, 1] and any CDF F (this is can obtained directly from the definition of F −1 also can
go beyond CDF, but we here only restrict ourselves in the case that F is a CDF). Therefore we have
                                  F (F −1 (U(i) )) ≥ U(i) ≥ s−1
                                                             i (sδ ).


Combined with the fact that X(i) is of the same distribution as F −1 (U(i) ) for all i ∈ [n], we have
            P ∀i, F (X(i) ) ≥ s−1                          −1
                                                              (U(i) ) ≥ s−1

                                  i (sδ ) = P ∀i, F (F                   i (sδ )
                                            = P ∀i, U(i) ≥ s−1

                                                               i (sδ ) ≥ P (S ≥ sδ )
                                              ≥ 1 − δ.



D.3    P ROOF OF T HEOREM 3

Proof. When x < x1 , F (x) ≥ 0. For any i ∈ {1, 2, · · · , n}, since F (xi ) ≥ bi , thus, for x ∈
[xi , xi+1 ), F (x) ≥ F (xi ) ≥ bi (xn+1 is considered as x+ here). Lastly, if x ≥ x+ , F (x) = 1.
Combined together, we have F (x) ≥ G(x,b) (x).

D.4    P ROOF OF C OROLLARY 1

Proof. Notice that by Theorem 3, if ∀i, F (X(i) ) ≥ s−1
                                                     i (sδ ), then we have F (x) ≥ G(X(1:n) s−1         ,
                                                                                             1:n (sδ ))
which implies

                P F (x) ≥ G(X(1:n) ,s−1 (sδ )) (x) ≥ P ∀i, F (X(i) ) ≥ s−1i  (sδ ) .
                                       1:n

Then, by Theorem 2, P ∀i, F (X(i) ) ≥ s−1  i (sδ ) ≥ 1 − δ.


D.5    P ROOF OF T HEOREM 4

Proof. The claim follows by applying a union bound argument over h ∈ H:
                                                 X
                 P (∃h ∈ H : F h ⪰̸ Ĝ(X1:n
                                         h
                                            )) ≤     P (F h ⪰̸ Ĝ(X1:n
                                                                   h
                                                                       ))) ≤ δ.
                                                        h∈H


E     E XPERIMENTAL D ETAILS
E.1   DKW M ETHOD FOR Q UANTILE D ISTRIBUTION -F REE U PPER C ONFIDENCE B OUNDS

A distribution upper confidence bound on F −1 (β) can be constructed by using a one-sided version
of the DKW inequality (Dvoretzky et al., 1956; Massart, 1990).
                                                            q Define the empirical distribution
                      1
                        Pn                                      1
function as Fn (x) = n i=1 I{Xi ≤ x}. Then for every ε ≥ 2n       log 2, by the DKW inequality,

                          P sup Fn (x) − F (x) > ε ≤ exp(−2nε2 ).
                                x∈R
                                               q
                                                    1     1
If we let δ = exp(−2nε2 ), then we have ε =        2n log δ and the above condition holds for any
δ ≤ 1/2.
Proposition 1. Let X(1) ≤ . . . ≤ X(n) denote the order statistics of X1 , . . . , Xn , where Xi ∼ F
                                   l     q          m                q
                                           1
for all i ∈ {1, . . . , n}. Let k = n β + 2n log 1δ . Then for β + 2n   1
                                                                            log 1δ ≤ 1 and δ ≤ 1/2,

                                      P (F −1 (β) ≤ X(k) ) ≥ 1 − δ.


                                                   15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Proof. Observe that Fn (X(i) ) ≥ ni for i ∈ {1, . . . , n}. Thus for k defined above, we have
                                                         r
                                                            1     1
                                   Fn (X(k) ) ≥ β +           log .
                                                           2n     δ
But with probability at least 1 − δ, we have
                                                       r
                                                            1     1
                                   F (x) ≥ Fn (x) −           log
                                                           2n     δ
for all x ∈ R. Thus P (F (X(k) ) ≥ β) ≥ 1 − δ ⇒ P (F −1 (β) ≤ X(k) ) ≥ 1 − δ, where the latter
follows from the property that F −1 ◦ F (x) ≤ x (see e.g. Proposition 3 on p. 6 of Shorack & Wellner
(2009)).

E.2   D EFINITIONS OF L OSS F UNCTIONS

Balanced accuracy is computed as follows, where Ŷ is the prediction set, Y is the set of ground truth
labels (which in this case will always be a single label), and K is the number of classes:
                                         1
                      L(Ŷ , Y ) = 1 − (Sens(Ŷ , Y ) + Spec(Ŷ , Y )), where
                                         2
                                 |Ŷ ∩ Y |                     K − |Y | − |Ŷ \ Y |
                 Sens(Ŷ , Y ) =           and Spec(Ŷ , Y ) =                      .
                                    |Y |                            K − |Y |

E.3   MS-COCO E XPERIMENT D ETAILS

MS-COCO (Lin et al., 2014) is a large object detection dataset with 80 different categories where
an image may contain one or more classes of objects and thus may have one or more ground truth
labels. Class scores are extracted using TResNet (Ridnik et al., 2021). Results are averaged over
1,000 trials, where in each trial 2,000 datapoints are randomly split into 500 validation and 1,500
test points. VaR is targeted with β = 0.9, while the Interval and CVaR target the ranges [0.85, 0.95]
and [0.9, 1.0], respectively. KS and BJ bound the Mean by targeting the loss for the entire range
[0.0, 1.0]. Point-wise methods (DKW, OrderStats) are used to bound intervals by calculating VaR
upper bounds over a grid of β values within the range of interest using a Bonferroni correction for
the grid size. The grid size is 10 for the VaR Interval, and 50 for CVaR.

E.4   CIFAR-100 AND G O E MOTIONS E XPERIMENT D ETAILS

We use a multi-modal CLIP (Radford et al., 2021) embedding model in order to perform zero-shot
image classification on the CIFAR-100 dataset using the method described in Radford et al. (2021).
CIFAR-100 features images of 100 different classes, and we use the 10,000 examples available in
the test split. Our feature extractor is the ViT-B/32 version of CLIP available on Hugging Face (Wolf
et al., 2020).
Go Emotions (Demszky et al., 2020) is a dataset of comments from Reddit where binary labels are
given for 28 different fine-grained emotion categories and each comment may have one or more
positive labels. 5,427 examples are drawn from the test set, and our base classifier is a bert-base-
uncased model fine-tuned on the train split, again available on Hugging Face (Wolf et al., 2020).
Experiments are run for 1,000 trials with 500 validation examples randomly selected and the rest
of the dataset used for testing. Balanced accuracy loss is bounded in the VaR-Interval [0.6, 0.9] in
both cases. For zero-shot CLIP, point-wise methods are run over a grid of 50 β values, and for Go
Emotions the grid size is also 50.

E.5   FAIRNESS E XPERIMENT

We measure a class-varying weighted accuracy loss:

                  L(Ŷ , Y ) = (1 − µY )(1 − Spec(Ŷ , Y )) + µY (1 − Sens(Ŷ , Y ))


                                                  16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 5: Results for bounding the quantities of the VaR for various methods. The average test loss
over all trials is plotted in red.


where µ ∈ R5 is a vector of class weights representing the importance of sensitivity for each test
item’s class label. This allows for user flexibility, where for instance a school could prefer to be
more sensitive towards detecting good students. To demonstrate this, we perform our experiments
with µ = (0.5, 0.6, 0.7, 0.8, 0.9).
We use 8,683 samples from the UCI Nursery train split, including examples from both groups, to
train a logistic regression classifier to predict a prospective student’s admission ranking. In our
bounding experiments, 4,000 samples from the original test split are used for validation and testing,
split evenly between the groups, with 500 examples from each group taken randomly for validation
each trial. Point-wise methods are run with a beta grid size of 50. Since fairness is often concerned
with those examples with the highest loss, we focus on bounding the CVaR in the range [0.9, 1.0].

E.6     A DDITIONAL R ESULTS

E.6.1     VALUE OF O PTIMIZING F OR TARGET M ETRIC
Results for additional experiments highlighting the value of optimizing for a given target metric are
shown in Table 5

      Dataset       Target         Mean               VaR           Interval          CVaR
      CIFAR-100     Mean       0.156 ± 0.007    0.507 ± 0.009    0.507 ± 0.016    0.664 ± 0.009
                    VaR        0.202 ± 0.024    0.411 ± 0.028    0.433 ± 0.020    0.651 ± 0.015
                    Interval   0.200 ± 0.022    0.418 ± 0.031    0.429 ± 0.020    0.647 ± 0.017
                    CVaR       0.353 ± 0.126    0.466 ± 0.038    0.468 ± 0.034    0.627 ± 0.007
      Go Emotions   Mean       0.147 ± 0.007    0.503 ± 0.091    0.472 ± 0.057    0.700 ± 0.015
                    VaR        0.178 ± 0.016    0.230 ± 0.023    0.312 ± 0.029    0.627 ± 0.030
                    Interval   0.195 ± 0.021    0.257 ± 0.027    0.289 ± 0.026    0.589 ± 0.027
                    CVaR       0.241 ± 0.044    0.314 ± 0.050    0.323 ± 0.045    0.570 ± 0.026

Table 5: CIFAR-100 and Go Emotions results illustrating trade-offs between targeting target differ-
ent metrics in predictor selection and the guarantees that can be issued for each metric given by the
selected bound. We use the Berk-Jones bound, and bold results are best for a given metric.


E.6.2     T RUNCATED B ERK -J ONES VS . E XISTING M ETHODS
Results for bounding a single predictor on MS-COCO are shown in Figure 5.

E.6.3     MS-COCO E XPERIMENTS ON ALL R ISK M EASURES
All results for MS-COCO experiments comparing the performance of various bounding methods
across the full canonical set of metrics (Mean, VaR, Interval, and CVaR) are reported in Table 6.

E.6.4     V IOLATIONS OF L OSS G UARANTEES AND L OWER C ONFIDENCE B OUNDS
Tables 7 and 8 show violations of both the loss guarantee and the CDF lower confidence bound
returned by each method for a subset of the MS-COCO experiments in Section 5.3 and the CIFAR-


                                                 17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


        Method        Guarantee          Actual                   Method            Guarantee         Actual
        LttHB        0.097 ± 0.004    0.048 ± 0.001               DKW              0.744 ± 0.005   0.146 ± 0.012
        RcpsWSR      0.055 ± 0.003    0.048 ± 0.001               OrderStats       0.189 ± 0.011   0.138 ± 0.007


                                                       Interval
 Mean
        KS           0.142 ± 0.003    0.048 ± 0.001               KS               0.581 ± 0.008   0.144 ± 0.013
        BJ           0.088 ± 0.003    0.048 ± 0.001               BJ               0.189 ± 0.011   0.138 ± 0.007
                                                                  One-sided BJ     0.183 ± 0.010   0.137 ± 0.006
                                                                  Two-sided BJ     0.182 ± 0.010   0.137 ± 0.006
        LttHB        0.968 ± 0.036     0.154 ± 0.01               DKW                 1.0 ± 0.0    0.500 ± 0.000
        DKW          0.287 ± 0.023    0.150 ± 0.020               OrderStats       0.454 ± 0.015   0.208 ± 0.011


                                                       CVaR
        OrderStats   0.166 ± 0.010    0.132 ± 0.004               KS               0.971 ± 0.002   0.228 ± 0.022
 VaR


        KS           0.287 ± 0.023    0.150 ± 0.020               BJ               0.453 ± 0.015   0.208 ± 0.011
        BJ           0.179 ± 0.010    0.134 ± 0.006               One-sided BJ     0.419 ± 0.015   0.207 ± 0.010

Table 6: Results for experiments with MS-COCO Object Detection and all canonical metrics. Best
results in bold, except for actual mean where all methods produced the same loss.


100 and Go Emotions experiments in Section 5.2. The experiment in Table 7 involves bounding a
space of predictors, while that in Table 8 uses a single fixed predictor.
We can make a few observations from these results. First, specific loss measures are violated less
frequently than CDF lower confidence bounds. A CDF violation occurs whenever the true CDF lies
below the CDF-LCB at any point. But many risk measures average over a range of quantiles, or
only focus on certain quantiles. In that case, it is possible for the CDF bound to be violated but
not the risk measure guarantee. Next, specific loss distributions may be better behaved in practice
than the theory accounts for. We deal with distribution-free methods, meaning that they hold for
any possible loss distribution with only minimal assumptions (e.g. the loss is bounded). If certain
properties of the loss distribution were known (for example, it belongs to a Beta distribution with
unknown parameters), then we could in theory take this into account to produce tighter bounds.
Since ours are distribution-free, there should be some distribution for which our bounds are tight,
but it may not be the particular loss distribution we encounter. A similar phenomenon occurs with
e.g. Hoeffding’s inequality, where the bound is only tight when the probability mass is concentrated
on the endpoints. Finally, bounding multiple predictors simultaneously affects the bounds, as shown
by the difference in violation levels between Tables 7 and 8. Applying the union bound to multiple
predictors assumes that they are independent. But in practice the predictors may be highly correlated,
meaning that the ordinary Bonferroni correction is overly conservative.

                       Metric            Method                   Loss Viol.     LCB Viol.
                       VaR Interval      DKW                        0.000          0.000
                                         OrderStats                 0.001          0.004
                                         KS                         0.000          0.000
                                         BJ                         0.001          0.002
                                         One-sided-BJ               0.001          0.007
                                         Two-sided-BJ               0.001          0.006
                       CVaR              DKW                        0.000          0.000
                                         OrderStats                 0.000          0.002
                                         KS                         0.000          0.000
                                         BJ                         0.000          0.003
                                         One-sided-BJ               0.000          0.005

Table 7: Violations of loss guarantees and lower confidence bounds for MS-COCO dataset when
using bounding methods to select a predictor with δ = 0.05.


E.7     P REDICTOR S PACE

For each experiment trial and random data split, we test a finite sample of 500 linearly spaced thresh-
olds (or predictors) on the validation set. For computational efficiency, upper and lower bounds are


                                                      18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                    Dataset         Method           Loss Viol.   LCB Viol.
                    CIFAR-100       DKW                0.000         0.000
                                    OrderStats         0.000         0.004
                                    KS                 0.000         0.031
                                    BJ                 0.000         0.020
                                    One-sided-BJ       0.000         0.026
                                    Two-sided-BJ       0.002         0.041
                    Go Emotions     DKW                0.000         0.001
                                    OrderStats         0.000         0.007
                                    KS                 0.000         0.028
                                    BJ                 0.000         0.021
                                    One-sided-BJ       0.003         0.041
                                    Two-sided-BJ       0.005         0.043

Table 8: Violations of loss guarantees and lower confidence bounds for CIFAR-100 and Go Emo-
tions datasets when using a fixed predictor with δ = 0.05.


set as the maximum and minimum values of the scores over the entire dataset, although this could
easily be replaced by the maximum and minimum value of the scores on the validation set alone.
Results are measured on the test data using the predictor with the best guarantee for a particular
target metric.


                                               19
