Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


T OWARDS U NDERSTANDING W HY M ASK R ECON -
STRUCTION P RETRAINING H ELPS IN D OWNSTREAM
TASKS
    Jiachun Pan1,2∗                 Pan Zhou1∗            Shuicheng Yan1
 1                                      2
     Sea AI Lab                           National University of Singapore
     pan.jiachun@u.nus.edu                      {zhoupan,yansc}@sea.com



                                                  A BSTRACT

             For unsupervised pretraining, mask-reconstruction pretraining (MRP) approaches,
              e.g. MAE (He et al., 2021) and data2vec (Baevski et al., 2022), randomly mask
             input patches and then reconstruct the pixels or semantic features of these masked
             patches via an auto-encoder. Then for a downstream task, supervised fine-tuning
             the pretrained encoder remarkably surpasses the conventional “supervised learning"
             (SL) trained from scratch. However, it is still unclear 1) how MRP performs seman-
             tic feature learning in the pretraining phase and 2) why it helps in downstream tasks.
             To solve these problems, we first theoretically show that on an auto-encoder of a
             two/one-layered convolution encoder/decoder, MRP can capture all discriminative
             features of each potential semantic class in the pretraining dataset. Then consider-
             ing the fact that the pretraining dataset is of huge size and high diversity and thus
             covers most features in downstream dataset, in fine-tuning phase, the pretrained
             encoder can capture as much features as it can in downstream datasets, and would
             not lost these features with theoretical guarantees. In contrast, SL only randomly
             captures some features due to lottery ticket hypothesis. So MRP provably achieves
             better performance than SL on the classification tasks. Experimental results testify
             to our data assumptions and also our theoretical implications.


1     I NTRODUCTION
Self-supervised learning (SSL) has emerged as a popular and effective method to learn unsupervised
representations, with great success witnessed by many downstream tasks, e.g. image classification (He
et al., 2016a), object detection (Girshick et al., 2015; Tan et al., 2020) and segmentation (Ronneberger
et al., 2015; He et al., 2017). In SSL, one often needs to first create an artificial supervised learning
problem, a.k.a. a pretext task, that can obtain pseudo data labels via well designing the task itself, and
then train a network for learning how to capture useful data features from this artificial supervised
task. For example, one representative SSL, contrastive learning (He et al., 2020a; Chen et al., 2020b),
constructs a supervised problem on an unlabeled dataset via regarding random augmentations of
an image as a separate class, and then performs supervised instance discrimination. Owing to the
unnecessity of manual annotations and its great success, SSL has already paved a new way to solve
unsupervised learning problems, and also has attracted increasing research interests.
In this work, we are particularly interested in the recently proposed mask-reconstruction pretraining
(MRP) of SSL families (Xie et al., 2021; Dong et al., 2021), e.g. MAE (He et al., 2021) and
data2vec (Baevski et al., 2022). The core idea of this MRP family is to randomly mask the patches
of the input image and then reconstruct the pixels or semantic features of these masked patches
via an auto-encoder. After pretraining on a large-scale unsupervised dataset, MRP fine-tunes the
encoder on a specific downstream task to learn more task-specific representations. This pretraining
mechanism generally enjoys remarkable test performance improvement on the same downstream
task and also a much superior generalization ability on out-of-distribution data than the standard
end-to-end “supervised learning". Actually, it also reveals better fine-tuning performance than other
state-of-the-art SSL approaches, including contrastive learning (He et al., 2020a; Chen et al., 2020b)
and clustering learning (Caron et al., 2018; Wu et al., 2018). Because of its simplicity and strong
     ∗
         Equal contribution. Pan Jiachun did this work during an internship at Sea AI Lab.


                                                         1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


compatibility, MRP has attracted wide interests and is seeing increasingly more applications. However,
theoretical analyses and understandings on MRP still largely lag their practical applications. To be
specific, it is not clear how MRP performs feature learning via the mask reconstruction task, though
heavily desired. Moreover, the theoretical reasons for the superiority in test performance of MRP
over end-to-end supervised learning are rarely investigated. Most existing theoretical works (Wen
& Li, 2021; Arora et al., 2019; Tosh et al., 2021a;b) focus on analyzing contrastive learning, and
few works study MRP which differs much from contrastive learning. Cao et al. (2022) analyzed the
patch-based attention in MAE via an integral kernel but did not study the core questions in this work,
i.e.1) what features does MRP learn and 2) why does MRP beat conventional supervised learning.
Contributions. In this work, we provide a theoretical viewpoint to understand the semantic (feature)
learning process of MRP. Moreover, we analyze test performance of MRP to show its superiority over
supervised learning on the downstream classification tasks. Our contributions are highlighted below.
Firstly, based on the multi-view data assumption from (Allen-Zhu & Li, 2020) where multi/single
discriminative features exist in multi-view/single-view data, we prove that on an auto-encoder with
a two/one-layered convolution encoder/decoder, the pretrained encoder in MRP can capture all the
discriminative features of each semantic class in the pretraining dataset. Moreover, a convolution
kernel in the encoder captures at most a feature. These properties benefit the downstream tasks. As the
pretraining dataset is often much larger than downstream dataset, pretraining dataset (approximately)
covers all the features in the downstream dataset. So the kernels of the pretrained encoder also well
grab the features in downstream datasets. Besides, as a kernel is associated with at most a feature,
then the semantic features would not be fused together, allowing a network to easily establish the
relation among kernels and semantic class labels in downstream classification task.
Secondly, we theoretically show that after fine-tuning on the downstream dataset, MRP enjoys
superior test performance to that of end-to-end supervised learning on the downstream tasks by
using classification as an example. Assuming pretraining and downstream datasets share the same
distribution, we prove that after fine-tuning, MRP can classify the new samples correctly with high
probability for both multi-view and single-view test data. This result is superior to (Allen-Zhu & Li,
2020), which shows the conventional SL only has a half test accuracy on single-view test data.

2    R ELATED W ORKS
SSL approaches. According to the pretext tasks, the current SSL approaches can be grouped into
contrastive learning, e.g. (Hjelm et al., 2018; Oord et al., 2018), clustering learning, e.g. (Caron et al.,
2018; Wu et al., 2018) and mask-reconstruction pretraining (MRP) (He et al., 2021; Baevski et al.,
2022). Given random augmentations of an image, contrastive learning, e.g., MoCo (He et al., 2020a)
and SimCLR (Chen et al., 2020a), brings the different crops of the same image together, and pushes
the crops of different images far away from each other in the feature space. For clustering learning,
it aims to cluster similar samples into the same group. However, both contrastive learning and
clustering learning heavily depend on the multi-crop augmentations. The recently proposed MRP is a
simpler SSL. This MRP family, e.g. MAE (He et al., 2021) and SimMIM (Xie et al., 2021), randomly
masks image patches and then reconstructs the masked patches via an auto-encoder. Later, both
MaskFeat (Wei et al., 2021) and data2vec (Baevski et al., 2022) empirically find better performance
by reconstructing semantic feature. Now MRP has surpassed the end-to-end supervised learning on
many downstream tasks, e.g. image classification (Dong et al., 2021) and object detection (He et al.,
2021), and is seeing more applications because of its effectiveness and strong compatibility.
SSL analysis. Despite its remarkable success in practice, the theoretical understanding of SSL is
still largely absent. Arora et al. (2019) provided generalization guarantees for contrastive learning on
linear classification models with the assumption that different positives belong to the same latent class.
Wang & Isola (2020) showed that contrastive learning can trade-off the alignment and uniformity
of features on a hypersphere. HaoChen et al. (2021) proposed and analyzed a spectral version
of contrastive loss with provable accuracy guarantees under linear probing evaluation. Tian et al.
(2020) proved that SimCLR only captures feature variability across data points. However, these
theoretical works mainly study contrastive learning which essentially differs from MRP. The most
closely relevant work to ours is (Lee et al., 2021; Cao et al., 2022). Cao et al. (2022) analyzed the
patch-based attention in MAE via an integral kernel by showing the benefits of patchifying, the
equivalence between the attention mechanism in MAE and a learnable integral kernel transform, etc.
However, they did not reveal any feature properties of MRP and the superiority reasons of MRP
over conventional supervised learning. Lee et al. (2021) showed the benefits of reconstruction partial


                                                     2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 1: Visualization of ResNet50 (He et al., 2016b) trained by conventional supervised learning.
We use Eigen-CAM to localize class-specific image regions which show why the model predicts the
image as the corresponding class. Though ResNet50 predicts all car images correctly, it actually
locates different regions, e.g. front, side window, car nose, taillight, and wheel, for different images,
indicating multiple independent features for each class and thus the “multi-view" data assumption.
data from another partial data on reducing sample complexity of the downstream tasks under the
condition where two pieces are independent conditioned on their semantic label. But this independent
condition is not the real cases where the two parts of the same image will share a significant amount
of information not explained by the label (Bansal et al., 2020). Moreover, these works do not study
how features are learned by networks, which is essential to understanding MRP in practice.

3       P ROBLEM S ETUP
Here we first introduce “multi-view” data assumption introduced in (Allen-Zhu & Li, 2020), and
then present the pretraining framework of mask-reconstruction pretraining (MRP). Finally, following
most MRP works, we use a k-classification task as a downstream task for analysis. In this work, we
use O, Ω, Θ to hide constants w.r.t. k, and Õ, Ω̃, Θ̃ to hide polylogarithmic factors w.r.t. k. We use
poly(k) (polylog(k) ) to denote Θ(k C ) (Θ(logC k)) with constant C > 0. [n] denotes {1, 2, . . . , n}.
3.1 M ULTI -V IEW DATA D ISTRIBUTION
On realistic data, for each semantic class, there are actually several independent features being in
effect during the classification process. As shown in Fig. 1, we adopt Eigen-CAM (Muhammad
& Yeasin, 2020) to localize class-specific regions which tell us why a model predicts the image
as the corresponding class. Here we test on ResNet50 (He et al., 2016b) trained by the Pytorch
Team1 in a supervised training manner. For all the car images in Fig. 1, though ResNet50 predicts
them correctly, Eigen-CAM locates different class-specific regions, e.g. car front, side window,
taillight, and wheel, on different images. These results directly testify to the multiple independent
discriminative features in a semantic class. Such a data structure is called “multi-view data" and is
firstly testified in (Allen-Zhu & Li, 2020). In the following, we make the multi-view assumption on
the realistic data for analysis. The mathematical formulation is similar to (Allen-Zhu & Li, 2020).
Assume that there are k semantic classes, and each data pair is denoted by (X, y), where X = (x1 , x2 ,
. . . , xP ) ∈ (Rd )P has P patches (e.g. (non-)overlap image patches) in which each patch is d-
dimensional, and y ∈ [k] is the label of X. Then suppose there are multiple discriminative features
associated with each semantic class. For simplicity, here we say two features and define the two
feature vectors as vi,1 , vi,2 ∈ Rd for each class i ∈ [k]. Note, our analysis technique can also be
extended to multiple features. We further assume feature vectors are orthonormal, i.e.,
           ∀i, i′ ∈ [k], ∀l, l′ ∈ [2], ∥vi,l ∥2 = 1, and vi,l ⊥ vi′ ,l′ , when (i, l) ̸= (i′ , l′ ). (1)
Denote the set of all discriminative features of the k classes as V = {vi,1 , vi,2 }ki=1 .
Now we introduce the multi-view distribution Dm and single-view distributions Ds , where samples
from Dm have multiple features, samples from Ds has only a single main feature. Let Cp be a
                                                                                       1
universal constant, s be a universal parameter to control feature sparsity, σp = √dpolylog(k) be a
parameter to control magnitude of random noise, and γ be a parameter to control the feature noise.
Definition 3.1 (Multi-view data (Allen-Zhu & Li, 2020)). Data distribution D consists of data from
multi-view data Dm with probability 1−µ and from single-view data Ds with probability µ. We define
(X, y) ∼ D by randomly uniformly selecting a label y ∈ [k] and generating data X as follows.
    1
        https://pytorch.org/hub/pytorch_vision_resnet/


                                                     3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


  1) Sample a set of features V ′ uniformly at random from {vi,1 , vi,2 }i̸=y each with probability ks .
  2) Denote V(X) = V ′ ∪ {vy,1 , vy,2 } as the set of feature vectors used in data X.
  3) For each v ∈ V(X), pick Cp disjoint patches in [P ] and denote it as Pv (X) (the distribution of
   these patches can be arbitrary). We denote P(X) = ∪v∈V(X) Pv (X).
  4) If D = Ds is the single-view distribution, pick a value ˆl = ˆl(X) ∈ [2] uniformly at random.
  5) For each p ∈ Pv (X) for some v ∈ V(X), given feature noise αp,v′ ∈ [0, γ], we set
                                            X
                                xp = zp v +     ′
                                                    αp,v′ v ′ + ξp ,
                                                    v ∈V
  where ξp ∈ N (0, σp I) is an independent random Gaussian noise. The coefficients zp ≥ 0 satisfy
                                                                                                   q
                                                  P                                   P
    • For “multi-view” data (X, y) ∈ Dm ,           p∈Pv (X) zp ∈ [1, O(1)] and          p∈Pv (X) zp ∈
      [1, O(1)] for an integer q ≥ 2, when v ∈ P      {vy,1 , vy,2 }, zp is uniformly distributed over
      Cp patches and the marginal distribution of p∈Pv (X) zp is left-close.
                                                                           P
    • For “single-view” data (X, y) ∈ Ds , when v = vy,l̂ ,                  p∈Pv (X) zp ∈ [1, O(1)],
                    q
      P                                                             P
                  z
         p∈Pv (X) p   ∈ [1, O(1)] for q ≥  2. When  v  = v y,3−l̂ ,   p∈Pv (X) zp ∈ [ρ, O(ρ)] (here we
                −0.01
      Pρ=k
      set             for simplicity). zp is uniformly distributed over Cp patches.
    • p∈Pv (X) zp ∈ [Ω(1), 0.4] when v ∈ V(X) \ {vy,1 , vy,2 }, and the marginal distribution of
      P
         p∈Pv (X) zp is right-close.
                                                                                             2 2
  6) For each p ∈ [P ]\P(X), with an independent random Gaussian noise ξp ∼ N (0, γ dk I),
                                         X
                                   xp =      ′
                                                 αp,v′ v ′ + ξp ,
                                                v ∈V
   where each αp,v′ ∈ [0, γ] is the feature noise.
Intuitively, multi-view data Dm refers to the data with multiple features distributed over patches
plus some noise from other features and background noise, while only a single main feature exists
in single-view data Ds . Their mixed distribution D can well characterize realistic data. Based on
distribution D, in Sec. 4 we will define the datasets used for pretraining and downstream fine-tuning.
3.2   M ASK -C ONSTRUCTION P RETRAINING F RAMEWORK
As a representative MRP, MAE (He et al., 2021) randomly masks the patches of an input image and
then reconstructs the pixels of these masked patches via an auto-encoder. Recently, many works show
that reconstructing the semantic features often achieves higher performance, where the semantic
feature can be obtained by feeding the vanilla full input into a teacher network, e.g. a pretrained
network (Wei et al., 2021) or the exponential moving average (EMA) of encoder in MAE (Dong
et al., 2021; Baevski et al., 2022). In this paper, we analyze both Teacher-Student framework and
MAE but will focus more on the former one because of its slightly higher performance.
Network Architectures. Formally, as shown in Fig 2, we implement the encoder in student network
by a two-layer convolution smoothed ReLU network with km kernels denoted by wr ∈ Rd , r ∈ [km].
for the encoder, its output is defined as
                                                                 X
    H(X) = [h1 (X), h2 (X), . . . , hkm (X)],  where hr (X) =             ReLU(⟨wr , xp ⟩).
                                                                           p∈[P ]
Here ReLU is a smoothed ReLU (Allen-Zhu & Li, 2020) and is defined as follows: for an integer
                                                                           q
                              1
q ≥ 2 and a threshold ϱ = polylog(k) , ReLU(z) = 0 if z ≤ 0, ReLU(z) = qϱzq−1 if z ∈ [0, ϱ] and
ReLU(z) = z − (1 − 1/q)ϱ if z ≥ ϱ. The desirable properties of smoothed ReLU function is that
when z is large it is linear with z and when z is small, it will be much smaller. Thus, it will make the
low-magnitude feature noises much smaller to better separate the true features from feature noises.
The decoder is a linear layer parameterized by br (r ∈ [km]), and its output is
        h′ (X) = [h′1 (X), h′2 (X), . . . , h′km (X)],   where h′r (X) = br hr (X), r ∈ [km].
Following the practice in MRP (Baevski et al., 2022; Dong et al., 2021), teacher network shares
the same architecture with student network, and is a smoothed ReLU network parameterized by
ŵr , r ∈ [km]. Its output is defined as
                                                                        X
      h(X) = [ĥ1 (X), ĥ2 (X), . . . , ĥkm (X)],     where ĥr (X) =            ReLU(⟨ŵr , xp ⟩).
                                                                           p∈[P ]
Pretraining of MRP on Pretext Task. Now we define the pretraining loss. Let ϵ = (ϵ1 , ϵ2 , . . . , ϵp ),
where ϵi is an independent Bernoulli variable with Pr(ϵi = 1) = θ. In the pretraining, for the linear


                                                   4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                      Student                                 Teacher


                                  .
                                  .
                                  .
                                                      Network                                 Network


                                                                                     .
                                                                                     .
                                                                                     .
         Encoder


                          .
                          .
                          .


                                   .
                                   .
                                   .
                                   .
                                   .
                                   .


                                                                                     .
                                                                                     .
                                                                                     .
                                                                                     .
                                                                                     .
                                                                                     .
                                                                                 .
                                                                                 .
                                                                                 .
         Decoder


                                   .
                                   .
                                   .
                                   .
                                   .
                                   .
                          .
                          .
                          .
                                                                 Supervision

Figure 2: Teacher-Student framework studied in this work. Given an input X = [x1 , . . . , xP ]
(image or text tokens) with P patches, this framework randomly masks patches to obtain ϵX =
[ϵ1 x1 , . . . , ϵp xP ] with Bernoulli variable ϵp to mask, and feeds ϵX into student encoder H for a
latent vector H(ϵX). Then, student decoder takes H(ϵX) as input and outputs h′ of all patches to
predict the output h of a teacher with vanilla input X as input. The encoder is two-layer CNN, and
the decoder is a linear layer. For MAE framework, it has encoder-decoder networks and the decoder
have an additional layer to map output of the encoder to recover P patches (see Fig 6 in Appendix).
student decoder, we set its all parameters as br = c(θ) = θ1 for simplicity, which is provably sufficient
for improving downstream tasks. Now we define the empirical mean squared pretraining loss:
                 1 X                              1 X          X
     L(H; ϵ) =                   L(H; Xn , ϵ) =                            ∥ĥr (Xn ) − h′r (ϵXn )∥22 ,
                2N       n∈[N ]                  2N     n∈[N ]     r∈[km]
where N is the number of data points for pretraining and ϵX = (ϵ1 x1 , ϵ2 x2 , . . . , ϵP xP ).
Now we discuss how to pretrain it. Following MRP (Baevski et al., 2022; Dong et al., 2021), we use
                                                                         (t)    (t)
student to update teacher by updating teacher kernel parameters ŵr as ŵr = τ wr , where we set τ =
                 1−θ         1

1 + c0 and c0 = Cp θ + Θ t+1 . Then we use gradient descent to update student encoder parameters:
                                wr(t+1) = wr(t) − ηEϵ [∇wr L(H; ϵ)] .                                       (2)
Fine-tuning of MRP on Classification Downstream Tasks. Here we consider a classification
downstream task. Specifically, we fine-tune the pretrained student encoder with an extra linear layer
using N2 labeled samples. We fine-tune the network by minimizing the empirical cross-entropy loss:
               1 X                                                    X
Ldown (F ) =                Ldown (F ; Xn , yn ), where Fi (X) =                ui,r hr (X), i ∈ [k].
              N2    n∈[N2 ]                                              r∈[km]
                                     Fy (X)
Here Ldown (F ; X, y) = − log P e            Fj (X)   , and ui,r , r ∈ [km], i ∈ [k] denotes the weights of the
                                   j∈[k] e
extra linear layer. Then we adopt the gradient descent to fine-tune the kernels wr of the pretrained
encoder and update the parameters ui,r :
                                                                (t+1)      (t)
            wr(t+1) = wr(t) − η1 ∇wr Ldown (F ), ui,r = ui,r − η2 ∇ui,r Ldown (F ),
where the learning rate η1 is often much smaller than η2 in practice.

4    M AIN R ESULTS
Here we first reveal the semantic feature learning process of mask-reconstruction pretraining (MRP),
and then theoretically show why MRP helps downstream tasks by taking the classification task as an
example. Finally, we intuitively discuss the benefits of MRP to other downstream tasks.
4.1 F EATURE L EARNING P ROCESS OF P RETRAINING
Here we mainly show that pretraining can capture the whole features V (defined in (1)) in the
pretraining dataset by showing that the correlation scores between the features and the kernels of the
student encoder gradually increase during training process. For brevity, we first define
   (0)                               (0)                             (t)
Mi,l := r ∈ [km] : ⟨wr(0) ,vi,l ⟩ ≥ Λi,l (1 − O(1/ log k)) , where Λi,l := maxr∈[km] [⟨wr(t) , vi,l ⟩]+ .


       (t)                                                                                          (t)
Here wr denotes the r-th convolution kernel of the student encoder at the t-th iteration. Λi,l denotes
the highest positive correlation score between the l-th feature vi,l of the i-th class and all the km
          (t)           (t)                                                                   (0)
kernels wr . Larger Λi,l means the network can better capture the feature vi,l . For Mi,l , it is


                                                           5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                                                        (0)
composed of the kernels which have slightly smaller correlation scores than the maximum score Λi,l
at the initial stage. For analysis, we pose some assumptions on data and the network as follows.
Assumption 1. (1) The pretraining dataset Z have N samples which are i.i.d. drawn from the
distribution D defined in Definition 3.1 and let N ≥ poly(k).
                   (0)                                                        2
      √ kernel wr (r ∈ [km]) is initialized by a√Gaussian distribution N (0, σ0 I) with σ0 =
(2) Each
O(1/ k). Moreover, m satisfies m ∈ [polylog(k), k].
Assumption 1 means that there are about (1 − µ)N “multi-view" samples and µN “single-view"
data points in the pretraining dataset Z. According to Definition 3.1, a multi-view sample contains
multiple discriminative features distributed over patches plus some noise from other features and
background noise, while for a single-view sample, it has only a single main feature and some noises.
We use Gaussian initialization as it is the standard initialization used in practice. Note, for pretraining,
we do not use any labels. Theorem 1 states the feature learning process in MRP.
                                                            1
Theorem 1. Suppose Assumption 1 holds, learning rate η ≤ poly(k) in gradient decent steps (2).
                                                                                   (T )
After T = poly(k)
              η    iterations, for sufficiently large k, the learned kernels {wr }r∈[km] satisfy the
following properties with high probability.
  1) Under Teacher-Student framework, when q ≥ 3, for every vi,l ∈ V and every (X, y) ∈ Z,
          (0)                             (T )                                            (0)
    (a) Λi,l ∈ [Ω̃(σ0 ), Õ(σ0 )], Λi,l          ∈ [1/polylog(k), Õ(1)] and r∗ ∈ Mi,l , where r∗ =
                            (T )
        argmaxr∈[km] [⟨wr , vi,l ⟩]+ .
                          (0)      (T )
    (b) For each r ∈ Mi,l , ⟨wr , vi′ ,l′ ⟩ ≤ Õ(σ0 ) when (i, l) ̸= (i′ , l′ ).
                          (0)      (T )
    (c) For each r ∈
                   / Mi,l , ⟨wr , vi,l ⟩ ≤ Õ(σ0 ).
  2) Under MAE framework, when q ≥ 4, the properties (a)-(c) also hold.
See the proofs of Teacher-Student framework in Appendix F and of MAE framework in Appendix H.
Theorem 1 states that for both frameworks, the pretrained model can capture all features. But MAE
needs slightly restrictive assumption, since 1) it requires q ≥ 4 where q is the smooth parameter in
ReLU (see Sec. 3.2), and 2) larger q compresses small feature noises more heavily to better separate
the true features from feature noises. This functionality is implemented by teacher in Teacher-Student
framework, as teacher can filter out feature noise and gives more clean targets.
Theorem 1 (a) shows that for those kernels winning the lottery ticket at the random initialization stage
               (0)       (0)
(i.e. kernels wr ∈ Mi,l ), at least one of them would win out through the course of training and
capture the feature vi,l . Specifically, at initialization, for any feature vi,l in the whole features V of
                                                  (0)                                                  √
the pretraining dataset, its correlation score Λi,l with any kernel wr in {wr }mk  r=1 is at most Õ(1/ k).
                                                                                                (T )
After MRP pretraining, for any feature vi,l , there always exists at least a kernel wr so that the
                    (T )                    (T )
correlation score Λi,l between vi,l and wr is increased to at least 1/polylog(k). So each feature
in V is captured by at least a convolution kernel in the student encoder. Besides, as the pretraining
dataset is often much larger than the downstream dataset, the features in pretraining dataset actually
(approximately) cover all the features in downstream dataset. So the kernels of the pretrained student
encoder is able to capture as much features as possible in downstream datasets.
For Theorem 1 (b) and (c), they mainly guarantee some kinds of corresponding relations among
kernels and features: a kernel captures at most a feature. Specifically, from Theorem 1 (b) indicates
                                 (0)
that for these kernels wr in Mi,l which mainly capture the semantic feature vi,l , they actually
                                                                                                        (0)
only capture little information of other features vi′ ,l′ where vi′ ,l′ ̸= vi,l , since for any wr ∈ Mi,l ,
its correlation score with vi′ ,l′ is no larger than Õ(σ0 ) and keeps small during the training phase.
                                                          (0)
Theorem 1 (c) shows that for these kernels wr ∈     / Mi,l , they keep losing the lottery ticket during
training, and only capture little information of feature vi,l . Theorem 1 (b) and (c) together guarantee
that a kernel mainly captures at most a feature and can only grab very little information of other
features. So the multiple features captured by the encoder kernels is separated and not involved with
each other. This property is very important for fine-tuning, since intuitively, a kernel is only associated
with at most a feature, and accordingly, a linear classifier can directly establish the relations among
kernels and semantic class labels. See more discussion in Sec. 4.2.

                                                        6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


4.2   B ENEFIT J USTIFICATION OF MRP ON D OWNSTREAM TASKS
Classification Downstream Task. Here we first analyze the performance of MRP on classification
downstream task. After pretraining, following the practice in (Wei et al., 2021; Dong et al., 2021;
He et al., 2021; Xie et al., 2021; Baevski et al., 2022), we only fine-tune the student encoder with
an extra linear layer on the labeled training data of the downstream datasets. See the details of fine
tuning in Sec. 3.2. Before analysis, we first make some mild assumptions.
Assumption 2. (1) The downstream dataset Zdown of N2 samples is i.i.d. drawn from the distribution
D defined in Definition 3.1. Let N2 ≥ k.
                   (0)                                          (0)                          (T )
(2) We initialize ui,r , i ∈ [k], r ∈ [km] by 0 and initialize wr by the pretrained encoder wr .
Assumption 2 actually assumes the pretraining and downstream datasets share the same distribution
D. This data assumption accords with the practice in many SSL works (Wei et al., 2021; Dong et al.,
2021), e.g. MAE (He et al., 2021), SimMIM (Xie et al., 2021) and data2vec (Baevski et al., 2022),
which pretrain and fine-tune on the same dataset, e.g. ImageNet, but with significant improvement over
the conventional supervised learning. Then based on Theorem 1, we analyze the test performance
on the classification downstream task, and summarize the results in Theorem 2. We denote the
fine-tuning network as function F (·) ∈ Rk which outputs k-dimensional prediction for k classes.
Theorem 2 (Test performance analysis). Suppose Assumption 2 holds. When F (·) is either the
student encoder in Teacher-Student framework or the encoder in MAE with an extra linear layer, by
fine-tuning F (·) with N2 labeled samples, for any new data point (X, y) ∼ D, F (·) satisfies
                            h                                 i                2
                 Pr(X,y)∼D Fy (X) ≥ maxj̸=y Fj (X) + Õ(1) ≥ 1 − e−Ω(log k) ,
where Fy (X) denotes the y-th element in F (X), i.e. the predicted probability for the class y.
See its proof in Appendix G. Theorem 2 guarantees that no matter for single-view or multi-view data
(X, y) ∼ D, the fine-tuned classifier F (·) always correctly predicts the label y with high probability.
This is because intuitively, as proved in Theorem 1 (a), after pretraining, for each discriminative
feature vi,l in the feature set V, at least a kernel wr in the pretrained student encoder can capture it.
This means that even at the beginning of the fine tuning, the encoder in the function F (·) is already
capable to discover and grab all features in V. Then as shown in Theorem 1 (b) and (c), a kernel
captures at most a feature. In this way, for single-view sample containing a single feature denoted by
vi,l̂ , the corresponding kernels in the encoder would capture it and output a large correlation score (
                                                                                            √
≥ 1/polylog(k)) at the corresponding positions and small correlation scores ( ≤ Õ(1/ k)) at the
remaining positions. Similarly, for multi-view samples including several features, the corresponding
kernels have large correlation scores at some specific kernels while small ones for remaining kernels.
For a class, these positions of high scores would not change, because all features are captured and
a kernel grabs at most a feature. Based on this, the last linear layer in F (·) can easily establish the
corresponding relation between large score positions and feature labels, and learns to classify.
Then we compare the test performance with conventional end-to-end “supervised learning" (SL) on
the same downstream dataset. Under the same data distribution and the same network F , Allen-Zhu
& Li (2020) analyzed the test performance of SL (see Lemma 1).
Lemma 1. Suppose the data assumption in Assumption 2 holds and now let sample number N2 ≥
                                      1
poly(k). Let the learning rate η ≤ poly(k) . Then by training F after T = poly(k)
                                                                             η    iterations with
                                                       2                                    (T )
supervised training, with probability ≥ 1 − e−Ω(log k) , the supervised trained model FSL satisfies

                                          (T )         (T )
                 Pr(X,y)∼D ∃i ∈ [k] : FSL,y (X) < FSL,i (X) ∈ [0.49µ, 0.51µ].
                                                       (T )
Lemma 1 shows that the supervised trained model FSL has only about 50% accuracy on single-view
data whose ratio among all data is µ. Both our Theorems and Lemma 1 are proved using lottery
ticket hypothesis (Allen-Zhu & Li, 2020; Wen & Li, 2021; Allen-Zhu & Li, 2022; Frankle & Carbin,
2019) and we discuss the detailed difference between our work and (Allen-Zhu & Li, 2020) in terms
of network architecture, objective loss and fine-tuning on downstream tasks in Appendix C. For
supervised training, when the convolution kernels are randomly initialized, for each class, a feature
correlates more with kernels than other features. With more training iterations, this feature become a
winning lottery over other features. Thus, for those single-view data without the captured features,
the classification will make an error and obtain only half accuracy for total dataset. By comparison, in
MRP including both teacher-student framework and MAE, all features are captured in the pretraining,


                                                   7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


and thus has stronger capacity to capture more kinds of features for each class. This also accords with
our empirical observations in Sec. 5. Specifically, Fig. 3 visualizes the class-specific image regions
for both models trained by SL and MRP. By comparison, MRP captures multiple discriminative
features in an image, while SL only captures single feature.
Discussion on Other Downstream Tasks. Besides classification downstream task, our conclusion
could intuitively generalize to other downstream tasks, e.g. transfer learning and detection, because
in the pretraiing phase, our encoder have provably captured all feature features in each images.
For transfer learning, the representative task is classification task Tcls (He et al., 2020b; 2021) which
pretrains a model on a large-scale unlabeled data Dpre and then fine-tunes the pretrained model on a
classification downstream dataset Dfine . Denote the feature set of dataset Dfine as V ′ . We discuss this
transfer learning in three cases: 1) the datasets Dfine and Dpre share the same feature set V ′ (i.e. V ′ = V)
but can have different data distribution (e.g. different ratio of single- and multi-view data); 2) V ⊂ V ′ ;
3) the pretraining and downstream tasks share the partial semantic set, i.e., V ∩ V ′ ̸= ∅. For the
case (1) and (2), following the similar proof process of Theorem 2, the fine-tuned model can also
obtain high classification accuracy on downstream    √ tasks. For the case (3), as our training networks
are over-parameterized, i.e., m ∈ [polylog(k), k] and the size of the lottery ticket winning set
is O(polylog(k)) at the end of pre-training, the number of kernel weights that finally capture the
features is much smaller than the total number of kernels. For the remaining kernels, they still can
capture new features in the downstream fine-tuning phase. In this way, MRP still improves the overall
transfer learning performance. The experimental results on transfer learning in Table 1 also support
our above analysis. While the pretraining dataset, i.e. ImageNet, and the downstream dataset, VOC07,
share many different categories and thus have different features, MRP still performs better than the
supervised case, which validates our analysis.
For object detection downstream task, it has two targets: 1) finding the bounding boxes of possible
objects, and 2) classifying bounding boxes. For bounding box detection, since a) the encoder
pretrained by MRP can grab all features and b) the desired bounding boxes should contain features,
the encoder can detect the bounding boxes precisely, at least does not lose many bounding boxes of
objects. In contrast, supervised learning often randomly captures feature features (Allen-Zhu & Li,
2020) and thus cannot well detect bounding boxes. For the second target, i.e. classification, we can
draw similar results on the transformer learning classification task that MRP often performs better
than supervised learning. So by considering the advantages of MRP over supervised learning on the
two targets in object detection, MRP should expect better performance than supervised learning.
Comparison to Other SSL Analysis. Only a few works have studied MRP. Cao et al. (2022) revealed
the benefits of patchifying and the equivalence between the attention mechanism in MAE, etc. But
they did not analyze any feature learning process of MRP and the superiority reasons of MRP over
supervised learning. Lee et al. (2021) showed that by splitting an input into two pieces, the pretext
tasks of reconstructing one piece from another piece can decrease the sample complexity of the
downstream tasks. Though promising, they require the two pieces to be approximately independent
conditioned on their feature label, which contradicts many realistic cases where the two parts of
the same image share a significant amount of information not explained by the label (Bansal et al.,
2020). In contrast, under multi-view data assumptions verified by (Allen-Zhu & Li, 2020) and
our experimental results, we reveal how features are learned by MRP, and also explicitly show the
performance improvement on downstream tasks, which is essential to understanding MRP in practice.
Discussion on CNN Architectures. We analyze CNNs because of two reasons. One is for easy
comparison with supervised results of same encoder network in (Allen-Zhu & Li, 2020). Another
one is the difficulty of analyzing the feature learning process of Transformer due to its correlated
manipulations and highly nonlinear attentions. But this work is the first one that analyzes the feature
learning process of MRP on explicit non-linear networks. Moreover, as shown in (Jing et al., 2022;
Fang et al., 2022) (see our Appendix B) and our Sec. 5, CNNs pretrained by MRP empirically surpass
supervised one on various downstream tasks, e.g. classification, detection and segmentation. Finally,
Appendix B shows that Transformers pretrined by MRP also captures more features than supervised
one which accords with our observations on CNNs and validates our theory.
Table 1: Performance on Various Downstream Tasks. We use official MRP setting to train ResNet50.
        Downstream Tasks Acc.Classification        Detection            Transfer learning
                              (%) on ImageNet AP75 on VOC07+12 Classification Acc. (%) on VOC07
       Supervised Training          76.2                  58.8                      87.5
             MRPs                   78.0                  63.2                      91.1



                                                      8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 3: Visualization of ResNet50 (He et al., 2016b) respectively trained by supervised learning
and MRP. We use Eigen-CAM to localize class-specific image regions. For each pair, the left figure
is given by the supervised model, while the right figure comes from the pretrained model. By
comparison, the pretrained model often captures more kinds of features than the supervised model.

5    E XPERIMENTS
Assumption Investigation. To verify our “multi-view" data assumption, we investigate whether there
are multiple discriminative features for some classes in ImageNet (Deng et al., 2009). To this end, we
use the widely used Eigen-CAM (Muhammad & Yeasin, 2020) to visualize which part of an image
plays a key role in deciding its predicted class. We follow the default setting in Eigen-CAM and use
the network parameters of the forth block to compute the project of an image in ResNet50 (He et al.,
2016b) released by PyTorch Team1 . As shown in Fig. 1 of Sec. 3.1, though ResNet50 predicts all the
car images correctly, Eigen-CAM locates different class-specific regions, e.g. car front, side window,
car nose, taillight, and wheel, for different images. It indicates the existence of multiple independent
discriminative features in a semantic class and validates our “multi-view" data assumption.
Results on CNN. We investigate the performance of MRP on CNNs. We use the recently proposed
SimMIM (Xie et al., 2021), a representative MRP, on ResNet50. We use SimMIM rather than
MAE (He et al., 2021), as MAE removes the masked patches before encoder but the convolution
operations in CNN encoder cannot handle masked input, while SimMIM replaces the masked patches
by a mask token and can use CNNs. Then we use ResNet50 (4-layered transformer) to implement
the encoder (decoder). Next, we pretrain for 300 epochs on ImageNet, and fine-tune pretrained
ResNet50 for 100 epochs on ImageNet. Table 1 reports the top-1 accuracy on ImageNet, and shows
that on ResNet50, MRP improves supervised training by a large margin. Moreover, we fine-tune our
pretrained ResNet50 on transfer learning classification downstream task on VoC07 and detection
task on VoC07+12. The results show that CNNs pretrained by MRP generalizes well on various
downstream tasks and indeed often surpasses supervised baselines. These results accord with our
theoretical implications that MRP can help downstream tasks by enjoying superior performance than
conventional SL. See more results on downstream tasks in Appendix B.
Finally, we use Eigen-CAM to localize class-specific image regions for both models trained by
supervised learning (SL) and MRP. For each pair in Fig. 3, the left image is the visualization of
SL, while the right one is from MRP. By comparison, MRP often captures several discriminative
features in an image, e.g. front window and door handle in the first pair, while SL only grabs a feature,
e.g. front window in the first pair. See similar observations on transformer in Appendix B. These
results accord with our theory that the advantages of MRP come from its stronger capacity to capture
more kinds of class features in the pretraining.

6    C ONCLUSION
In this work, we analyze the feature learning process of mask-reconstruction pretraining (MRP) and
show its superiority in downstream tasks. For pretraining, the pretrained encoder in MRP provably
captures all discriminative features in the pretraining dataset. Because of its huge size and high
diversity, the pretraining dataset covers the features in downstream dataset. So for fine-tuning, the
encoder well grabs as much features as it can in downstream datasets, while supervised learning only
randomly captures some features due to its random initialization. Thus, the fine-tuned encoder in MRP
provably achieves better accuracy than supervised learning on the classification tasks. Experimental
results validate our assumptions and also our theoretical implications.


                                                   9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


R EFERENCES
Zeyuan Allen-Zhu and Yuanzhi Li. Towards understanding ensemble, knowledge distillation and
  self-distillation in deep learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2012.09816, 2020.
Zeyuan Allen-Zhu and Yuanzhi Li. Feature purification: How adversarial training performs robust
  deep learning. In 2021 IEEE 62nd Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science
  (FOCS), pp. 977–988, 2022. doi: 10.1109/FOCS52979.2021.00098.
S. Arora, H. Khandeparkar, M. Khodak, O. Plevrakis, and N. Saunshi. A theoretical analysis of
   contrastive unsupervised representation learning. In Proc. Int’l Conf. Machine Learning, pp.
   5628–5637, 2019.
Alexei Baevski, Wei-Ning Hsu, Qiantong Xu, Arun Babu, Jiatao Gu, and Michael Auli. Data2vec:
  A general framework for self-supervised learning in speech, vision and language. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2202.03555, 2022.
Yamini Bansal, Gal Kaplun, and Boaz Barak. For self-supervised learning, rationality implies
  generalization, provably. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.08508, 2020.
Hangbo Bao, Li Dong, and Furu Wei. Beit: Bert pre-training of image transformers. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2106.08254, 2021.
Shuhao Cao, Peng Xu, and David A Clifton. How to understand masked autoencoders. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2202.03670, 2022.
M. Caron, P. Bojanowski, A. Joulin, and Matthijs M. Douze. Deep clustering for unsupervised
 learning of visual features. In Proc. European Conf. Computer Vision, pp. 132–149, 2018.
T. Chen, S. Kornblith, M. Norouzi, and G. Hinton. A simple framework for contrastive learning of
   visual representations. In Proc. Int’l Conf. Machine Learning, 2020a.
X. Chen, H. Fan, R. Girshick, and K. He. Improved baselines with momentum contrastive learning.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.04297, 2020b.
Jia Deng, Wei Dong, Richard Socher, Li-Jia Li, Kai Li, and Li Fei-Fei. Imagenet: A large-scale
   hierarchical image database. In 2009 IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition,
   pp. 248–255. Ieee, 2009.
Xiaoyi Dong, Jianmin Bao, Ting Zhang, Dongdong Chen, Weiming Zhang, Lu Yuan, Dong Chen,
  Fang Wen, and Nenghai Yu. Peco: Perceptual codebook for bert pre-training of vision transformers.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2111.12710, 2021.
Alexey Dosovitskiy, Lucas Beyer, Alexander Kolesnikov, Dirk Weissenborn, Xiaohua Zhai, Thomas
  Unterthiner, Mostafa Dehghani, Matthias Minderer, Georg Heigold, Sylvain Gelly, et al. An
  image is worth 16x16 words: Transformers for image recognition at scale. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2010.11929, 2020.
Yuxin Fang, Li Dong, Hangbo Bao, Xinggang Wang, and Furu Wei. Corrupted image modeling for
  self-supervised visual pre-training. arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.03382, 2022.
Jonathan Frankle and Michael Carbin. The lottery ticket hypothesis: Finding sparse, trainable neural
  networks. In 7th International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2019, New Orleans,
  LA, USA, May 6-9, 2019. OpenReview.net, 2019.
Ross Girshick, Jeff Donahue, Trevor Darrell, and Jitendra Malik. Region-based convolutional
  networks for accurate object detection and segmentation. IEEE transactions on pattern analysis
  and machine intelligence, 38(1):142–158, 2015.
Jeff Z HaoChen, Colin Wei, Adrien Gaidon, and Tengyu Ma. Provable guarantees for self-supervised
   deep learning with spectral contrastive loss. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
   34, 2021.
K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun. Deep residual learning for image recognition. In Proc. IEEE
  Conf. Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 770–778, 2016a.


                                                10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


K. He, H. Fan, Y. Wu, S. Xie, and R. Girshick. Momentum contrast for unsupervised visual
  representation learning. In Proc. IEEE Conf. Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp.
  9729–9738, 2020a.
Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image
  recognition. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition,
  pp. 770–778, 2016b.
Kaiming He, Georgia Gkioxari, Piotr Dollár, and Ross Girshick. Mask r-cnn. In Proceedings of the
  IEEE international conference on computer vision, pp. 2961–2969, 2017.
Kaiming He, Haoqi Fan, Yuxin Wu, Saining Xie, and Ross Girshick. Momentum contrast for
  unsupervised visual representation learning. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
  Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 9729–9738, 2020b.
Kaiming He, Xinlei Chen, Saining Xie, Yanghao Li, Piotr Dollár, and Ross Girshick. Masked
  autoencoders are scalable vision learners. arXiv preprint arXiv:2111.06377, 2021.
R. Hjelm, A. Fedorov, S. Lavoie-Marchildon, K. Grewal, P. Bachman, A. Trischler, and Y. Bengio.
  Learning deep representations by mutual information estimation and maximization. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1808.06670, 2018.
Li Jing, Jiachen Zhu, and Yann LeCun. Masked siamese convnets. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.07700,
   2022.
Jason D Lee, Qi Lei, Nikunj Saunshi, and Jiacheng Zhuo. Predicting what you already know helps:
  Provable self-supervised learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34, 2021.
Mohammed Bany Muhammad and Mohammed Yeasin. Eigen-cam: Class activation map using
 principal components. In 2020 International Joint Conference on Neural Networks (IJCNN), pp.
 1–7. IEEE, 2020.
A. Oord, Y. Li, and O. Vinyals. Representation learning with contrastive predictive coding. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1807.03748, 2018.
Olaf Ronneberger, Philipp Fischer, and Thomas Brox. U-net: Convolutional networks for biomedical
  image segmentation. In International Conference on Medical image computing and computer-
  assisted intervention, pp. 234–241. Springer, 2015.
Mingxing Tan, Ruoming Pang, and Quoc V Le. Efficientdet: Scalable and efficient object detection.
 In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp.
 10781–10790, 2020.
Yuandong Tian, Lantao Yu, Xinlei Chen, and Surya Ganguli. Understanding self-supervised learning
  with dual deep networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.00578, 2020.
Christopher Tosh, Akshay Krishnamurthy, and Daniel Hsu. Contrastive estimation reveals topic
  posterior information to linear models. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 22(281):1–31,
  2021a.
Christopher Tosh, Akshay Krishnamurthy, and Daniel Hsu. Contrastive learning, multi-view redun-
  dancy, and linear models. In Algorithmic Learning Theory, pp. 1179–1206. PMLR, 2021b.
Tongzhou Wang and Phillip Isola. Understanding contrastive representation learning through align-
  ment and uniformity on the hypersphere. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp.
  9929–9939. PMLR, 2020.
Chen Wei, Haoqi Fan, Saining Xie, Chao-Yuan Wu, Alan Yuille, and Christoph Feichtenhofer. Masked
  feature prediction for self-supervised visual pre-training. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.09133, 2021.
Zixin Wen and Yuanzhi Li. Toward understanding the feature learning process of self-supervised
  contrastive learning. In Marina Meila and Tong Zhang (eds.), Proceedings of the 38th International
  Conference on Machine Learning, volume 139 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp.
  11112–11122. PMLR, 18–24 Jul 2021.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Z. Wu, Y. Xiong, S. Yu, and D. Lin. Unsupervised feature learning via non-parametric instance
  discrimination. In Proc. IEEE Conf. Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 3733–3742,
  2018.
Zhenda Xie, Zheng Zhang, Yue Cao, Yutong Lin, Jianmin Bao, Zhuliang Yao, Qi Dai, and Han Hu.
  Simmim: A simple framework for masked image modeling. arXiv preprint arXiv:2111.09886,
  2021.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A    O UTLINE OF A PPENDIX

This supplementary document contains the main proofs for two main theorems. It is structured as
follows. Appendix B first provides more experimental results to compare the learnt features between
the conventional supervised learning and the mask-reconstruction pretraining. We also provide the
results on other downstream tasks under backbone. Moreover, we also visualize the results under
Transformer backbone. In Appendix C, we present the necessary assumptions and main results on
feature learning process of mask-reconstruction pretraining. In Appendix D, we introduce the main
ideas to prove our main results. In Appendix E, we show some technical results. Then we prove
Theorem C.4 in Appendix F. Finally, we show the performance on downstream classification tasks
(proof of Theorem G.2) in Appendix G. We prove the similar results under MAE framework and have
a discussion on BEiT in Appendix H.


B    M ORE E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS AND D ETAILS


                                            (a) airplane


                                              (b) yawl

Figure 4: Class-specific visualization of ResNet50 (He et al., 2016b) trained by MRP. For each pair,
the left figure is given by supervised model, while the right figure comes from the pretrained model.
By comparison, pretrained model often captures more kinds of features than supervised model.
In this section, we provide more visualizations to compare the learnt features by conventional
supervised learning (SL) and the mask-reconstruction pretraining (MRP). Moreover, we provide
more results on other downstream tasks.
More visualization results. Same as in the manuscript (Sec. 5), here we use Eigen-CAM to localize
class-specific image regions for both models trained by SL and MRP. Note, since 1) CAM-alike
methods all need to a well-trained classifier at the top of the backbone, and 2) the pretrained model
for MRP has only encoder backbone but no a classifier, we visualize the fine tuned model instead of
pretrained model for MRP.
For each pair in Fig. 4, the left image is the visualization of SL, while the right one is from MRP.
By comparison, MRP can often capture several discriminative features in an image, e.g. the airplane


                                                 13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


head and airplane tail in the first pair, while SL only captures a feature, e.g. airplane tail in the first
pair. These results also accord with our theory that the advantages of MRP come from its stronger
capacity to capture more kinds of features for each class in the pretraining phase.
Results on other downstream tasks. Actually, some works, e.g. (Jing et al., 2022; Fang et al., 2022),
also empirically find that CNNs pretrained by MRP can generalize well on various downstream tasks,
e.g., detection and segmentation. Specifically, Fang et al. (2022) showed that on ResNet50, MRP
achieves 38.0 mIoU on ADE20K semantic segmentation task and greatly improves the 36.1 mIoU of
supervised learning baseline. See these results in its Table 3 (b). Indeed, Table 4 in work (Jing et al.,
2022) also demonstrates that on VoC07+12 detection task, COCO detection task and COCO instance
segmentation tasks, ResNet50 pretrained by MRP respectively achieves 64.4 AP75 , 42.1 APbb       75 and
36.4 APmk                                                                            bb
         75 , while supervised ResNet50 respectively achieves 58.8 AP75 , 41.2 AP75 and 35.2 AP75 .
                                                                                                    mk


Visualization under Transformer backbone. Besides ResNet, we further provide visualization
results on Transformer (Dosovitskiy et al., 2020) to display the localize class-specific image regions
for both models trained by SL and MRP. For each group in Fig. 5, the left image is the visualization of
SL, while the middle one is from MAE (He et al., 2021) and the right one is from data2vec (Baevski
et al., 2022). Here we directly use the official released ViT-base models (Dosovitskiy et al., 2020) of
SL2 , MAE3 and data2vec4 .
Then one can observe that both MAE and data2vec usually capture several discriminative features
in an image, while SL only captures a feature. For example, in the first comparison group, SL only
captures one side of car tail. In contrast, MAE grabs two sides of car tail, and data2vec locates both
two sides of car tail and captures more, including the car wheel and car window. These results are
consistent with the results on ResNet50. All these results show the generality of the implication of
our theory on MRP.


Figure 5: Class-specific visualization of ViT-base (Dosovitskiy et al., 2020) trained by MRP. For each
group, the left image is the visualization of supervised model, while the middle one is from MAE
and the right one is from data2vec. By comparison, the model trained by MAE and data2vec often
captures more kinds of features than supervised model.



   2
    For official trained SL model, you can download it at https://github.com/facebookresearch/
deit/blob/main/README_deit.md.
  3
    For official trained MAE model, you can download it at https://github.com/
facebookresearch/mae/blob/main/FINETUNE.md.
  4
    For official trained data2vec model, you can download it at https://github.com/
facebookresearch/fairseq/tree/main/examples/data2vec.


                                                    14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


C    M AIN R ESULT ON F EATURE L EARNING P ROCESS OF
     M ASK -R ECONSTRUCTION P RETRAINING
In this section, we first show the main result on feature learning process mask-reconstruction pretrain-
ing (MRP). To introduce our main result, we first characterize the kernels at random initialization and
during the training process. We first define
                                        (t)
                                       Λi,l := max [⟨wr(t) , vi,l ⟩]+ ,
                                                r∈[km]
         (t)
where wr denotes the r-th convolution kernel of the student encoder at the t-th iteration. Here Λi,l
is the largest positive correlation score between the l-feature vi,l of i-th class and all the km kernels
  (t)
wr . We also define

                        (0)                                  (0)
                                                                             1
                     Mi,l := r ∈ [km] : ⟨wr(0) , vi,l ⟩ ≥ Λi,l 1 − O                  .
                                                                           log k
                (0)
Here the set Mi,l is formed by the kernels which have slightly smaller correlation scores than the
                   (0)                                                     (0)
maximum score Λi,l at the intial stage. If a kernel wr is not in Mi,l , it means that the magnitude of
                                         (0)
vi,l inside the random initialization wr is non-trivially lagging behind, comparing to other kernels.
Later we will prove that through the course of training, those kernels wr will lose the lottery and not
learn anything useful for feature vi,l .
We also have some properties of kernels at initialization (t = 0). The following lemma has been
proved in (Allen-Zhu & Li, 2020, Fact B.1.).
                              (0)                                                                5
Lemma C.1 (The size of Mi,l at initialization). With high probability at least 1 − e−Ω(log k) , we
         (0)
have |Mi,l | ≤ m0 , where m0 := O(log5 k).

Then to show our main result, we need some assumptions on the parameters and an induction
hypothesis.
Assumption C.2 (Parameter Assumption). The parameters introduced in the paper need to satisfy
the following conditions:
                                                                                1
       • ϱ is the threshold for the smoothed ReLU activation. We assume ϱ = polylog(k) .

       • q ≥ 3 and σ0q−2 ≤ k1 .
                                               σ0

       • γ controls feature noise. γ ≤ Õ      k        .
       • s controls feature sparsity. s = Θ(polylog(k)).
                         √                    √                               −q+1/2
       • N ≥ ω̃ σ2q−1k
                          , d ≥ ω̃(k/σ02q−1 ), d ≥ ω̃(k 5/2 /η 1/q ) and P ≤ σ0      .
                       0
                              √
       • polylog(k) ≤ m ≤         k.
                1               1
       • η ≥ kq(q−2) and η ≤ poly(k) .

       • c(θ) = θ1 .

       • τ is the parameter controls the update of weights of Teacher network. τ = 1 + 1−θ
                                                                                       Cp θ +
               1
         Θ( t1/q +1 ).

The following induction hypothesis is important as it shows the main properties of kernels during the
training course.
                                                                          (0)
Induction Hypothesis C.3. For every vi,l ∈ V, for each r ∈ Mi,l , for every (X, y) ∈ Z,

     (a) For every p ∈ Pvi,l (X), we have
                                        ⟨wr(t) , xp ⟩ = ⟨wr(t) , vi,l ⟩zp + õ(σ0 ).


                                                            15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


     (b) For every p ∈ P(X) \ Pvi,l (X), we have

                                                     |⟨wr(t) , xp ⟩| ≤ Õ(σ0 ).

     (c) For every p ∈ [P ] \ P(X), we have

                                                    |⟨wr(t) , xp ⟩| ≤ Õ(σ0 γk).

                                (0)
For every r ∈
            / ∪i∈[k],l∈[2] Mi,l , for every (X, y) ∈ Z,

                                        (t)
     (d) for every p ∈ P(X), |⟨wr , xp ⟩| ≤ Õ(σ0 ).
                                              (t)
     (e) for every p ∈ [P ] \ P(X), |⟨wr , xp ⟩| ≤ Õ(σ0 γk).

Moreover, for every vi,l ∈ V:
           (t)
     (f) Λi,l ∈ [Ω̃(σ0 ), Õ(1)].
                          (0)         (t)
     (g) for each r ∈ Mi,l , ⟨wr , vi,l ⟩ ≥ −Õ(σ0 ).
                          (0)         (t)
                    / Mi,l , ⟨wr , vi,l ⟩ ≤ Õ(σ0 ).
     (h) for each r ∈

Now we have the following result on the feature learning process of MRP.
Theorem C.4 (Feature learning process of MRP). Suppose Assumption C.2 holds. By running
                                                             1
the gradient descent step in (2) with learning rate η ≤ poly(k)   , after T = poly(k)
                                                                                  η       iterations, for
sufficiently large k > 0, Induction Hypothesis C.3 holds for all iterations t = 0, 1, . . . , T with high
probability.

Differences from the work (Allen-Zhu & Li, 2020). We use the similar multi-view data assump-
tion 3.1 as (Allen-Zhu & Li, 2020), since we find it is a reasonable and practical assumption and it
is helpful in proving what we actually have learned in the masked-reconstruction based pretraining.
Besides, we also adopt the same network (two-layer CNNs with smoothed ReLu activation function)
in (Allen-Zhu & Li, 2020) as our encoder. It is mainly for easy to compare the supervised learning
results in (Allen-Zhu & Li, 2020) and self-supervised results proved by us. This can better illustrate
the benefits of self-supervised pretraining.
But there are three main differences between our works and (Allen-Zhu & Li, 2020), including
network architecture, objective loss and teacher. For network architecture, MRP contains both
encoder and decoder, while supervised learning in (Allen-Zhu & Li, 2020) only considers the encoder.
As for objective loss, MRP is a reconstruction loss of a masked input, while supervised learning
in (Allen-Zhu & Li, 2020) uses distillation loss and cross-entropy loss of a non-masked input. Finally,
in terms of teacher, MRP uses an online teacher whose parameters are changed along with training
and thus is more dynamic and complex, while supervised learning in (Allen-Zhu & Li, 2020) uses
a well-trained teacher whose parameter is fixed and thus gives a fixed target of an image. These
three big differences cause the different lottery tickets winning or losing process during the training
courses. This point can be observed in different practical intuition from our Induction Hypothesis C.3
and from Induction Hypothesis B.3 of (Allen-Zhu & Li, 2020). In our Induction Hypothesis C.3, no
semantic features will lose the lottery tickets, while in (Allen-Zhu & Li, 2020) some of semantic
features will be missed during the training courses. Based on different Induction Hypothesis, analysis
of mask-reconstruction pretraining is non-trivial which is one part of our novel contributions.
Another part of our contributions is that after pretraining, we further need to show the test performance
on downstream classification task. In this part, we use the same cross-entropy loss as (Allen-Zhu &
Li, 2020), which is also popularly adopted in supervised training. But different from (Allen-Zhu &
Li, 2020), which simply fixed the linear coefficients of output of convolution kernels of the encoder
(backbone) by 1, here we need to train the weights of an extra linear layer and fine-tune the weights
of convolution kernels of the encoder at the same time (see (15) in Appendix G).


                                                           16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


D     P ROOF OVERVIEW OF T HEOREM C.4
In this section, we introduce the main steps to prove Theorem C.4. The proof of Theorem C.4
                                                            k
includes two process. First, when t ≤ T0 , where T0 = Θ( ησ2q−2 ) and when t ∈ [T0 , T ], where
                                                                            0
                   1/q
                kT0
T − T0 ≤ Õ(      η      ).

D.1       I NITIAL S TAGE

The initial stage of the training process is defined as the training iterations t ≤ T0 , where T0 =
     k                                  (0)
Θ( ησ2q−2 ). In this stage, kernels in Mi,l will focus on learning feature vi,l . More formally, we will
      0
                                               (0)
prove that at least one of kernels in Mi,l will capture the feature vi,l , i.e.,
                                                                        1
                                     max ⟨wr(T0 ) , vi,l ⟩ ≥ ϱ =               .
                                       (0)
                                    r∈Mi,l                          polylog(k)

                                                                                        (0)
This indicates that the maximum correlation between kernels inside Mi,l and feature vi,l will grow.
                                       (0)
Next, since the kernels inside Mi,l have captured the main correlations with feature vi,l , what about
                              (0)                                                             (0)
the kernels outside Mi,l ? To answer this question, we will show that for wr ∈
                                                                             / Mi,l ,
                                                                         1
                                       ⟨wr(T0 ) , vi,l ⟩ ≤ Õ(σ0 ) = Õ √ ,
                                                                          k
which means that the correlations with feature vi,l will keep small. For those kernels that the
magnitude of vi,l is lagging behind at initialization, it will loss the lottery and capture little feature
vi,l .
                                                     (0)
Furthermore, will those kernels inside Mi,l capture other feature vj,l′ ̸= vi,l ? The answer is no. So
                                                           (0)
to show this point, we also prove that for r ∈ Mi,l ,

                                    ⟨wr(T0 ) , vj,l′ ⟩ ≤ Õ(σ0 ),   ∀ vj,l′ ̸= vi,l .
Besides, the kernels will also not be influenced by the noises, i,e., for all r, r ∈ [km], for every
p ∈ [P ],

                                     (T0 )              1
                                   ⟨wr , ξp ⟩ ≤ Õ             .
                                                     poly(k)

D.2       C ONVERGENCE S TAGE

In this stage, when t ∈ [T0 , T ], since part of kernels have won the lottery, its correlations with
corresponding feature will continue to hold in this stage. But in this stage, the gradient will become
small which drives the learning process to converge.
The intuition here is that, when the correlation between weights and its corresponding features grows
over the threshold ϱ, the gradients will become to be small. That is when the kernels learned the
corresponding feature, the increasing in the correlation will be small and thus drive the learning
process to converge. We will show that after t ≥ T0 ,

                                             1               1                     (0)
               ⟨∇w(t) L(H), vi,l ⟩ ≤ Õ      1/q
                                                   = Õ             , for wr ∈ Mi,l .
                    r
                                           T              poly(k)
                                                     0

While the gradients with other features (features not captured by this kernels) keep to be smaller. In
this way, the correlation between weights and its corresponding features will not grow too large and
we will show that
                                              max ⟨wr(T ) , vi,l ⟩ ≤ Õ(1).
                                                 (0)
                                             r∈Mi,l



                                                           17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


E     S OME T ECHNICAL R ESULTS


In this section, we first show the gradient and its approximations. We also state some consequences
from our Induction Hypothesis C.3. They all are useful in our later proof of the main results.



E.1    G RADIENTS AND ITS APPROXIMATIONS

Recall

                            X                                               2
                      1 X                         X
         L(H; X, ϵ) =         ReLU(⟨ŵr , xp ⟩) −   c(θ)ReLU(⟨wr , ϵp xp ⟩) .
                      2
                         r∈[km]      p∈[P ]                   p∈[P ]


and

                                           X                                                 2
                                1 X                                   X
    L(H; X) = Eϵ [L(H; X, ϵ)] =                  ReLU(⟨ŵr , xp ⟩) −        ReLU(⟨wr , xp ⟩)
                                2
                                  r∈[km]  p∈[P ]                     p∈[P ]
                                              X X                              2
                                  1 1
                                +        −1                 ReLU(⟨wr , xp ⟩) .                 (3)
                                  2 θ
                                                    r∈[km] p∈[P ]


The function of θ. As we make an expectation on the pretraining loss function L(H; X, ϵ) over
ϵ when doing gradient descent, the expectation of ϵ ( here E[ϵ] = θ) really matters in the analysis.
More specifically, based on (3) and from the definition of θ, when θ → 1, this means P (ϵp = 1) → 1,
i.e., there is nearly no mask. Then according to our choice of the teacher’s network parameters,
when θ → 1, ŵr ≈ wr , which means that the loss keeps small and so there is nearly no update of
parameters of student and teacher models. In this case, the student model cannot learn the useful
semantic features in the data. When θ → 0 (i.e., we mask all the data), ŵr → ∞ and L(H; X) → ∞.
In this case, the student model also cannot learn useful semantic features in the data. Overall, there
is a tradeoff on the mask ratio θ. The analysis also holds under the MAE model in Appendix. H.
When θ → 0, L(H; X) → ∞. When θ → 1, there is a trivial answer to make L(H; X) → 0. In
both above cases, no semantic features will be learned.
The derivation of above loss function is shown as follows. For simplicity of clarification, we denote
ŷr,p = ReLU(⟨ŵr , xp ⟩) and yr,p = ReLU(⟨wr , xp ⟩). Then the loss function is


                     X       2                             X              2
              1 X                X       X
 L(H; X, ϵ) =          ŷr,p − 2   ŷr,p   c(θ)ϵp yr,p +     c(θ)ϵp yr,p     .
              2
                   r∈[km]     p∈[P ]             p∈[P ]    p∈[P ]               p∈[P ]


Because 1) we set c(θ) = θ1 and 2) each ϵp is i.i.d. Bernoulli and E[ϵp ] = θ, we obtain


                         X       X                 X       X
                     Eϵ 2  ŷr,p   c(θ)ϵp yr,p = 2   ŷr,p   yr,p .
                            p∈[P ]      p∈[P ]                p∈[P ]   p∈[P ]



                                                   18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


We also have
      X                   2                X                      X
                                  1
Eϵ           c(θ)ϵp yr,p      = 2 Eϵ                  ϵp yr,p               ϵp yr,p
                                  θ
      p∈[P ]                                 p∈[P ]                 p∈[P ]
                                           X                      X
                                  1
                              = 2 Eϵ                  ϵp yr,p              ϵp′ yr,p′
                                  θ
                                             p∈[P ]                 p′ ̸=p
                                              X                     X
                                     1
                                 + 2 Eϵ                  ϵp yr,p              ϵp′ yr,p′
                                    θ
                                                p∈[P ]                  p′ =p
                                          X X                                               X X
                                  1                                                1
                              = 2 Eϵ                      ϵp ϵp′ yr,p yr,p′ + 2 Eϵ                      ϵp ϵp′ yr,p yr,p′
                                  θ                                                θ
                                           p∈[P ] p′ ̸=p                                   p∈[P ] p′ =p
                                    X               X                             X               X
                              (a)                                           1
                              =             yr,p               yr,p′ +                    yr,p           yr,p′
                                                                            θ
                                     p∈[P ]             p′ ̸=p                     p∈[P ]          p′ =p
                                   X               X                                     X                X
                                                                             1
                              =            yr,p              yr,p +
                                                                  ′             −1                yr,p            yr,p ′
                                                                             θ
                                    p∈[P ]              p′                                 p∈[P ]           p′ =p
                                   X               X                                    X
                                                                             1                   2
                              =            yr,p              yr,p′ +            −1              yr,p
                                                          ′
                                                                             θ
                                           p∈[P ]              p                                  p∈[P ]
                                               2                     ′
where (a) is because Eϵ [ϵp ϵp′ ] = θ when p ̸= p as we assume the variable in ϵ is independent
Bernoulli variable with Pr(ϵp = 1) = θ and Eϵ [ϵp ϵp′ ] = θ when p = p′ . Combining the above
results, we have
                                          X                     2              X X
                                  1 X                  X           1 1                      2
L(H; X) = Eϵ [L(H; X, ϵ)] =                    ŷr,p −     yr,p +        −1                yr,p ,
                                  2                                2 θ
                                             r∈[km]      p∈[P ]               p∈[P ]                           r∈[km] p∈[P ]
which is our result.
We define                                 X                                     X
                        Φr (X) :=                  ReLU(⟨ŵr , xp ⟩) −                  ReLU(⟨wr , xp ⟩).
                                          p∈[P ]                               p∈[P ]

Fact 2.1 (Gradients). Given the data point (X, y) ∈ D, for every wr , r ∈ [km],
                         X                1                                 ′
         −∇wr L(X) =           Φr (X) −      − 1 ReLU(⟨wr , xp ⟩) ReLU (⟨wr , xp ⟩)xp .
                                           θ
                                 p∈[P ]
                ′                                                               (t)         (t)
where ReLU is the gradient of ReLU. Besides, we set ŵr = τ wr .
We define several error terms that will be used in our proofs.
Definition E.1.                       X             ′
         Vr,i,l (X) = I{vi,l ∈V(X)}           ReLU (⟨wr , xp ⟩)zp ,
                                             p∈Pvi,l (X)
                                                   X                     ′
           V̂r,i,l (X) = I{vi,l ∈V(X)}                     ReLU (⟨wr , xp ⟩),
                                             p∈Pvi,l (X)
                           1                                   X                                           ′
          Wr,i,l (X) =           − 1 I{vi,l ∈V(X)}                           ReLU(⟨wr , xp ⟩)ReLU (⟨wr , xp ⟩)zp ,
                             θ
                                                         p∈Pvi,l (X)
                           1                                   X                                           ′
          Ŵr,i,l (X) =          − 1 I{vi,l ∈V(X)}                           ReLU(⟨wr , xp ⟩)ReLU (⟨wr , xp ⟩),
                             θ
                                                         p∈Pvi,l (X)
                                               X
          ∆r,i,l (X) = Ivi,l ∈V(X)                        ReLU(⟨ŵr , xp ⟩) − ReLU(⟨wr , xp ⟩) .
                                           p∈Pvi,l (X)
                                                      (2q−1)
            Ui,l (X) = I{vi,l ∈V(X)} · Õ(σ0                   ).


                                                                    19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


We also define some small terms for easy of notation.
Definition E.2.
                              (q−1)
                  E1 = Õ(σ0          )(γ + σp )s,      E2 = Õ((σ0 γk)(q−1) )(γ + σp ) · P,
                              (2q−1)
                  E3 = Õ(σ0           )(γ + σp )s,      E4 = Õ((σ0 γk)(2q−1) )(γ + σp ) · P.
                  E5 = Õ(σ0q ) · (s + 1),      E6 = Õ((σ0 γk)q ) · P.


We have the following lemma to approximate the gradient. We first approximate the term Φr (X).
Claim E.3 (Bounds on Φr (X)). Suppose Assumption C.2 holds and Induction Hypothesis C.3 holds
                                                        (0)
at iteration t. Then for every vi,l ∈ V, for every r ∈ Mi,l , for every (X, y) ∈ Z,

                                        Φr (X) = ∆r,i,l (X) ± E5 ± E6 .



                                                                                                     (0)
Proof of Claim E.3. Using the induction hypothesis C.3, for every vi,l ∈ V, for every r ∈ Mi,l , for
every (X, y) ∈ Z,
                              X                             X
                Φr (X) =            ReLU(⟨ŵr , xp ⟩) −             ReLU(⟨wr , xp ⟩)
                           p∈[P ]                          p∈[P ]
                                             X
                        = Ivi,l ∈V(X)                   ReLU(⟨ŵr , xp ⟩) − ReLU(⟨wr , xp ⟩)
                                         p∈Pvi,l (X)
                                       X
                           +                          ReLU(⟨ŵr , xp ⟩) − ReLU(⟨wr , xp ⟩)
                               p∈P(X)\Pvi,l (X)
                                    X
                           +                  ReLU(⟨ŵr , xp ⟩) − ReLU(⟨wr , xp ⟩)
                               p∈[P ]\P(X)
                        (a)                   X
                        = Ivi,l ∈V(X)                    ReLU(⟨ŵr , xp ⟩) − ReLU(⟨wr , xp ⟩)
                                          p∈Pvi,l (X)

                           ± Õ(σ0q ) · (s + 1) ± Õ((σ0 γk)q ) · P,

where (a) is as Cp is a universal constant.



Claim E.4 (Approximations of gradients). Suppose Assumption C.2 holds and Induction Hypothe-
                                                                      (0)
sis C.3 holds at iteration t. Then for every vi,l ∈ V, for every r ∈ Mi,l , for (X, y) ∈ Z,

     (a)

           ⟨−∇wr L(X), vi,l ⟩ = Vr,i,l (X)∆r,i,l (X) − Wr,i,l (X) + ∆r,i,l (X)(E1 + E2 ) − E3 − E4
                                      ± (Vr,i,l (X) + V̂r,i,l (X)(γ + σp ))(E5 + E6 ) ± (E5 + E6 )(E1 + E2 )


     (b) for vj,l′ ̸= vi,l (note that vj,l′ ̸= vi,l means that when j = i, l′ ̸= l or j ̸= i),

           |⟨−∇wr L(X), vj,l′ ⟩| = V̂r,i,l (X)∆r,i,l (X) − Ŵr,i,l (X) (γ + σp ) ± V̂r,i,l (X)(E5 + E6 )(γ + σp )
                                       ± Ur,j,l′ (X) + ∆r,i,l (X)(E1 + E2 ) ± (E5 + E6 )(E1 + E2 ) − E3 − E4 .


                                                          20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Proof of Claim E.4. We first prove (a). Using the induction hypothesis C.3 and the fact Cp is a
                                                              (0)
universal constant, we have that for vi,l ∈ V, for every r ∈ Mi,l , we have
⟨−∇wr L(X), vi,l ⟩
    X                1                          ′
 =         Φr (X) −    − 1 ReLU(⟨wr , xp ⟩) ReLU (⟨wr , xp ⟩)⟨xp , vi,l ⟩
                     θ
   p∈[P ]
                   X                1                                ′
 = I{vi,l ∈V(X)}          Φr (X) −    − 1 ReLU(⟨wr , xp ⟩) ReLU (⟨wr , xp ⟩)(zp + αp,vi,l + ⟨vi,l , ξp ⟩)
                                    θ
                  p∈Pvi,l (X)
             X                                       1                               ′
   +                           Φr (X) −                     − 1 ReLU(⟨wr , xp ⟩) ReLU (⟨wr , xp ⟩)(αp,vi,l + ⟨vi,l , ξp ⟩)
                                                        θ
       p∈P(X)\Pvi,l (X)
          X                                1                               ′
   +                     Φr (X) −                 − 1 ReLU(⟨wr , xp ⟩) ReLU (⟨wr , xp ⟩)(αp,vi,l + ⟨vi,l , ξp ⟩)
                                              θ
       p∈[P ]\P(X)
                         X                                      1                             ′
= I{vi,l ∈V(X)}                           ∆r,i,l (X) −               − 1 ReLU(⟨wr , xp ⟩) ReLU (⟨wr , xp ⟩)zp
                                                                 θ
                  p∈Pvi,l (X)

   ± Vr,i,l (X)(E5 + E6 ) ± V̂r,i,l (X)(E5 + E6 ) · (γ + σp )
   + (∆r,i,l (X) ± E5 ± E6 − Õ(σ0q )) · Õ(σ0q−1 ) · (γ + σp ) · (s + 1)
  + (∆r,i,l (X) ± E5 ± E6 − Õ((σ0 γk)q )) · Õ((σ0 γk)q−1 ) · (γ + σp ) · P
= Vr,i,l (X)∆r,i,l (X) − Wr,i,l (X) + ∆r,i,l (X)(E1 + E2 )
   ± (Vr,i,l (X) + V̂r,i,l (X)(γ + σp ))(E5 + E6 ) ± (E5 + E6 )(E1 + E2 ) − E3 − E4
                                                                                                                    (0)
Now we show (b). Using the induction hypothesis C.3, for vi,l ∈ V, for every r ∈ Mi,l , when
vj,l′ ̸= vi,l , we have
⟨−∇wr L(X), vj,l′ ⟩
     X                   1                          ′
 =           Φr (X) −      − 1 ReLU(⟨wr , xp ⟩) ReLU (⟨wr , xp ⟩)⟨xp , vj,l′ ⟩
                         θ
    p∈[P ]
                      X                 1                                ′
 = I{vi,l ∈V(X)}              Φr (X) −    − 1 ReLU(⟨wr , xp ⟩) ReLU (⟨wr , xp ⟩)(αp,vj,l′ + ⟨vj,l′ , ξp ⟩)
                                        θ
                  p∈Pvi,l (X)
                            X                                    1                             ′
   + I{vj,l′ ∈V(X)}                               Φr (X) −            − 1 ReLU(⟨wr , xp ⟩) ReLU (⟨wr , xp ⟩)(zp + αp,vj,l′ + ⟨vj,l′ , ξp ⟩)
                                                                  θ
                         p∈Pv        (X)
                                j,l′
                     X                                                 1                            ′
   +                                                    Φr (X) −           − 1 ReLU(⟨wr , xp ⟩) ReLU (⟨wr , xp ⟩)(αp,vj,l′ + ⟨vj,l′ , ξp ⟩)
                                                                       θ
       p∈P(X)\{Pvi,l (X)∪Pv                  (X)}
                                      j,l′
          X                                1                               ′
   +                     Φr (X) −                 − 1 ReLU(⟨wr , xp ⟩) ReLU (⟨wr , xp ⟩)(αp,vj,l′ + ⟨vj,l′ , ξp ⟩)
                                              θ
       p∈[P ]\P(X)

= V̂r,i,l (X)∆r,i,l (X) − Ŵr,i,l (X) (γ + σp ) ± V̂r,i,l (X)(E5 + E6 )(γ + σp )
   ± Ur,j,l′ (X) + ∆r,i,l (X)(E1 + E2 ) ± (E5 + E6 )(E1 + E2 ) − E3 − E4 .



E.2     S OME R ESULTS FROM I NDUCTION H YPOTHESIS C.3
                                (t)
E.2.1    G ROWTH OF Λi,l
                                                                                (t)
The following claim shows about at which iteration Λi,l will be greater than the threshold ϱ in the
definition of smooth ReLU function.


                                                                        21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Claim E.5. Suppose Assumption C.2 holds and induction hypothesis C.3 holds at iteration t. For
                      (t)
every vi,l , suppose Λi,l ≤ ϱ. Then we have
                                             η                 ′
                           (t+1)    (t)               (t)         (t)
                          Λi,l = Λi,l + Θ̃      ReLU(Λi,l )ReLU (Λi,l ).
                                             k
                                         (t)                           (t)
Proof of Claim E.5. Recall that Λi,l := maxr∈[km] [⟨wr , vi,l ⟩]+ . We choose any r ∈ [km] that
          (t)
makes ⟨wr , vi,l ⟩ ≥ Ω̃(σ0 ). Now we show the updates. We know that
                 ⟨wr(t+1) , vi,l ⟩ = ⟨wr(t) , vi,l ⟩ + ηE(X,y)∼Z [⟨−∇wr L(X), vi,l ⟩]
Using Claim E.4, we have
    ⟨−∇wr L(X), vi,l ⟩ = Vr,i,l (X)∆r,i,l (X) − Wr,i,l (X) + ∆r,i,l (X)(E1 + E2 ) − E3 − E4
                               ± (Vr,i,l (X) + V̂r,i,l (X)(γ + σp ))(E5 + E6 ) ± (E5 + E6 )(E1 + E2 )
                                                                             (t)
Recall the definition of Vr,i,l , ∆r,i,l , Wr,i,l . As we assume Λi,l ≤ ϱ and based on our definition of
smooth ReLU function, we could simplify the above inequalities by only keeping the main increasing
term as
                      ⟨ − ∇wr L(X), vi,l ⟩ = ∆r,i,l (X)Vr,i,l (X) − Wr,i,l (X).
                                               (t)
This equation is obtained by setting ⟨wr , vi,l ⟩ ≥ Ω̃(σ0 ) and compare its order with the remaining
term. It is indeed the main increasing term. For (X, y) ∈ Z, we have
                                      ′                 X
       Vr,i,l (X) =I{vi,l ∈V(X)} ReLU (⟨wr(t) , vi,l ⟩)         zpq                               (4)
                                                                 p∈Pvi,l (X)
                                                                   X
       ∆r,i,l (X) =I{vi,l ∈V(X)} ReLU(⟨wr(t) , vi,l ⟩)                       (τ q − 1)zpq ,                              (5)
                                                              p∈Pvi,l (X)

                                                                       ′
                                                                                        1               X
       Wr,i,l (X) =I{vi,l ∈V(X)} ReLU(⟨wr(t) , vi,l ⟩)ReLU (⟨wr(t) , vi,l ⟩)                  −1                  zp2q   (6)
                                                                                         θ
                                                                                                    p∈Pvi,l (X)

Then
                                                                                                                    
                                                       X                     X                           1
    ∆r,i,l (X)Vr,i,l (X) − Wr,i,l (X) =             zpq               (τ q − 1)zpq′ −                       − 1 zpq 
                                                                                                         θ
                                        p∈Pvi,l (X)       p′ ∈Pvi,l (X)
                                                                                                    ′
                                               × I{vi,l ∈V(X)} ReLU(⟨wr(t) , vi,l ⟩)ReLU (⟨wr(t) , vi,l ⟩).
According to our choice of τ and zp is uniformly distributed over Cp patches, when (X, y) ∈ Zm
and i = y or (X, y) ∈ Zs and i = y and ˆl = l, we have
                                                                            
                 X              X                   1
                                               q
  E(X,y)∈Z             zpq        (τ q − 1)zp′ −     − 1 zpq  I{vi,l ∈V(X)}  ∈ [Ω(1), O(1)].
                              ′
                                                     θ
                 p∈Pvi,l (X)       p ∈Pvi,l

When (X, y) ∈ Zs and i = y and ˆl = 3 − l, we have
                                                                           
               X               X                    1
 E(X,y)∈Zs            zpq        (τ q − 1)zpq′ −    − 1 zpq  I{vi,l ∈V(X)}  ∈ [Ω(ρ), O(ρ)].
                             ′
                                                    θ
                 p∈Pvi,l (X)        p ∈Pvi,l

When (X, y) ∈ Z and i ̸= y, we have
                                                                          
              X               X                    1                            s
 E(X,y)∈Z           zpq         (τ q − 1)zpq′ −    − 1 zpq  I{vi,l ∈V(X)}  ∈ [Ω(1), O(1)].
                            ′
                                                   θ                            k
                p∈Pvi,l (X)       p ∈Pvi,l

Combining all above results, we have
                                                        η                                     ′
            ⟨wr(t+1) , vi,l ⟩ = ⟨wr(t) , vi,l ⟩ + Θ̃         ReLU(⟨wr(t) , vi,l ⟩)ReLU (⟨wr(t) , vi,l ⟩).
                                                        k



                                                            22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                             (0)
Using Claim E.5, and Ω̃(σ0 ) ≤ Λi,l ≤ Õ(σ0 ), we have the following result:
Claim E.6. Suppose
                    Assumption
                               C.2 holds and Induction Hypothesis C.3 holds
                                                                              for every
                                                                                      iteration.
                  k                                               (t)          1
Define T0 := Θ̃ ησ2q−2 . We have that when t ≥ T0 , it satisfies Λi,l ≥ Θ polylog(k) .
                       0


                                                                                           (0)
Proof of Claim E.6. Using the result in E.5 and beginning from Λi,l = Θ̃(σ0 ), we have that
                                                                                          !t
                                                                         η   σ 2q−2
                                           (t)    (0)                             0
                                          Λi,l ≈ Λi,l      1 + Θ̃                              .         (7)
                                                                             k   ϱ2q−2

                              k
Thus, when T0 = Θ̃          ησ02q−2
                                          , we have

                                                     (t)
                                                   Λi,l ≈ Θ̃(σ0 )epolylog(k) ,

which means

                                                    (t)               1
                                                   Λi,l = Θ                           .
                                                                  polylog(k)


F     P ROOF OF T HEOREM C.4

Before we formally show Theorem C.4, we need some lemmas. First, we need to prove that
                                                                      (t)              (0)
for every feature vi,l ∈ V. at least one of “diagonal” correlations ⟨wr , vi,l ⟩, r ∈ Mi,l grows
                                                     (t)
and the “off-diagonal” correlations ⟨wr , vj,l′ ⟩, vj,l′ ̸= vi,l decreases. To show these, we provide
                                                            (t)               (0)
three lemmas about the lower and upper bound on ⟨wr , vi,l ⟩, r ∈ Mi,l and upper bound on
    (t)                                    (0)
⟨wr , vj,l′ ⟩, vj,l′ ̸= vi,l , r ∈ Mi,l .

F.1       D IAGONAL CORRELATIONS
                                                                       (t)
The first lemma is used to obtain upper bound on Λi,l .
Lemma F.1. Suppose Assumption C.2 holds and Induction Hypothesis C.3 holds for all iterations
< t. We have
                                                                       (t)
                                                 ∀vi,l ∈ V :       Λi,l ≤ Õ(1).


                                                                                                   (0)
Proof of Lemma F.1. Based on Claim E.4, we have that for every r ∈ Mi,l ,

   (t+1)               (t)
 ⟨wr     , vi,l ⟩ = ⟨wr , vi,l ⟩ + ηE(X,y)∼Z Vr,i,l (X)∆r,i,l (X) − Wr,i,l (X) + ∆r,i,l (X)(E1 + E2 )

                    ± (Vr,i,l (X) + V̂r,i,l (X)(γ + σp ))(E5 + E6 ) ± (E5 + E6 )(E1 + E2 ) − E3 − E4 .

                                                                         (t)
When taking the positive part, we know there exists δr,i,l ∈ [0, 1] such that

                                              (t)
[⟨wr(t+1) , vi,l ⟩]+ = [⟨wr(t) , vi,l ⟩]+ + ηδr,i,l E(X,y)∼Z Vr,i,l (X)∆r,i,l (X) − Wr,i,l (X) + ∆r,i,l (X)(E1 + E2 )

                       ± (Vr,i,l (X) + V̂r,i,l (X)(γ + σp ))(E5 + E6 ) ± (E5 + E6 )(E1 + E2 ) − E3 − E4 .


                                                                  23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                                 (t)
Suppose we are now at some iteration t > T0 . In this stage, Λi,l ≥ 1/polylog(k). As T0 =

        k               1
Θ̃ ησ2q−2    and η ≤ poly(k)   , we have
        0
                                                                               
                                         X        X                    1
∆r,i,l (X)Vr,i,l (X) − Wr,i,l (X) =        zp           (τ − 1)zp′ −    − 1 zp 
                                                ′
                                                                       θ
                                        p∈Pvi,l (X)             p ∈Pvi,l (X)
                                                                                       ′
                                       × I{vi,l ∈V(X)} ReLU(⟨wr(t) , vi,l ⟩)ReLU (⟨wr(t) , vi,l ⟩)

                                             1                                                ′
                                     = O 1/q · I{vi,l ∈V(X)} ReLU(⟨wr(t) , vi,l ⟩)ReLU (⟨wr(t) , vi,l ⟩).
                                           t
Using Claim E.5 and we also keep the main increasing term, we have
                                                           !
        (t+1)          +         (t)         +        η                                     ′
    [⟨wr      , vi,l ⟩] ≤ [⟨wr , vi,l ⟩] + Õ          1/q
                                                              · ReLU(⟨wr(t) , vi,l ⟩)ReLU (⟨wr(t) , vi,l ⟩)
                                                  kT0
                                                           !
                                 (t)         +        η
                           ≤ [⟨wr , vi,l ⟩] + Õ       1/q
                                                              · ReLU(⟨wr(t) , vi,l ⟩).
                                                  kT0
Taking the maximum on both side and as we are at t > T0 , we have
                                                                                           !!
                              (t+1)          +            (t)      +                  η
                 max [⟨wr           , vi,l ⟩] ≤ max [⟨wr , vi,l ⟩]    1 + Õ           1/q
                                                                                              .
                       (0)                        (0)
                r∈Mi,l                         r∈Mi,l                              kT0
                                 1/q
                              kT
When t ≤ T = T0 + Õ η0 , we have
                                                     (t)
                                                Λi,l ≤ Õ(1).


                                                           (t)                 (0)
The second lemma is used to lower bound on ⟨wr , vi,l ⟩, r ∈ Mi,l and indicates that the diagonal
correlations are nearly non-negative.
Lemma F.2. Suppose Assumption C.2 holds and Induction Hypothesis C.3 holds for all iterations
< t. We have
                                           (0)
                          ∀vi,l ∈ V, ∀r ∈ Mi,l : ⟨wr(t) , vi,l ⟩ ≥ −Õ(σ0 ).

                                                                         (t)
Proof of Lemma F.2. We start with any iteration t that is ⟨wr , vi,l ⟩ ≤ −Ω̃(σ0 ) to see how negative
                                                                                      (t′ )
the next iteration will be. Without loss of generality, we consider the case when ⟨wr , vi,l ⟩ ≤ −Ω̃(σ0 )
holds for every t′ ≥ t. Now based on Claim E.4, we have

   (t+1)                (t)
⟨wr      , vi,l ⟩ = ⟨wr , vi,l ⟩ + ηE(X,y)∼Z Vr,i,l (X)∆r,i,l (X) − Wr,i,l (X) + ∆r,i,l (X)(E1 + E2 ) − E3 − E4

                     ± (Vr,i,l (X) + V̂r,i,l (X)(γ + σp ))(E5 + E6 ) ± (E5 + E6 )(E1 + E2 )
                  (a)

                         (t)
                  ≥ ⟨wr , vi,l ⟩ + ηE(X,y)∼Z − E3 − E4 − (E5 + E6 )(E1 + E2 )

                        (t)
                  ≥ ⟨wr , vi,l ⟩ − η E3 + E4 + (E5 + E6 )(E1 + E2 )
                                               (t)
where (a) is because that as we assume ⟨wr , vi,l ⟩ ≤ −Ω̃(σ0 ), we have

                1                      X                                ′
Wr,i,l (X) =      − 1 I{vi,l ∈V(X)}             ReLU(⟨wr , xp ⟩)ReLU (⟨wr , xp ⟩)zp
                θ
                                    p∈Pvi,l (X)

                1                      X                                          ′
           =      − 1 I{vi,l ∈V(X)}             ReLU(⟨wr , vi,l ⟩zp ± õ(σ0 ))ReLU (⟨wr , vi,l ⟩zp ± õ(σ0 )zp
                θ
                                         p∈Pvi,l (X)

            = 0,


                                                           24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


and similar results also hold for ∆r,i,l , Vr,i,l , V̂r,i,l . This shows that when t ≤ T0 ,
                                             (2q−1)
  ⟨wr(t+1) , vi,l ⟩ ≥ ⟨wr(t) , vi,l ⟩ − η Õ(σ0         ) · (γ + σp ) · s2 − η Õ((σ0 γk)2q−1 ) · (γ + σp )P 2
                     − η Õ(σ02q−1 (γk)q−1 ) · (γ + σp )P s
                                              (2q−1)
                  ≥ −Õ(σ0 ) − ηT0 Õ(σ0                ) · (γ + σp ) · s2 − ηT0 Õ((σ0 γk)2q−1 ) · (γ + σp )P 2
                    − ηT0 Õ(σ02q−1 (γk)q−1 ) · (γ + σp )P s
                                         kσ0                kσ0
                  ≥ −Õ(σ0 ) − Õ σ02 + √ − Õ σ02 + √ (γk)2q−1 · P 2
                                           d                  d
                  ≥ −Õ(σ0 ).
When t ∈ [T0 , T ], we have
                                                        (2q−1)
⟨wr(t) , vi,l ⟩ ≥ ⟨wr(T0 ) , vi,l ⟩ − η(T − T0 )Õ(σ0            ) · (γ + σp ) · s2 − η(T − T0 )Õ((σ0 γk)2q−1 ) · (γ + σp )P 2
                − η(T − T0 )Õ(σ02q−1 (γk)q−1 ) · (γ + σp )P s
             ≥ −Õ(σ0 ).



F.2    O FF - DIAGONAL CORRELATIONS

Lemma F.3. Suppose Assumption C.2 holds and Induction Hypothesis C.3 holds for all iterations
< t. Then
                                           (0)
                   ∀vi,l ∈ V, ∀r ∈ Mi,l , for vj,l′ ̸= vi,l :             |⟨wr(t) , vj,l′ ⟩| ≤ Õ(σ0 ).

                                                  (0)
Proof of Lemma F.3. For every r ∈ Mi,l , using Claim E.4, we have

       (t+1)                 (t)
   |⟨wr      , vj,l′ ⟩| ≤ |⟨wr , vj,l′ ⟩| + ηE(X,y)∼Z V̂r,i,l (X)∆r,i,l (X) − Ŵr,i,l (X) (γ + σp )

                          + V̂r,i,l (X)(E5 + E6 )(γ + σp ) + Ur,j,l′ (X) + ∆r,i,l (X)(E1 + E2 )

                          + (E5 + E6 )(E1 + E2 ) − E3 − E4

Stage I. We first consider the stage when t ≤ T0 . In this stage, similar to the analysis in the proof
of Claim E.5, we have that

              E(X,y)∼Z V̂r,i,l (X)∆r,i,l (X) − Ŵr,i,l (X) (γ + σp )

                               1                                         ′
                         ≤ Õ       · (γ + σp )ReLU(⟨wr(t) , vi,l ⟩)ReLU (⟨wr(t) , vi,l ⟩),
                               k
where Õ k1 is the probability of vi,l ∈ V(X), and


                                                        1                      ′
       E(X,y)∼Z V̂r,i,l (X)(E5 + E6 )(γ + σp ) ≤ Õ          · (E1 + E2 )ReLU (⟨wr(t) , vi,l ⟩),
                                                        k
and

                                                              1 2q−1
                                  E(X,y)∼Z Ur,j,l′ (X) ≤ Õ     σ0     ,
                                                              k
where Õ k1 is the probability of vj,l′ ∈ V(X). Thus, when t ≤ T0 , we also keep the main increasin

term and obtain that
                                                       η               T0
                                                                      X         (t)      ′  (t)
         |⟨wr(t) , vj,l′ ⟩| ≤ |⟨wr(0) , vj,l′ ⟩| + Õ     · (γ + σp )     ReLU(Λi,l )ReLU (Λi,l ) (8)
                                                       k              t=0



                                                            25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


From Claim E.5, we have that
                            0 −1
                       η   TX                                             0 −1
                                                                         TX                    0 −1
                                                                                              TX
                                            (t)          ′     (t)                (t+1)                (t)
                Θ̃                 ReLU(Λi,l )ReLU (Λi,l ) =                     Λi,l     −           Λi,l
                      k    t=0                                            t=0                 t=0
                                                                         (T )    (0)               1
                                                                      = Λi,l0 − Λi,l ≤                    .    (9)
                                                                                               polylog(k)
Putting (9) into (8), we have that for every t ≤ T0 ,

    (t)               (0)                σ0    1          η
                                                                              (T )      ′  (T )
|⟨wr , vj,l′ ⟩| ≤ |⟨wr , vj,l′ ⟩| + Õ      +√      + Õ     · (γ + σp )ReLU(Λi,l0 )ReLU (Λi,l0 )
                                         k      d         k
                ≤ Õ(σ0 ).

Stage II. In the second stage, when t ≥ T0 , we have

           E(X,y)∼Z V̂r,i,l (X)∆r,i,l (X) − Ŵr,i,l (X) (γ + σp )
                                       1                                                        ′
                                                · (γ + σp )ReLU(⟨wr(t) , vi,l ⟩)ReLU (⟨wr(t) , vi,l ⟩)

                            ≤ Õ      1/q
                                    kT0
                                       1
                            ≤ Õ      1/q
                                                · (γ + σp ),
                                    kT0
where the first inequality is from Lemma F.1. Thus, when t ∈ [T0 , T ]

                                                                     η(T − T0 )
                    |⟨wr(t) , vj,l′ ⟩| ≤ |⟨wr(T0 ) , vj,l′ ⟩| + Õ        1/q
                                                                                  · (γ + σp )
                                                                       kT0
                                                                                  √
                                       ≤ |⟨wr(T0 ) , vj,l′ ⟩| + Õ(σ0 /k) + Õ(1/ d)
                                       ≤ Õ(σ0 )
Combining all above results, we complete our proof.

                                                              (0)
F.3    L OTTERY WINING : KERNELS INSIDE Mi,l

                                                                                                         (0)
In this subsection, we prove that the feature vi,l captured by kernels not in Mi,l is negligible. To
prove this result, we first need a lemma from (Allen-Zhu & Li, 2020, Lemma C.19) that compare the
growth speed of two sequences of updates of the form xt+1 ← xt + ηCt xtq−1 .
Lemma F.4. Let q ≥ 3 be a constant and x0 , y0 = o(1). Let {xt , yt }t≥0 be two positive sequences
updated as

        • xt+1 ≥ xt + ηCt xq−1
                           t   for some Ct = Θ(1),

        • yt+1 ≤ yt + ηSCt ytq−1 for some constant S = Θ(1).
                                   1

Suppose x0 ≥ y0 S 1/(q−2) 1 + polylog(k)   , then we must have for every A = O(1), let Tx be the first
iteration such that xt ≥ A, then
                                            yTx ≤ O(y0 · polylog(k)).

Now we begin to prove our result.
Lemma F.5. Suppose Assumption C.2 holds and Induction Hypothesis C.3 holds for all iterations
< t. Then
                                                        (0)
                               ∀vi,l ∈ V, ∀r ∈
                                             / Mi,l :                ⟨wr(t) , vi,l ⟩ ≤ Õ(σ0 ).

                                            (0)                                                         (t)
Proof of Lemma F.5. When r ∈ Mj,l′ , (vj,l′ ̸= vi,l ), we have prove that ⟨wr , vi,l ⟩ ≤ Õ(σ0 ) in
                                                                                   (0)
Lemma F.3. So we only prove the case when r ∈
                                            / ∪i∈[k],l∈[2] Mi,l .


                                                              26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                           (0)
We assume that there exists an wr′ ∈
                                   / ∪i∈[k],l∈[2] Mi,l such that induction hypothesis C.3 (a)-(c)
                                                                                             (t)
holds for every (X, y) ∈ Z. We want to see if the sequence ⟨wr′ , vi,l ⟩ will increase more quickly
                   (t)
than maxr∈M(0) ⟨wr , vi,l ⟩. Under this assumption, we have that (here we also only keep the main
                i,l
increasing term),

               (t+1)                  (t)
            ⟨wr′         , vi,l ⟩ = ⟨wr′ , vi,l ⟩ + ηE(X,y)∼Z Vr,i,l (X)∆r,i,l (X) − Wr,i,l (X) .

                                                                                     (t)
Stage I We first consider when t ≤ T0 . In this stage, Λi,l ≤ ϱ. We define two sequences. First,
                                    (0)                               (t)            s 1/2q     1

we take wr∗ = argmaxr∈M(0) ⟨wr , vi,l ⟩ and define xt := ⟨wr∗ , vi,l ⟩ · qk                 ϱ(2q−1)/2q
                                                                                                       . We also
                            i,l
                     (t)           s
                                       1/2q     1
define yt = max{⟨wr′ , vi,l ⟩ · qk          ϱ(2q−1)/2q
                                                       , σ0 }. From Claim E.5, when t ≤ T0 , we have that
                                                  sη                                  ′
             (t+1)              (t)                                 (t)                    (t)
           ⟨wr∗ , vi,l ⟩ = ⟨wr∗ , vi,l ⟩ + Θ            ReLU(⟨wr∗ , vi,l ⟩)ReLU (⟨wr∗ , vi,l ⟩)
                                                  k
                                                  sη   1
                                (t)
                         ≥ ⟨wr∗ , vi,l ⟩ + Θ                     ([⟨wr∗ , vi,l ⟩]+ )2q−1 .
                                                  k qϱ2q−1
                           q−2
Let S = 1+C/(log(k)−C)
             1+1/ log(k)          , C > 1. We have
                                                              sη                                   ′
               (t+1)                    (t)                                            (t)                 (t)
            ⟨wr′         , vi,l ⟩ = ⟨wr′ , vi,l ⟩ + Θ    ReLU(⟨wr′ , vi,l ⟩)ReLU (⟨wr′ , vi,l ⟩)
                                                     k
                                                     sη   1
                                   (t)                             (t)
                               ≤ ⟨wr′ , vi,l ⟩ + Θ            ([⟨wr′ , vi,l ⟩]+ )2q−1 S.
                                                     k qϱ2q−1
Set Ct = 1. Then we have that
                                                    xt+1 ≥ xt + ηCt xt2q−1 ,
                                                     yt+1 ≤ yt + ηSCt yt2q−1 .
                      (0)                     (0)                                                                (0)
Besides, x0 = Λi,l and y0 ≤ Λi,l (1 − O(1/ log(k))) based on the definition of Mi,l . Here we
                   (0)
assume y0 ≤ Λi,l (1 − C/ log(k)). Thus, we have

                                       C                1          1
                    x0 ≥ y0 1 +                 = y0 S q−2   1+          .
                                  log(k) − C                    log(k)
                                                                  (t+1)
So using the result from Lemma F.4, when ⟨wr∗                              , vi,l ⟩ reaches Ω̃(1), which necessarily is an
iteration t ≥ T0 , we still have that
                                                                     (t)
                                        yt ≤ Õ(y0 ) =⇒ ⟨wr′ , vi,l ⟩ ≤ Õ(σ0 ).

Stage II We now consider when t ∈ [T0 , T ]. In this stage, using the induction hypothesis C.3 (d)
and (e), we have that

                                                                1 2q−1
                      E(X,y)∼Z ⟨∇wr L(H; X), vi,l ⟩ ≤ Õ          σ0      .
                                                                k
Thus,
                                                                             η
                                (t+1)                     (t)
                            ⟨wr′        , vi,l ⟩ ≤ ⟨wr′ , vi,l ⟩ + Õ                σ02q−1
                                                                                 k

                                                        (T )                         η(T − T0 ) 2q−1
                                                    ≤ ⟨wr′ 0 , vi,l ⟩ + Õ                     σ0
                                                                                         k
                                                    ≤ Õ(σ0 ).


                                                                 27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


F.4    N OISE C ORRELATION

In this subsection, we prove that the kernels correlate small with the random noise.
Lemma F.6. Suppose Assumption C.2 holds and Induction Hypothesis C.3 holds for all iterations
                                        (0)
< t. For every vi,l ∈ V, for every r ∈ Mi,l , for every (X, y) ∈ Z, we have

                                           (t)
      (a) For every p ∈ Pvi,l (X), |⟨wr , ξp ⟩| ≤ õ(σ0 ).
                                                            (t)
      (b) For every p ∈ P(X) \ Pvi,l (X), |⟨wr , ξp ⟩| ≤ Õ(σ0 ).
                                                 (t)
      (c) For every p ∈ [P ] \ P(X), |⟨wr , ξp ⟩| ≤ Õ(σ0 γk).

                                            (0)
Moreover, for every r ∈
                      / ∪i∈[k],l∈[2] Mi,l , for every (X, y) ∈ Z, we have

                                     (t)
      (d) for every p ∈ P(X), |⟨wr , ξp ⟩| ≤ Õ(σ0 ).
                                                 (t)
      (e) for every p ∈ [P ] \ P(X), |⟨wr , ξp ⟩| ≤ Õ(σ0 γk).


Proof of Lemma F.6. For every r ∈ [km], for every (X ∗ , y ∗ ) ∈ Z and every p∗ ∈ [P ], we have that
                           X                            1                            ′
  ⟨−∇wr L(X), ξp∗ ⟩ =               Φr (X) −                − 1 ReLU(⟨wr , xp ⟩) ReLU (⟨wr , xp ⟩)⟨xp , ξp∗ ⟩.
                                                        θ
                           p∈[P ]

                                                         √
When X ̸= X ∗ , we have |⟨x√                                                ∗          ∗
                              p , ξp∗ ⟩| ≤ Õ(σp ) ≤ o(1/ d); and when X = X but p ̸= p , we have
|⟨xp , ξp∗ ⟩| ≤ Õ(σp ) ≤ o(1/ d). Therefore, we have

E(X,y)∼Z ⟨−∇wr L(X), ξp∗ ⟩ = E(X,y)∈Z IX=X ∗ ⟨−∇wr L(X), ξp∗ ⟩ + IX̸=X ∗ ⟨−∇wr L(X), ξp∗ ⟩ .

For the first term,

 E(X,y)∼Z IX=X ∗ ⟨−∇wr L(X), ξp∗ ⟩

                 1                                ′
             = E(X ∗ ,y∗ )∼Z Φr (X ∗ )ReLU (⟨wr , xp∗ ⟩)⟨xp∗ , ξp∗ ⟩
                 N
                    1
                                                         ′                               1
                −      − 1 ReLU(⟨wr , xp∗ ⟩)ReLU (⟨wr , xp∗ ⟩)⟨xp∗ , ξp∗ ⟩ ± o √
                     θ                                                                    d

             (a)       1                                   ′
              = Θ̃         E(X ∗ ,y∗ )∼Z Φr (X ∗ )ReLU (⟨wr , xp∗ ⟩)
                       N
                    1
                                                         ′                   1
                −      − 1 ReLU(⟨wr , xp∗ ⟩)ReLU (⟨wr , xp∗ ⟩) ± o √
                     θ                                                        d

                      1                                    X
             = Θ̃          E(X ∗ ,y∗ )∼Z Ivi,l ∈V(X ∗ )              ReLU(⟨ŵr , xp ⟩) − ReLU(⟨wr , xp ⟩)
                     N
                                                        p∈Pvi,l (X)

                         ′
                                             1                                 ′                   1
                × ReLU (⟨wr , xp∗ ⟩) −          − 1 ReLU(⟨wr , xp∗ ⟩)ReLU (⟨wr , xp∗ ⟩) ± o √
                                             θ                                                      d

where (a) is because ∥ξp∗ ∥22 = Θ̃(1). For the second term,

                                                                  1
                       E(X,y)∼Z IX̸=X ⟨−∇wr L(X), ξp ⟩ = ±o √
                                         ∗                  ∗
                                                                   d


                                                                  28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                               (0)
Now we begin to prove (a). For every vi,l ∈ V, for every r ∈ Mi,l , for every p∗ ∈ Pvi,l (X ∗ ), using
the induction hypothesis C.3, when t ∈ [0, T0 ], we have

E(X,y)∼Z ⟨−∇wr L(X), ξp∗ ⟩

                    1                                X                           X                         1
           = Θ̃         E(X,y)∼Z Ivi,l ∈V(X ∗ )                  zpq−1
                                                                    ∗                     (τ q − 1)zpq′ −      − 1 zpq∗
                   N                                                                                         θ
                                                  p∈Pvi,l (X ∗ )          p′ ∈Pvi,l (X ∗ )

                                          ′                        1
             × ReLU(⟨wr , vi,l ⟩)ReLU (⟨wr , vi,l ⟩) ± o √               .
                                                                     d
Thus, we have
                                          η
        (t+1)              (t)                                                ′                      η
      ⟨wr     , ξp∗ ⟩ ≤ ⟨wr , ξp∗ ⟩ + Õ        ReLU(⟨wr , vi,l ⟩)ReLU (⟨wr , vi,l ⟩) + o √                ,
                                            N                                                          d
Now we use the results from Lemma F.1, when t ≤ T0 ,

                             (t)            (0)              ηT0                ηT0
                          ⟨wr , ξp ⟩ ≤ ⟨wr , ξp ⟩ + Õ
                                   ∗             ∗                     +o       √
                                                              N                   d

                        k
                                   √              2q−1                      (t)
So when N ≥ ω̃ σ2q−1 and d ≥ ω̃(k/σ0                   ), we have ⟨wr , ξp∗ ⟩ ≤ õ(σ0 ). Then when
                           0
t ∈ [T0 , T ], we have

E(X,y)∈Z IX=X ⟨−∇wr L(X), ξp ⟩
                   ∗                 ∗

                            !
                       1                                                ′                      1
            = Θ̃        1/q
                              E          I      ∗
                               (X,y)∼Z vi,l ∈V(X ) ReLU(⟨w  , v
                                                           r i,l ⟩)ReLU   (⟨w , v
                                                                             r i,l ⟩)   ± o    √    .
                    N T0                                                                      N d
Therefore, for t ∈ [T0 , T ], we have
                                                                      !
                                                         η(t − T0 )                η(t − T0 )
                ⟨wr(t) , ξp∗ ⟩ ≤ ⟨wr(T0 ) , ξp∗ ⟩ + Õ          1/q
                                                                          +o          √             ≤ õ(σ0 ),
                                                          N T0                          d
       √
when       d ≥ ω̃(k 5/2 /η 1/q ).
Now we begin to prove (b). For every p∗ ∈ P(X ∗ ) \ Pvi,l (X ∗ ), using the induction hypothesis C.3,
when t ∈ [0, T0 ], we have

E(X,y)∈Z IX=X ∗ ⟨−∇wr L(X), ξp∗ ⟩
                                                                                                                 
       1
                                              X                                                    (q−1)      1
 ≤ Õ      E(X ∗ ,y∗ )∼Z Ivi,l ∈V(X ∗ )               ReLU(⟨ŵr , xp ⟩) − ReLU(⟨wr , xp ⟩) Õ(σ0        )±o √ 
       N                                                                                                       d
                                          p∈Pvi,l (X)
       1
                                  (q−1)          1
 ≤ Õ      E(X ∗ ,y∗ )∼Z Õ(σ0          )±o √
       N                                           d
Thus, when t ≤ T0 , we have

                                                      ηT0 (q−1)           ηT0
               ⟨wr(t) , ξp∗ ⟩ ≤ ⟨wr(0) , ξp∗ ⟩ + Õ       σ0       +o √          ≤ Õ(σ0 ),
                                                       N                    d
                     √
when N ≥ σkq and d ≥ k/σ02q−1 . Then when t ∈ [T0 , T ], we have
             0

           (t)               (T0 )              η(t − T0 ) (q−1)           η(t − T0 )
        ⟨wr , ξp∗ ⟩ ≤ ⟨wr , ξp∗ ⟩ + Õ                    σ0        +o        √         ≤ Õ(σ0 ).
                                                     N                          d

We begin to prove (c). For every p ∈ [P ]\P(X), using the induction hypothesis C.3, when t ∈ [0, T0 ],
we have
                                              1
                                                                           (q−1)          1
  E(X,y)∈Z IX=X ⟨−∇wr L(X), ξp ⟩ ≤ Õ
                    ∗                  ∗            E(X ∗ ,y)∼Z Õ((σ0 γk)       )±o √           .
                                                N                                          d


                                                           29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Then the process to prove (c) is similar to the proof of (b).
To prove (d) and (e), for every p∗ ∈ P(X ∗ ), using the induction hypothesis C.3, we have
                                                          1
                                                                    (2q−1)         1
           E(X,y)∈Z IX=X ∗ ⟨−∇wr L(X), ξp∗ ⟩ ≤ Õ               Õ(σ0      )±o √         .
                                                          N                         d
and for every p∗ ∈ [P ] \ P(X ∗ ), using the induction hypothesis C.3, we have
                                                       1
                                                                                    1
        E(X,y)∈Z IX=X ∗ ⟨−∇wr L(X), ξp∗ ⟩ ≤ Õ              Õ((σ0 γk)(2q−1) ) ± o √      .
                                                       N                             d
Following the similar process, we could also prove (d) and (e).

F.5   P ROOF OF T HEOREM C.4

In this subsection, we will combine all lemmas and begin to prove Theorem C.4.

Proof of Theorem C.4. At iteration t, according to the data structure we defined in Definition 1, we
have
                                                               X
          ∀p ∈ Pvi,l (X) : ⟨wr(t) , xp ⟩ = ⟨wr(t) , vi,l ⟩zp +   αp,v′ ⟨wr(t) , v ′ ⟩ + ⟨wr(t) , ξp ⟩, (10)
                                                                     v ′ ∈V
                                              X
        ∀p ∈ [P ] \ P(X) : ⟨wr(t) , xp ⟩ =            αp,v′ ⟨wr(t) , v ′ ⟩ + ⟨wr(t) , ξp ⟩.           (11)
                                             v ′ ∈V

It is easy to verify the induction hypothesis C.3 holds at iteration t = 0. Suppose induction
hypothesis C.3 holds for all iteration < t. We have established several lemmas:
                                                               (0)
                   Lemma F.3 =⇒ ∀vi,l ∈ V, ∀r ∈ Mi,l , for vj,l′ ̸= vi,l : |⟨wr(t) , vj,l′ ⟩| ≤ Õ(σ0 )
                                                                                                    (12)
                                                               (0)
 Lemma F.2 and Lemma F.1 =⇒ ∀vi,l ∈ V, ∀r ∈ Mi,l : ⟨wr(t) , vi,l ⟩ ∈ [−Õ(σ0 ), Õ(1)]                (13)
                                                               (0)
                                              / Mi,l : ⟨wr(t) , vi,l ⟩ ≤ Õ(σ0 ).
                   Lemma F.5 =⇒ ∀vi,l ∈ V, ∀r ∈                                                       (14)

       • To prove Induction Hypothesis C.3(a), we plug (12) and (13) into (10), and use αp,v′ =∈
                                 (t)
         [0, γ], |V| = 2k and |⟨wr , ξp ⟩| ≤ õ(σ0 ) from Lemma F.6(a).
       • To prove Induction Hypothesis C.3(b), we plug (12) and (13) into (10), and use αp,v′ =∈
                                 (t)
         [0, γ], |V| = 2k and |⟨wr , ξp ⟩| ≤ Õ(σ0 ) from Lemma F.6(b).
       • To prove Induction Hypothesis C.3(c), we plug (12) and (13) into (11), and use αp,v′ =∈
                                 (t)
         [0, γ], |V| = 2k and |⟨wr , ξp ⟩| ≤ Õ(σ0 γk) from Lemma F.6(c).
       • To prove Induction Hypothesis C.3(d), we plug (14) into (10), and use αp,v′ =∈ [0, γ],
                         (t)
         |V| = 2k and |⟨wr , ξp ⟩| ≤ Õ(σ0 ) from Lemma F.6(d).
       • To prove Induction Hypothesis C.3(e), we plug (14) into (11), and use αp,v′ =∈ [0, γ],
                         (t)
         |V| = 2k and |⟨wr , ξp ⟩| ≤ Õ(σ0 γk) from Lemma F.6(e).
       • Induction Hypothesis C.3 (f), (g) and (h) are easily obtained from Lemma F.2, Lemma F.1
         and Lemma F.5.


G     T EST P ERFORMANCE ON D OWNSTREAM C LASSIFICATION TASKS
In this section, we analyze the performance of mask-reconstruction pretraining on downstream
classification tasks to show its superiority over supervised training.


                                                       30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


G.1     M AIN R ESULTS

We add an extra linear layer on the pretrained encoder. We collect labeled data points Zdown =
{(Xi , yi )}N
            i=1 ∼ D and use these labeled data points to update the weights ui,r , i ∈ [k], r ∈ [km] of
              2


                                      P kernels of the pretrained encoder wr , r ∈ [km]. The output of
the extra linear layer and fine-tune the
linear layer is denoted as Fi (X) = r∈[km] ui,r hr (X). The loss function on downstream tasks is
                                                     1 X
                                 Ldown (F ) =            Ldown (F ; Xi , yi ),
                                                     N2
                                                             i∈[N2 ]
                                           Fy (X)                                                      Fy (X)
where Ldown (F ; X, y) = − log P e                Fj (X)   . We define logiti (F ; X) = P e                   Fj (X)   . The gradient
                                        j∈[k] e                                                     j∈[k] e
of Ldown (F ; X, y) is
                         −∇ui,r Ldown (F ; X, y) = (Ii=y − logiti (F ; X))hr (X).
                (0)                                                                        (0)                      (T )
We initialize ui,r = 0, i ∈ [k], r ∈ [km] and the initialization of wr , r ∈ [km] is wr , i.e., kernels
of the pretrained encoder. We update the weights using gradient descent:
                                   (t+1)           (t)
                                 ui,r      = ui,r − η2 ∇ui,r Ldown (F ; X, y),
                                 wr(t+1) = wr(t) − η1 ∇wr Ldown (F ; X, y).                                                     (15)
We set η1 to be much smaller than η2 .
The following lemma states that the induction hypothesis C.3 still holds in the training of classification
tasks.
Lemma G.1. For N2 ≥ k many samples, setting the learning rate η2 = Θ(k) and η1 ≤ Θ̃(k), after
Tdown ≥ poly(k)
            η1 η2 many iterations, for sufficiently large k > 0, Induction Hypothesis C.3 holds for all
iterations with high probability.

Then we have the following theorem showing the performance of downstream classification test.
Theorem G.2 (Performance on downstream classification tasks). For N2 ≥ k many samples, setting
the learning rate η2 = Θ(k) and η1 ≤ Θ̃(k), after Tdown ≥ poly(k)
                                                              η1 η2 many iterations, with high
probability, we have

      (a) (training loss is small) for every (X, y) ∈ Zdown , i.e.,
                                                                                                      1
                             Ldown (F ) = E(X,y)∼Zdown [Ldown (F ; X, y)] ≤                                .
                                                                                                   poly(k)

      (b) (test performance is good) for new data point (X, y) ∼ D, the test performance is

                                                                                  2
                           Pr     Fy (X) ≥ max Fj (X) + Õ(1) ≥ 1 − e−Ω(log k) .
                           (X,y)∈D                         j̸=y


G.2     F INETUNING OF DOWNSTREAM CLASSIFICATION MODELS

In this subsection, we fine-tune the weights wr , r ∈ [km] of pretrained encoder of Student network
and update the weights of the linear layer ui,r , i ∈ [k], r ∈ [km].

G.2.1     U PDATES OF ui,r
We first define several terms which will be used frequently.
Definition G.3.
                                          X
                  Zi,l (X) = Ivi,l ∈V(X)          zp ,
                                             p∈Pvi,l (X)
                                                                        X                          X
                      ψr,i,l = [⟨wr , vi,l ⟩]+ ,         Ψi,l =                  2
                                                                                ψr,i,l ,    Ψi =           Ψi,l .
                                                                          (0)                      l∈[2]
                                                                       r∈Mi,l



                                                                  31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


              (0)
When r ∈ Mi,l , at t = 0, using the induction hypothesis C.3, we have
                       X
hr (X) = Ivi,l ∈V(X)           ReLU (⟨wr , vi,l ⟩zp + õ(σ0 )) + Õ(σ0q ) · (s + 1) + Õ((σ0 γk)q ) · P
                        p∈Pvi,l (X)
                                               X
        = [⟨wr , vi,l ⟩]+ · Ivi,l ∈V(X)                   zp + Õ(σ0q ) · s + Õ((σ0 γk)q ) · P
                                            p∈Pvi,l (X)

        = ψr,i,l · Zi,l (X) + E5 + E6 .
                           (0)
When r ∈
       / ∪i∈[k],l∈[2] Mi,l , at t = 0, using the induction hypothesis C.3, we have

                                 hr (X) = Õ(σ0q )(s + 2) + Õ((σ0 γk)q ) · P.

The gradients with respect to the output Fi (X) include three types.

                                                                          (0)
(1) Near zero gradients For ui,r , when r ∈
                                          / ∪i∈[k],l∈[2] Mi,l ,

                              hr (X) = Õ(σ0q ) · (s + 2) + Õ((σ0 γk)q ) · P.
which is very small. Thus, there is nearly no updates on those weights and they keep near zero, i.e.,
                                      (t)                                         (0)
                                   ui,r ≈ 0       when r ∈
                                                         / ∪i∈[k],l∈[2] Mi,l .

                                                                    (0)
(2) Negative gradients For ui,r , when r ∈ Mj,l , j ̸= i, we now show the gradients
−∇ui,r L(F ; X, y) for different type of data points:

     (a) when y = i, for every (X, y) ∼ Zdown ,
                                                                                        X
                 −∇ui,r L(F ; X, y) = (1 − logiti (F ; X))hr (X),                               zp ∈ [Ω(1), 0.4]
                                                                                  p∈Pvj,l (X)


     (b) when y ̸= i but y = j, for every (X, y) ∈ Zdown,m or (X, y) ∈ Zdown,s , ˆl = l,
                                                                  X
                   −∇ui,r L(F ; X, y) = −logiti (F ; X)hr (X),          zp ∈ [1, O(1)]
                                                                                p∈Pvj,l (X)


     (c) when y ̸= i but y = j, for every (X, y) ∈ Zdown,s , ˆl = 3 − l,
                                                                     X
                  −∇ui,r L(F ; X, y) = −logiti (F ; X)hr (X),                                 zp ∈ [ρ, O(ρ)]
                                                                                p∈Pvj,l (X)


     (d) when y ̸= i and y ̸= j, for every (X, y) ∈ Zdown ,
                                                                                   X
                     −∇ui,r L(F ; X, y) = −logiti (F ; X)hr (X),                              zp ∈ [Ω(1), 0.4]
                                                                                p∈Pvj,l (X)


                                                                                                                   (0)
(3) Positive gradients For ui,r , we now show the gradients −∇ui,r L(F ; X, y) when r ∈ Mi,l for
different type of data points:

     (a) when y = i, for every (X, y) ∼ Zdown,m or (X, y) ∈ Zdown,s , ˆl = l
                                                                 X
                −∇ui,r L(F ; X, y) = (1 − logiti (F ; X))hr (X),           zp ∈ [1, O(1)].
                                                                                  p∈Pvi,l (X)


     (b) when y = i, for every (X, y) ∼ Zdown,s , ˆl = 3 − l,
                                                                                        X
                    −∇ui,r L(F ; X, y) = (1 − logiti (F ; X))hr (X),                            zp ∈ [ρ, O(ρ)].
                                                                                  p∈Pvi,l (X)



                                                            32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


     (c) when y ̸= i, for every (X, y) ∈ Zdown ,
                                                                            X
                   −∇ui,r L(F ; X, y) = −logiti (F ; X)hr (X),                        zp ∈ [Ω(1), 0.4].
                                                                        p∈Pvi,l (X)


                                                                                                    1
Now we begin to show the full gradients. As we assume the ratio of single-view data is µ = poly(k)      ,
it has little influence on the update of weights. So we ignore single-view data and only focus on
                                        (0)
(X, y) ∈ Zdown,m . Then when r ∈ Mj,l , j ̸= i, we have

                                                                                   0.4s
E(X,y)∼Zdown [−∇ui,r L(F ; X, y)] = E(X,y)∼Zdown I{y=i} (1 − logiti (F ; X))             · ψr,j,l + E5 + E6
                                                                                    k

                                      − E(X,y)∼Zdown I{y=j} logiti (F ; X) [O(1) · ψr,j,l + E5 + E6 ]

                                                                                   0.4s
                                      − E(X,y)∼Zdown I{y̸=i,y̸=j} logiti (F ; X)         · ψr,j,l + E5 + E6
                                                                                     k

                                       k − 1 0.4s                             1
                                    =          ·        · ψr,j,l + E5 + E6 − 2 [ψr,j,l · O(1) + E5 + E6 ]
                                         k2         k                         k

                                         k − 2 0.4s
                                      −                  · ψr,j,l + E5 + E6 ,
                                            k2       k

where k1 , k1 , k−2                                                                           1
                 k is the ratios for each type of data and at t = 0, we have logiti (F ; X) = k , i ∈ [k]
because we initialize ui,r = 0. Therefore, if we ignore the small term, at t = 1, we have

                  (1)        0.4(k − 1)s O(1) 0.4(k − 2)s                      η2 (E5 + E6 )
                 ui,r ≈ η2                −         −                 ψr,j,l +
                                  k3          k2           k3                        k

                             0.4s O(1)                η2 (E5 + E6 )
                      ≈ η2        − 2        ψr,j,l +               < 0.                             (16)
                              k3       k                    k
Using this weight, we could also obtain the bounds of loss function after the update of wr , r ∈ [km]
(we will show the following inequality in (24) after we update wr ):

                                                       1
                        0 ≤ 1 − logity (F ; X) ≤ Õ        ,
                                                       k

                                                       1
                             0 ≤ logiti (F ; X) ≤ Õ       , ∀i ∈ [k] \ y.
                                                       k
Thus, at t = 2, we have

          (2)       0.4s O(1)              η2 (E5 + E6 )       η
                                                                 2          η2 (E5 + E6 )
        ui,r ≥ η2      3
                         −   2
                                 ψ r,j,l +               − Õ    2
                                                                   ψr,j,l −               ,
                     k     k                     k             k                 k2

          (2)       0.4s O(1)              η2 (E5 + E6 )       η
                                                                 2          η2 (E5 + E6 )
        ui,r ≤ η2      3
                         −   2
                                 ψ r,j,l +               + Õ    3
                                                                   ψr,j,l +               .
                     k     k                     k             k                 k2
                            (2)
So the approximation of ui,r is

                                   (2)
                                                η
                                                 2               η2 (E5 + E6 )
                                  ui,r ≈ −Õ          ψr,j,l +                 .
                                                k2                     k
Then for t > 2, as we continue to train to minimize the loss function, 1 − logity (F ; X) will become
smaller and so as logiti (F ; X), i ∈ [k] \ y. So the main term in ui,r , i ∈ [k], r ∈ [km] is the term of
the first two updates and there is nearly no order changes on values of weights after the first two step
of gradient descent. Thus, for simplicity of analysis, we could take

                          (t)
                                      η
                                         2            η2 (E5 + E6 )
                         ui,r ≈ −Õ 2 ψr,j,l +                      , for t ≥ 2.                      (17)
                                       k                    k


                                                      33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                 (0)
Similar to the former case, when r ∈ Mi,l , we have
                                                      k−1
              E(X,y)∼Zdown [−∇ui,r L(F ; X, y)] =            [ψr,i,l · O(1) + E5 + E6 ]
                                                       k2
                                                        k − 1 0.4s
                                                     −                  · ψ r,i,l + E5 + E6
                                                          k2       k
Then if we ignore the small term, at t = 1, we have

                (1)        O(1) · (k − 1) 0.4s(k − 1)                     η2 (E5 + E6 )
              ui,r ≈ η2                    −                  ψr,i,l +                  > 0.      (18)
                                 k2                k3                            k
Similar to the former analysis, for simplicity of analysis, we also take that
                          (t)
                                    η
                                       2           η2 (E5 + E6 )
                         ui,r ≈ Õ        ψr,i,l +               , for t ≥ 2.                     (19)
                                      k                  k
G.2.2    F INETUNING OF wr AND P ROOF OF L EMMA G.1
After the update of ui,r , we then finetune wr . We have the gradients:
                                                 X         ′
−∇wr L(F ; X, y) = (1 − logity (F ; X))uy,r          ReLU (⟨wr , xp ⟩)xp
                                                       p∈[P ]
                           X                              X             ′
                      −             logiti (F ; X)ui,r            ReLU (⟨wr , xp ⟩)xp
                          i∈[k]\y                        p∈[P ]
                                                                        X
                                                 X                            ′
                    = (1 − logity (F ; X))uy,r −   logitj (F ; X)uj,r     ReLU (⟨wr , xp ⟩)xp
                                                           j∈[k]\y                       p∈[P ]

                                           (0)
Diagonal correlations. For r ∈ Mi,l , as we initialize wr by the pretrained encoder, we have
    X          ′                                       X           ′
         ReLU (⟨wr , xp ⟩)⟨xp , vi,l ⟩ = I{vi,l ∈V(X)}      ReLU (⟨wr , xp ⟩)(zp + γ + σp )
    p∈[P ]                                                      p∈Pvi,l (X)

                                              + Õ(σ0q−1 ) · (γ + σp ) · (s + 1)
                                              + Õ((σ0 γk)q−1 ) · (γ + σp ) · P.
Thus,
                                                                           X
⟨−∇wr L(F ; X, y), vi,l ⟩ = (Vr,i,l + E1 + E2 ) (1 − logity (F ; X))uy,r −   logitj (F ; X)uj,r .
                                                                                        j∈[k]\y
                                                                                                  (20)
At t = 1, for every (X, y) ∼ Zdown , when i = y, put (16) and (18) into (20), we have

                                     O(1) 0.4s
    ⟨−∇wr L(F ; X, y), vi,l ⟩ = η2          − 2 (Vr,i,l + E1 + E2 )(1 − logity (F ; X))ψr,i,l
                                       k        k
                                                        η2 (E5 + E6 )
                                + (Vr,i,l + E1 + E2 ) ·
                                                               k
Similarly, when y ̸= i,

                                          O(1) 0.4s
      ⟨−∇wr L(F ; X, y), vi,l ⟩ = η2 −          + 2 (Vr,i,l + E1 + E2 )logiti (F ; X)ψr,i,l
                                            k       k
                                                           η2 (E5 + E6 )
                                  + (Vr,i,l + E1 + E2 ) ·
               P                                                 k
Denote Si,l = p∈Pv (X) zp . We have
                      i,l

                                            1      O(1) 0.4s             k−1
E(X,y)∼Zdown [⟨−∇wr L(F ; X, y), vi,l ⟩] = η2             − 2 Si,l            ψr,i,l
                                            k        k         k          k

                                              k−1            O(1) 0.4s           s      η2 (E5 + E6 )
                                           +        η2 −           + 2 Si,l 2 ψr,i,l +
                                                 k             k       k        k             k

                                              k − 1 (k − 1)s              O(1) 0.4s              η2 (E5 + E6 )
                                         =          −               η2         − 2 Si,l ψr,i,l +               .
                                               k2           k3             k        k                  k

                                                          34
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Thus, at t = 1, we have
                                                             η η
                                                              1 2              η1 η2 (E5 + E6 )
                    ⟨wr(1) , vi,l ⟩ = ⟨wr(0) , vi,l ⟩ + O           ψr,i,l +                                 (21)
                                                              k2                       k
                                       (T )
                                                     η η
                                                       1   2   (T )   η 1 η 2 (E5 +  E6 )
                                    ≤ Λi,l + O           2
                                                              Λi,l +                      ≤ Õ(1),
                                                       k                        k
                                                        (1)
when η1 η2 ≤ Õ(k 2 ). The lower bound on ⟨wr , vi,l ⟩ can be easily obtained by similar methods.
Besides, for t > 1, for every (X, y) ∼ Zdown , when i = y, putting (17) and (19) into (20) and
keeping the main term, we have
                                          η
                                           2
          ⟨−∇wr L(F ; X, y), vi,l ⟩ ≈ Õ        (Vr,i,l + E1 + E2 )(1 − logity (F ; X))ψr,i,l
                                          k
                                                              η2 (E5 + E6 )
                                      + (Vr,i,l + E1 + E2 ) ·
                                                                    k
Similarly, when y ̸= i,
                                                        η
                                                             2
               ⟨−∇wr L(F ; X, y), vi,l ⟩ ≈ −Õ                    (Vr,i,l + E1 + E2 )logiti (F ; X)ψr,i,l
                                                           k
                                                                              η2 (E5 + E6 )
                                                 + (Vr,i,l + E1 + E2 ) ·
                                                                                    k

Suppose induction hypothesis C.3 holds at time t. Now we have that
             E(X,y)∼Zdown,m [⟨−∇wr L(F ; X, y), vi,l ⟩]
                             (a)    η
                                      2
                             ≥ Õ         ψr,i,l E(X,y)∼Zdown,m I{y=i} (1 − logity (F ; X))
                                     k

                                                               η2 (E5 + E6 )
                                − 0.4I{y̸=i} logiti (F ; X) +                .
                                                                     k
where (a) is because for y ̸= i, Vr,i,l = 0.4I{vi,l ∈V(X)} ≤ 0.4, and

              E(X,y)∼Zdown,s [⟨−∇wr L(F ; X, y), vi,l̂ ⟩]
                              (a)    η
                                       2
                              ≥ Õ         ψr,i,l̂ E(X,y)∼Zdown,s I{y=i} (1 − logity (F ; X))
                                      k

                                                                 η2 (E5 + E6 )
                                 − 0.4I{y̸=i} logiti (F ; X) +                 .
                                                                       k

                                    1
Thus, using the result ψr,i,l ≥ polylog(k) , we obtain
                                                      η η
                                                       1 2
X                         X
     ⟨wr(t+1) , vi,l ⟩ ≥      ⟨wr(t) , vi,l ⟩ + Ω̃               E(X,y)∼Zdown (1 − logity (F ; X)) + η1 η2 (E5 + E6 ).
                                                       k
i∈[k]                    i∈[k]

                                                                                              (t)
As the induction hypothesis C.3 still holds in the training process, we have Λi,l ≤ Õ(1). Thus,
         TX
          down                                                                2
                                                                              k
              E(X,y)∼Zdown (1 − logity (F ; X)) + Õ kTdown (E5 + E6 ) ≤ Õ        .                         (22)
          t=1
                                                                             η1 η2

So, if we assume induction hypothesis C.3 holds for all iteration < t, then
                                                   t
                                             η η   X
             (t)            (1)               1 2
           ⟨wr , vi,l ⟩ ≤ ⟨wr , vi,l ⟩ + Õ           E(X,y)∼Zdown (1 − logity (F ; X))
                                              k 2 t=1
                                 tη1 η2 (E5 + E6 )
                             +                     ≤ Õ(1).
                                         k

                                                               35
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                      (0)
Off-diagonal correlations. For r ∈ Mi,l , as we initialize wr by the pretrained encoder, we have
    X          ′
        ReLU (⟨wr , xp ⟩)⟨xp , vj,l′ ⟩ = V̂r,i,l (X)(γ + σp ) + I{vj,l′ ∈V(X)} Õ(σ0q−1 ) + E1 + E2 .
    p∈[P ]

Thus,
     ⟨−∇wr L(F ; X, y), vj,l′ ⟩ = (V̂r,i,l (X)(γ + σp ) + I{vj,l′ ∈V(X)} Õ(σ0q−1 ) + E1 + E2 )
                                                                     X
                                  × (1 − logity (F ; X))uy,r −             logitj (F ; X)uj,r .                    (23)
                                                                                  j∈[k]\y


At t = 1, for every (X, y) ∼ Zdown , when i = y, put (16) and (18) into (23), we have

  ⟨−∇wr L(F ; X, y), vj,l′ ⟩ = ((γ + σp ) + I{vj,l′ ∈V(X)} Õ(σ0q−1 ))

                                        O(1) 0.4s                              η2 (E5 + E6 )
                               × η2           − 2 (1 − logity (F ; X))ψr,i,l +
                                          k         k                                k
Similarly, when y ̸= i but y = j,

   ⟨−∇wr L(F ; X, y), vj,l ⟩ = I{vi,l ∈V(X)} (γ + σp ) + Õ(σ0q−1 ) + E1 + E2

                                          O(1) 0.4s                             η2 (E5 + E6 )
                                × η2 −          + 2 logiti (F ; X)ψr,i,l +                      .
                                           k       k                                  k
When y ̸= i and y ̸= j,

    ⟨−∇wr L(F ; X, y), vj,l ⟩ = I{vi,l ∈V(X)} (γ + σp ) + I{vj,l′ ∈V(X)} Õ(σ0q−1 ) + E1 + E2

                                           O(1) 0.4s                                η2 (E5 + E6 )
                               × η2 −            + 2 logiti (F ; X)ψr,i,l +                         .
                                            k       k                                     k
Therefore,
  E(X,y)∼Zdown [⟨−∇wr L(F ; X, y), vj,l′ ⟩]

                     1                                   O(1) 0.4s k − 1
                   =   ((γ + σp ) + Õ(sσ0q−1 /k))η2          − 2           ψr,i,l
                     k                                     k      k     k
                        1  s                            O(1) 0.4s   1
                     +        (γ + σp ) + Õ(σ0q−1 ) η2 −         + 2       ψr,i,l
                        k k                                   k       k   k
                        k − 2  s                                 O(1) 0.4s   1
                     +             (γ + σp ) + Õ(sσ0q−1 /k) η2 −       + 2          ψr,i,l
                          k      k                                    k     k      k
                        η2 (γ + σp )(E5 + E6 )
                     +
                                   k
                       s                               O(1) 0.4s            η2 (γ + σp )(E5 + E6 )
                   = − ((γ + σp ) + Õ(σ0q−1 ))η2            − 2 ψr,i,l +                          .
                       k                                 k      k                      k
Thus, at t = 1, we have
                                               η η
                                                1 2
                                                                                η1 η2 (γ + σp )(E5 + E6 )
   ⟨wr(1) , vj,l′ ⟩ ≤ ⟨wr(0) , vj,l′ ⟩ + Õ         (γ + σp )        ψr,i,l +                             ≤ Õ(σ0 ),
                                                k2                                          k
when η1 η2 ≤ Õ(k 2 ). Suppose induction hypothesis C.3 holds for all iterations < t. We have
                                                η η                TX
                                                                    down
                                                 1 2
    ⟨wr(t) , vj,l′ ⟩ ≤ ⟨wr(1) , vj,l′ ⟩ + Õ         (γ + σp )              E(X,y)∼Zdown (1 − logity (F ; X))
                                                 k2                   t=1
                         Tdown η1 η2 (γ + σp )(E5 + E6 )
                       +                                 ≤ Õ(σ0 )
                                        k

                                                            36
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                   (0)                   (0)
Kernels outside ∪i∈[k],l∈[2] Mi,l . For r ∈
                                          / Mi,l , as we initialize wr by the pretrained encoder, we
have
                     X            ′
                           ReLU (⟨wr , xp ⟩)⟨xp , vi,l ⟩ = Õ(σ0q−1 ) + E1 + E2 ,
                        p∈[P ]

which is very small and there is nearly no increase on ⟨wr , vi,l ⟩. Thus, when induction hypothesis C.3
                                        (0)             (t)
holds for all iterations < t, for r ∈
                                    / Mi,l , we have ⟨wr , vi,l ⟩ ≤ Õ(σ0 ).

Noise correlations. For every r ∈ [km], for every (X ∗ , y ∗ ) ∈ Z and every p∗ ∈ [P ], we have that
                                                                                               √

                                                  1                       ′
 E(X,y)∼Z [IX=X ∗ ⟨−∇wr L(F ; X, y), ξp∗ ⟩] = Θ̃      E(X,y)∼Z (ReLU (⟨wr , xp∗ ⟩ ± o(1/ d))
                                                 N2
                                      h                                X                          i
                                    × (1 − logity (F ; X ∗ ))uy,r −          logitj (F ; X ∗ )uj,r ,
                                                                                j∈[k]\y

and
                                                                          √
                       E(X,y)∼Z [IX̸=X ∗ ⟨−∇wr L(F ; X, y), ξp∗ ⟩] = ±o(1/ d).
                                             (0)
For every vi,l ∈ V, for every r ∈ Mi,l , for every p∗ ∈ Pvi,l (X ∗ ), when i = y, we have

 E(X,y)∼Z [I{i=y} ⟨−∇wr L(F ; X, y), ξp∗ ⟩]
                                                                                        √

                  η2       ′                O(1) 0.4s
           = Θ̃        ReLU (⟨wr , xp∗ ⟩)       − 2 (1 − logity (F ; X ∗ ))ψr,i,l ± o(1/ d)
                 N2                          k      k
                                                                      √

           (a)     η2   O(1) 0.4s               η2 (E5 + E6 )
           = Θ̃               − 2 ψr,i,l +                    ± o(η2 / d),
                  N2      k        k                N2 k
where (a) is because 1 − logity (F ; X ∗ ) = k−1
                                              k at t = 0. When i ̸= y, we have

        E(X,y)∼Z [I{i̸=y} ⟨−∇wr L(F ; X, y), ξp∗ ⟩]
                                                                                      √

                             1             O(1) 0.4s            η2 (E5 + E6 )
                  = Θ̃               η2 −          + 2 ψr,i,l +               ± o(η2 / d),
                         (k − 1)N2            k      k          N2 k(k − 1)
Thus, we have
                                                                  η2 (E5 + E6 )         √
                  E(X,y)∼Z [⟨−∇wr L(F ; X, y), ξp∗ ⟩] =                    2
                                                                                ± o(η2 / d),
                                                                      N2 k
and
                                                    η1 η2 (E5 + E6 )            √
                  ⟨wr(1) , ξp ⟩ = ⟨wr(0) , ξp ⟩ +             2
                                                                     ± o(η1 η2 / d) ≤ õ(σ0 ).
                                                         N2 k
Thus, when induction hypothesis C.3 holds for all iterations < t, we have
                                             Tdown η1 η2 (E5 + E6 )                  √
           ⟨wr(t) , ξp ⟩ ≤ ⟨wr(1) , ξp ⟩ +                2
                                                                    ± o(Tdown η1 η2 / d) ≤ õ(σ0 ).
                                                    N2 k
Similarly, following the similar step as in the proof of Lemma F.6, we can also prove other claims
about the noise correlations in the downstream tasks. We skip the similar steps here.
Combining all above results, we can prove the Lemma G.1.

G.2.3     T RAINING L OSS AND P ROOF OF T HEOREM G.2 ( A )
We set η2 to be O(k). The reason why we set the step size to O(k) is in the first step, the weights of
negative parts (< 0) and positive parts (> 0) is well separated. Thus, by setting a suitable step length
η2 = O(k), we can obtain a small loss in the first update of (15). We will show that the training loss
is small in the following.


                                                         37
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


After one-step training, at t = 1, for (X, y) ∈ Zdown,m , we have

Fj (X) − Fy (X)
    2
    X X                                                            X2 X
=                      (uj,r − uy,r ) ψr,j,l · Zj,l (X) + E5 + E6 +     (uj,r − uy,r ) ψr,y,l · Zy,l (X) + E5 + E6
    l=1 r∈M(0)                                                                             l=1 r∈M(0)
                 j,l                                                                                 y,l
                 X                    X
    +                                           (uj,r − uy,r ) ψr,v′ · Zv′ (X) + E5 + E6
        i∈[k]\{j,y},l∈[2] r∈M(0)
                                          i,l

    2                                               X2
(a) X X                                                X
=       (uj,r − uy,r ) ψr,j,l · Zj,l (X) + E5 + E6 +     (uj,r − uy,r ) ψr,y,l · Zy,l (X) + E5 + E6
     l=1 r∈M(0)                                                                            l=1 r∈M(0)
                  j,l                                                                                y,l

  + η2 m0 (E5 + E6 )
     X2    X   O(1) · (k − 1) 0.4s(k − 1) 0.4s O(1)
                                                         2
= η2                   2
                             −      3
                                         − 3 + 2        ψr,j,l · Zj,l (X)
                     k            k        k    k
        l=1 r∈M
             (0)
                        j,l

         2
         X X   0.4s O(1) O(1) · (k − 1) 0.4s(k − 1)
                                                          2
    + η2           −    −              +                ψr,y,l · Z y,l (X)  + η2 m0 (E5 + E6 )
                k3   k2       k2            k3
            l=1 r∈M
            (0)
                              y,l
                                                                                    
          O(1)                          2                       2
                          0.4s          X X
                                             2
                                                                X X
                                                                     2
= η2               −                        ψr,j,l · Zj,l (X) −     ψr,y,l · Zy,l (X) + η2 m0 (E5 + E6 )
                                                                                    
             k                k2
                                      
                                          l=1 r∈M(0)                                 l=1 r∈M(0)
                                                       j,l                                     y,l
                                                                                                                  
                                                 2                                            2
            O(1) 0.4s                            X X
                                                                                    2
                                                                                              X X
                                                                                                              2
= η2            − 2                      0.4                        I{vj,l ∈V(X)} ψr,j,l −                  ψr,y,l  + η2 m0 (E5 + E6 ),
                                                                                                                   
             k    k
                                                  l=1 r∈M(0)                                  l=1 r∈M(0)
                                                               j,l                                     y,l



where (a) is because the third term is nearly zero. We could show the similar result for single-view
data. At t = 1, for (X, y) ∈ Zdown,s , we have

                  Fj (X) − Fy (X)
                                       X  2
                         O(1) 0.4s          X
                                                                2
                                                                        X
                                                                              2
                  = η2         − 2    0.4        I{vj,l ∈V(X)} ψr,j,l −      ψr,y, l̂
                           k      k          (0)                      l=1 r∈M
                                                                         (0)
                                                                                                             r∈M
                                                                               j,l                                 y,l̂

                                      X
                                                   2
                         −ρ                       ψr,y,3− l̂
                                                                     + η2 m0 (E5 + E6 ).
                                       (0)
                                    r∈M
                                       y,3−l̂



Thus, at t = 1, we have

                                    2s 2s2                                s2

                                                         1                           1
E(X,y)∼Zdown,m logity (F ; X) ≈         − 2                          −Ψ
                                                                         + 2
                                                             0.4Ψ         k 1 + i∈[k]\y e0.4Ψi −Ψy
                                                  P                            P
                                    k      k   1 + i∈[k]\y e     i,l   y


                                         s  2         1
                                 + 1−
                                         k 1 + i∈[k]\y e0.4s/k−Ψy
                                                 P
                                         1
                               ≥ 1 − Õ      ,                                         (24)
                                         k
                                                             1
where the last inequality using the result that ψr,i,l ≥ polylog(k) and ψr,i,l ≤ Õ(1) from Lemma F.1
at initialization, |M0i,l | ≤ O(log5 k) from Lemma C.1. We could obtain the similar results for
single-view data.


                                                                             38
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Finally, if we set Tdown ≥ poly(k)
                            η1 η2 , according to (22), it is easy to verify that
       TX                                                       TX
                           "                         #
   1     down
                                       eFy (X)              1     down

              E(X,y)∼Zdown − log   P          Fj (X)
                                                       ≤               E(X,y)∼Zdown 1 − logity (F ; X)
Tdown t=1                             j∈[k] e            T down t =1
                                                                         1

                                                            1
                                                     ≤           .
                                                         poly(k)
This implies that the training loss is small and so we prove Theorem G.2 (a).

G.2.4    P ROOF OF T HEOREM G.2 ( B )
In this subsection, we prove Theorem G.2 (b). For (X, y) ∼ Dm , due to our definition of data
                                                                  2
structure in Definition 1, with probability at least 1 − e−Ω(log k) , it satisfies that for every j ∈ [k] \ y,
                                                       2                         2
                                                                                         !
                                                     X                          X
                 Fj (X) − Fy (X) ≈ O(1) · 0.4            I{vj,l ∈V(X)} Ψj,l −       Ψy,l .               (25)
                                                          l=1                      l=1
and for (X, y) ∼ Ds ,
                                                    2
                                                                                                  !
                                                    X
             Fj (X) − Fy (X) ≈ O(1) ·         0.4         I{vj,l ∈V(X)} Ψj,l − ρΨy,3−l̂ − Ψy,l̂       .   (26)
                                                    l=1

To prove Theorem G.2 (b), we need a lemma:
Lemma G.4. For every (X, y) ∈ Zdown ,
                                         4
                                        k
               1 − logity (F ; X) ≤ Õ      · E(X,y)∼Zdown [1 − logity (F ; X)].
                                        s2
                                                               2
(The same also hold with probability ≥ 1 − e−Ω(log k) for every (X, y) ∼ D on the left hand side.)
Furthermore, if E(X,y)∼Zdown [1 − logity (F ; X)] ≤ k15 is sufficiently small, we have for every
j ∈ [k] \ y,
                                       Fj (X) − Fy (X) ≤ −Õ(1).

Proof of Lemma G.4. The proof of Lemma G.4 for multi-view data has been shown in (Allen-Zhu &
Li, 2020, Claim C.16). Now we prove this lemma also holds for single-view data.
For a data point (X, y) ∈ Zdown,s , let us denote by H(X) be the set of all i ∈ [k] \ {y} such that
          X       X                       1        X     X                            1
                         zp ≥ 0.8 −             ,                zp ≤ 1 + ρ +               .
                                      100 log k                                   100 log k
          l∈[2] p∈Pvi,l (X)                                l∈[2] p∈Pvy,l (X)

                                                                     1
Now suppose 1 − logity (F ; X) = ζ(X), then using min{1, β} ≤ 2 1 − 1+β   , we have
                               n    X                   o
                           min 1,         eFi (X)−Fy (X) ≤ 2ζ(X).
                                        i∈[k]\{y}

By (26) and our definition of H(X), this implies that
                           n    X                                    o
                      min 1,          eO(1)·(0.4Ψi −ρΨy,3−l̂ −Ψy,l̂ ) ≤ 4ζ(X)
                                  i∈H(X)

Now we define ϕ = E(X,y)∼Zdown,s [1 − logity (F ; X)], then
                                                                               
                                    n    X                                     o
              E(X,y)∼Zdown,s min 1,            eO(1)·(0.4Ψi −ρΨy,3−l̂ −Ψy,l̂ )  ≤ 4ϕ
                                              i∈H(X)
                                                                                           
                                       X            n1                                     o
             =⇒E(X,y)∼Zdown,s                min         , eO(1)·(0.4Ψi −ρΨy,3−l̂ −Ψy,l̂ )  ≤ 4ϕ.
                                                      k
                                     i∈H(X)



                                                          39
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


It equals to
    X X                                                                    n1                                       o
                  I{i̸=j} E(X,y)∼Zdown,s [I{j=y} I{i∈H(X)} ] min                   , eO(1)·(0.4Ψi −ρΨy,3−l̂ −Ψy,l̂ ) ≤ 4ϕ.
                                                                               k
    j∈[k] i∈[k]

Note that for every i ̸= j ∈ [k], the probability of choosing a single-view sample (X, y) from Zdown,s
                                                 2
with y = j and i ∈ H(X) is at least Ω k1 · ks 2 . This implies
                    X X               n1                                   o      k3
                                min       , eO(1)·(0.4Ψi −ρΨy,3−l̂ −Ψy,l̂ ) ≤ Õ 2 ϕ .
                                        k                                         s
                        j∈[k] i∈[k]\j
                     1
Finally, using 1 − 1+β   ≤ min{1, β}, for every (X, y) ∼ Zdown,s , we have
                                  n     X                                     o
         1 − logity (F ; X) ≤ min 1,         2eO(1)·(0.4Ψi −ρΨy,3−l̂ −Ψy,l̂ )
                                                 i∈[k]\y
                                             X              n1                 o      k4
                                  ≤k·         , eO(1)·(0.4Ψi −ρΨy,3−l̂ −Ψy,l̂ ) ≤ Õ 2 ϕ .
                                                     min
                                            k                                         s
                               i∈[k]\y

This implies that when E(X,y)∼Zdown,s (1 − logity (F ; X)) ≤ k15 , we have


                                        0.4Ψi − ρΨy,3−l̂ − Ψy,l̂ ≤ −Õ(1).



As we have proved in Section G.2.3 that
                                                               1
                        E(X,y)∼Zdown (1 − logity (F ; X)) ≤         ,
                                                            poly(k)
                          7
We could set Tdown ≥ Õ ηk1 η2 and then based on Lemma G.4, we have

                                                                      2
                     Pr    Fy (X) ≥ max Fj (X) + Õ(1) ≥ 1 − e−Ω(log k) .
                         (X,y)∈D                     j̸=y


H      E XTENSIONS ON OTHER MRP M ETHODS
We have prove that Theorem C.4 holds in the above sections, which means that under the Teacher-
Student Framework, the pretraining phase can capture all features. In this section, we extend our
proof methods to other popular mask-reconstruction pretraining methods. Here we mainly consider
the masked autoencoder (MAE) structure He et al. (2021). For simplicity of analysis, we set the
weights of the decoder as the copy of encoder weights and add a linear layer with bi = c(θ), i ∈ [P ]
to finally obtain the recovered patches. The explicit framework is shown in Fig. 6. Denote the position
encoding of patch p as ep ∈ RP , where at position p the element equal to 1, otherwise the element
equal to 0. Recall that ϵX = (ϵ1 x1 , ϵ2 x2 , . . . , ϵP xP ). Under this framework, the loss function is
                                 1 X                       X                              2
                  L(H; X, ϵ) =            xp − c(θ)              wr ReLU(⟨wr , eTp ϵX⟩) 2
                                 2
                                            p∈[P ]                r∈[km]
                                        1 X                           X                                 2
                                   =                 xp − c(θ)             wr ReLU(⟨wr , ϵp xp ⟩) 2
                                        2
                                            p∈[P ]                r∈[km]
and
                                                     1 X            X                         2
          L(H; X) = Eϵ [L(H; X, ϵ)] =                         xp −        wr ReLU(⟨wr , xp ⟩) 2
                                                     2
                                                       p∈[P ]      r∈[km]
                                                                   X
                                                       1 1−θ               X                        2
                                                     +                          wr ReLU(⟨wr , xp ⟩) 2 .
                                                       2      θ
                                                                      p∈[P ]       r∈[km]
Denote
                                                                           ′
                        Ar,p (X) = ReLU(⟨wr , xp ⟩) + ReLU (⟨wr , xp ⟩)[⟨wr , xp ⟩]+ .
We have that


                                                                 40
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                             Encoder                               Decoder


                                . . . . .


                                                          . . . . .


                                                                                         . . . . .



                                                                                                     . . . . .
                                                 Figure 6: Masked Autoencoder
Fact 2.2. Given the data point (X, y) ∈ D, for every wr , r ∈ [km],
                                                                                
                                X                1   X
              −∇wr L(X) =           Ar,p xp −              wr′ ReLU(⟨wr′ , xp ⟩) .
                                                 θ ′
                                            p∈[P ]                             r ∈[km]

To prove that under MAE framework, the pretraining can also capture all features, we have the
same induction hypothesis as Induction Hypothesis C.3 but now the parameter assumption is a little
different. Our new assumptions are shown as follows:
Assumption H.1 (Parameter Assumption: MAE framework). The parameters introduced in the
paper need to satisfy the following conditions:
                                                                                1
       • ϱ is the threshold for the smoothed ReLU activation. We assume ϱ = polylog(k) .

       • q ≥ 4 and σ0q−2 ≤ k1 .
                                                        σ0

       • γ controls feature noise. γ ≤ Õ               k             .
       • s controls feature sparsity. s = Θ(polylog(k)).
                        √
                                                      −q+1/2
       • N ≥ ω̃ σq−1k
                         , d ≥ ω̃(k/σ0q−1 ), and P ≤ σ0      .
                       0
                                   √
       • polylog(k) ≤ m ≤                   k.
                1               1
       • η ≥ kq(q−2) and η ≤ poly(k) .

       • c(θ) = θ1 .
Now we have the following result on the feature learning process of MAE.
Theorem H.2 (Feature learning process of MAE). Suppose Assumption H.1 holds. By running
                                                                                1
the gradient descent step based on gradient Fact. 2.2 with learning rate η ≤ poly(k) , after T =
poly(k)
   η    iterations, for sufficiently large k > 0, Induction Hypothesis C.3 holds for all iterations
t = 0, 1, . . . , T with high probability.
See its proof in Appendix H.2.5. Similarly, we also have the result about the performance on
downstream classification tasks shown as follows.
Theorem H.3 (Performance on downstream classification tasks under MAE pretraining). For N2 ≥ k
many samples, setting the learning rate η2 = Θ(k) and η1 ≤ Θ̃(k), after Tdown ≥ poly(k)
                                                                                    η1 η2 many
iterations, with high probability, we have


                                                                          41
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


      (a) (training loss is small) for every (X, y) ∈ Zdown , i.e.,
                                                                                             1
                              Ldown (F ) = E(X,y)∼Zdown [Ldown (F ; X, y)] ≤                      .
                                                                                          poly(k)

      (b) (test performance is good) for new data point (X, y) ∼ D, the test performance is

                                                                                  2
                           Pr     Fy (X) ≥ max Fj (X) + Õ(1) ≥ 1 − e−Ω(log k) .
                          (X,y)∈D                  j̸=y


See its proof in Appendix H.2.6. Theorem H.2 guarantees that under MAE pretraining, the pretrained
convolution kernels can capture all discriminative features in the data and each convolution kernel
only grab at most one discriminative feature. Such a result accords with the result of MRP in
Theorem 1 of the manuscript. Please refer to more detailed discussion and analysis of Theorem 1
in manuscript. We also note that the assumptions under MAE framework are more strict than the
assumptions of Teacher-Student framework. In the assumptions of MAE, we need q ≥ 4, which
means we need to let the low-magnitude feature noises to be compressed much much smaller in
order that we can separate the true feature from feature noises. Then Theorem H.3 shows that as
we have captured all features in the MAE pretraining phase, we can also obtain very high accuracy
with high probability in the downstream classification tasks. Therefore, compared with supervised
learning, MAE also shows better performance on classification downstream task. This result shows
the generality of our analysis framework.
To prove Theorem H.2 and Theorem H.3, we mainly follow the similar framework used to prove
Theorems 1 and Theorem 2 in the manuscript. To begin with, we first prove some auxiliary theories
based on which one can easily prove the desired results.

H.1    S OME R ESULTS FROM I NDUCTION H YPOTHESIS C.3 UNDER MAE

We first introduce some claims about the terms in the gradients.
Claim H.4. Suppose Assumption H.1 and Induction Hypothesis C.3 holds at iterations t. Then for
              (0)
every r ∈ Mi,l , we have

        • if p ∈ Pvi,l (X),
                                                                                      ′
              Ar,p (X) = Ivi,l ∈V(X) ReLU(⟨wr , xp ⟩) + Ivi,l ∈V(X) ReLU (⟨wr , xp ⟩)[⟨wr , xp ⟩]+ .

        • if p ∈ P(X) \ Pvi,l (X),

                                                   Ar,p (X) ≈ Õ(σ0q ).

        • if p ∈ [P ] \ P(X),
                                               Ar,p (X) ≈ Õ((σ0 γk)q ).

We also denote
                                               1 X
                              ∆p (X) = xp −        wr′ ReLU(⟨wr′ , xp ⟩).
                                               θ ′
                                                   r ∈[km]

Claim H.5. Suppose Assumption H.1 and Induction Hypothesis C.3 holds at iterations t,

        • When p ∈ Pvi,l (X), we have
                                               1     X                                                           X
          ⟨∆p (X), vi,l ⟩ = zp Ivi,l ∈V(X) −                    ⟨wr′ , vi,l ⟩Ivi,l ∈V(X) ReLU(⟨wr′ , xp ⟩) −               Õ(σ0 )Õ(σ0q )
                                               θ          (0)                                                        (0)
                                                   r ′ ∈Mi,l                                                   r ′ ∈M
                                                                                                                   / i,l

                                               1     X                                                              q− 21
                         = zp Ivi,l ∈V(X) −                     ⟨wr′ , vi,l ⟩Ivi,l ∈V(X) ReLU(⟨wr′ , xp ⟩) ± Õ(σ0          ).
                                               θ         (0)
                                                   r ′ ∈Mi,l



                                                          42
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


      • When p ∈
               / Pvi,l (X) but p ∈ Pvj,l′ (X) for vj,l′ ̸= vi,l , we have
                                               q− 21
                                                              X                                             X
          ⟨∆p (X), vi,l ⟩ = γ ± Õ(σ0                  )±               ⟨wr′ , vi,l ⟩Õ(σ0q ) ±                        Ivj,l′ ∈V(X) Õ(σ0 )ReLU(⟨wr′ , xp ⟩).
                                                                  (0)                                           (0)
                                                            r ′ ∈Mi,l                                     r ′ ∈Mj,l′


      • When p ∈ [P ] \ P(X), we have
                                                                                      X
                       ⟨∆p (X), vi,l ⟩ = γ ± Õ(σ0q+1 (γk)q ) ±                                    ⟨wr′ , vi,l ⟩Õ((σ0 γk)q ).
                                                                                             (0)
                                                                                    r ′ ∈Mi,l


Now we have some claims for the gradients. The proof is just based on the result from Claim H.4 and
Claim H.5.
Claim H.6. Suppose Assumption H.1 and Induction Hypothesis C.3 holds at iterations t. Then for
                               (0)
every vi,l ∈ V, for every r ∈ Mi,l , for every (X, y) ∈ Z, we have

    (a)
          −⟨∇wr L(X), vi,l ⟩
                                                                                                                                        
                       X                                 1                X
                =                 Ar,p zp Ivi,l ∈V(X) −                            ⟨wr′ , vi,l ⟩Ivi,l ∈V(X) ReLU(⟨wr′ , xp ⟩)
                                                                                                                             
                                                         θ                    (0)
                    p∈Pvi,l (X)                                         r ′ ∈Mi,l
                                              2q−1/2
                    ± γ Õ(σ0q ) ± Õ(σ0               ) ± Õ((σ02q+1 )(γk)2q ) · P

    (b) for vj,l′ ̸= vi,l ,
          −⟨∇wr L(X), vj,l′ ⟩
                                          q− 1                      2q−1/2
                   X
            =±              Ar,p (γ + Õ(σ0 2 )) ± γ Õ(σ0q ) ± Õ(σ0      ) ± Õ((σ02q+1 )(γk)2q ) · P
                      p∈Pvi,l (X)
                                                                                                                                                
                         X                                          1               X
                +                       Õ(σ0q ) zp Ivj,l′ ∈V(X) −                          ⟨wr′ , vj,l′ ⟩Ivj,l′ ∈V(X) ReLU(⟨wr′ , xp ⟩) .
                                                                                                                                        
                                                                    θ                  (0)
                      p∈Pv        (X)                                         r ′ ∈Mj,l′
                             j,l′


Intuitions on Claim H.6. From Claim H.6, we can find that the positive-correlation gradient
−⟨∇wr L(X), vi,l ⟩ has a non-small term that drive the correlation between wr and vi,l when r ∈
   (0)
Mi,l to increase during the training courses. How the correlation increase will be shown in Claim H.7
in the following. On the other hand, the negative correlations will keep small as the negative-
correlation gradients −⟨∇wr L(X), vj,l′ ⟩ always have small terms. These intuitions are same as the
intuitions under Teacher-Student Framework and thus we could also prove that MAE pretraining
could also capture all features.
                                                                                                    (t)
Now we have the following claim shows about at which iteration Λi,l will be greater than ϱ.
Claim H.7. Suppose Assumption C.2 holds and induction hypothesis C.3 holds at iteration t. For
                      (t)
every vi,l , suppose Λi,l ≤ ϱ. Then we have
                                               η
                               (t+1)    (t)
                             Λi,l ≈ Λi,l + Θ̃     ReLU(⟨wr , vi,l ⟩).
                                               k

                                               (t)                            (t)
Proof of Claim H.7. Recall that Λi,l := maxr∈[km] [⟨wr , vi,l ⟩]+ . We choose any r ∈ [km] that
          (t)
makes ⟨wr , vi,l ⟩ ≥ Ω̃(σ0 ). Now we show the updates. We know that

                       ⟨wr(t+1) , vi,l ⟩ = ⟨wr(t) , vi,l ⟩ + ηE(X,y)∼Z [⟨−∇wr L(X), vi,l ⟩]


                                                                  43
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Using Claim H.6 and following the similar method in the proof of Claim E.4, we have
                                                                                                          
                        X                             1   X
−⟨∇wr L(X), vi,l ⟩ =           Ar,p zp Ivi,l ∈V(X) −            ⟨wr′ , vi,l ⟩Ivi,l ∈V(X) ReLU(⟨wr′ , xp ⟩)
                                                                                                          
                                                      θ      (0)
                          p∈Pvi,l (X)                                    r ′ ∈Mi,l
                                                                                                                               
                                                                X
                    = Ivi,l ∈V(X) ReLU(⟨wr , vi,l ⟩) 1 − (1/θ)   ReLU(⟨wr′ , vi,l ⟩)⟨wr′ , vi,l ⟩
                                                                                                 
                                                                                        (0)
                                                                               r ′ ∈Mi,l
                                 X
                          ×                (1 + q)zpq+1 .
                              p∈Pvi,l (X)
                    P
As the term (1/θ)               (0)
                         r ′ ∈Mi,l
                                      ReLU(⟨wr′ , vi,l ⟩)⟨wr′ , vi,l ⟩ is small at the intial stage compared with
the constant 1, we have
                                                                η
                                      (t+1)       (t)
                                  Λi,l        ≈ Λi,l + Θ̃            ReLU(⟨wr , vi,l ⟩).
                                                                k


                                          (0)
Using Claim E.5, and Ω̃(σ0 ) ≤ Λi,l ≤ Õ(σ0 ), we have the following result:
Claim H.8. Suppose
                     Assumption
                                H.1 holds and Induction Hypothesis C.3  holds for every
                                                                                       iteration.
                                                                  (t)
Define T0 := Θ̃ ησkq−1 . We have that when t ≥ T0 , it satisfies Λi,l ≥ Θ polylog(k)
                                                                              1
                                                                                      .
                     0



H.2     P ROOF OF T HEOREM H.2

H.2.1    D IAGONAL CORRELATIONS
Lemma H.9. Suppose Assumption H.1 holds and Induction Hypothesis C.3 holds for all iterations
< t. We have
                                             (s                  )
                                   (t)               θ
                     ∀vi,l ∈ V : Λi,l ≤ min           (0)
                                                          , Õ(1) .
                                                  |Mi,l |

                                                                                               (t)
Proof. Suppose we are now at some iteration t > T0 . In this stage, Λi,l ≥ 1/polylog(k). As

T0 = Θ̃ ησkq−1 and η ≤ poly(k)
                          1
                               , we have
           0
                                                                                                       
                       X                            1 X
−⟨∇wr L(X), vi,l ⟩ =         Ar,p zp Ivi,l ∈V(X) −           ⟨wr′ , vi,l ⟩Ivi,l ∈V(X) ReLU(⟨wr′ , xp ⟩)
                                                                                                       
                                                    θ     (0)
                          p∈Pvi,l (X)                                    r ′ ∈Mi,l
                                                                                                    
                                                                           X                                X
                    = Ivi,l ∈V(X) [⟨wr , vi,l ⟩]+ 1 − (1/θ)                         ⟨wr′ , vi,l ⟩2                   2zp2 .
                                                                                                   
                                                                               (0)                       p∈Pvi,l (X)
                                                                         r ′ ∈Mi,l

Then we have
                                                                            η
                      [⟨wr(t+1) , vi,l ⟩]+ ≤ [⟨wr(t) , vi,l ⟩]+ + Õ
                                                                  [⟨wr(t) , vi,l ⟩]+
                                                             k
Taking the maximum on both side and as we are at t > T0 , we have
                                                                                η
                 max [⟨wr(t+1) , vi,l ⟩]+ ≤ max [⟨wr(t) , vi,l ⟩]+ 1 + Õ            .
                    (0)
                r∈Mi,l
                                              (0)
                                           r∈Mi,l                                k

When t ≤ T = T0 + Õ kη , we have


                                                         (t)
                                                        Λi,l ≤ Õ(1).


                                                               44
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Besides, we also need
                                                       X
                                      1 − (1/θ)                  ⟨wr′ , vi,l ⟩2 ≥ 0,
                                                           (0)
                                                    r ′ ∈Mi,l

which means
                                                          s
                                                  (t)               θ
                                                 Λi,l ≤              (0)
                                                                           .
                                                                 |Mi,l |
                                                  r
                                        (t)             θ
This condition shows that when Λi,l →                    (0) , the increase on the positive correlations tends to
                                                      |Mi,l |
zero and the training process becomes to converge.
Lemma H.10. Suppose Assumption H.1 holds and Induction Hypothesis C.3 holds for all iterations
< t. We have
                                      (0)
                    ∀vi,l ∈ V, ∀r ∈ Mi,l : ⟨wr(t) , vi,l ⟩ ≥ −Õ(σ0 ).

                                                          (t)
Proof. We start with any iteration t that is ⟨wr , vi,l ⟩ ≤ −Ω̃(σ0 ) to see how negative the next
                                                                                     (t′ )
iteration will be. Without loss of generality, we consider the case when ⟨wr , vi,l ⟩ ≤ −Ω̃(σ0 ) holds
                                                                               (t′ )
for every t′ ≥ t. Then based on Claim H.6 and when we assum ⟨wr , vi,l ⟩ ≤ −Ω̃(σ0 ), Ar,p = 0,
we have
                                                                  2q−1/2
           ⟨wr(t+1) , vi,l ⟩ ≥ ⟨wr(t) , vi,l ⟩ − γ Õ(σ0q ) − Õ(σ0      ) − Õ((σ02q+1 )(γk)2q ) · P.

When t ≤ T0 , we have
                                                                     2q−1/2
         ⟨wr(t+1) , vi,l ⟩ ≥ ⟨wr(t) , vi,l ⟩ − γ Õ(σ0q ) − Õ(σ0               ) − Õ((σ02q+1 )(γk)2q ) · P
                                                                        2q−1/2
                         ≥ −Õ(σ0 ) − ηT0 (γ Õ(σ0q ) + Õ(σ0                       ) + Õ((σ02q+1 )(γk)2q ) · P )
                       ≥ −Õ(σ0 ).
When t ∈ [T0 , T ], we have
                                                                     2q−1/2
     ⟨wr(t+1) , vi,l ⟩ ≥ ⟨wr(T0 ) , vi,l ⟩ − η(γ Õ(σ0q ) + Õ(σ0                ) + Õ((σ02q+1 )(γk)2q ) · P )
                                                                                2q−1/2
                     ≥ −Õ(σ0 ) − η(T − T0 )(γ Õ(σ0q ) + Õ(σ0                          ) + Õ((σ02q+1 )(γk)2q ) · P )
                     ≥ −Õ(σ0 ).



H.2.2    O FF - DIAGONAL CORRELATIONS
Lemma H.11. Suppose Assumption H.1 holds and Induction Hypothesis C.3 holds for all iterations
< t. Then
                              (0)
             ∀vi,l ∈ V, ∀r ∈ Mi,l , for vj,l′ ̸= vi,l : |⟨wr(t) , vj,l′ ⟩| ≤ Õ(σ0 ).

                                                                                                   (0)
Proof. Stage I. We first consider the stage when t ≤ T0 . For every r ∈ Mi,l , using Claim H.6, we
have
E(X,y)∼Z [−⟨∇wr L(X), vj,l′ ⟩]
                                        
                                                    q− 1                      2q−1/2
                            X
          ≤ E(X,y)∼Z               Ar,p  (γ + Õ(σ0 2 )) + γ Õ(σ0q ) + Õ(σ0      ) + Õ((σ02q+1 )(γk)2q ) · P + Õ(σ0q )
                             p∈Pvi,l (X)
                                                                                                                                   
                                    X                              1             X
              × E(X,y)∼Z                       zp Ivj,l′ ∈V(X) −                          ⟨wr′ , vj,l′ ⟩Ivj,l′ ∈V(X) ReLU(⟨wr′ , xp ⟩)
                                                                                                                                      
                                                                   θ                 (0)
                               p∈Pv       (X)                                  r ′ ∈Mj,l′
                                     j,l′
                                                             q
                 1                             q− 1         σ0
           ≤ Θ̃     ReLU(⟨wr , vi,l ⟩)(γ + Õ(σ0 2 )) + Õ      .
                 k                                           k

                                                           45
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


From Claim H.7, we have that
                                   0 −1
                              η   TX
                                                                             (T )        (0)                 1
                       Θ̃                  ReLU(⟨wr(t) , vi,l ⟩) = Λi,l0 − Λi,l ≤                                   .
                              k      t=0
                                                                                                         polylog(k)

Thus, when t ≤ T0 ,
                                                                                                         ησ0q

                                                                  q− 1
                |⟨wr(t) , vj,l′ ⟩| ≤ |⟨wr(0) , vj,l′ ⟩| + γ + Õ(σ0 2 ) + T0 Õ                                     ≤ Õ(σ0 ).
                                                                                                          k

Stage II. When t ∈ [T0 , T ], we have

                                                  η(T − T0 )                                 q− 1
 |⟨wr(t) , vj,l′ ⟩| ≤ |⟨wr(T0 ) , vj,l′ ⟩| + Õ                · (ReLU(⟨wr , vi,l ⟩)(γ + Õ(σ0 2 )) + Õ (σ0q ))
                                                      k
                 ≤ Õ(σ0 ).



                                                                           (0)
H.2.3     L OTTERY WINNING : KERNELS INSIDE Mi,l

Lemma H.12. Suppose Assumption H.1 holds and Induction Hypothesis C.3 holds for all iterations
< t. Then
                                                                (0)
                                    ∀vi,l ∈ V, ∀r ∈
                                                  / Mi,l :                 ⟨wr(t) , vi,l ⟩ ≤ Õ(σ0 ).

                             (0)                                                       (t)
Proof. When r ∈ Mj,l′ , (vj,l′ ̸= vi,l ), we have prove that ⟨wr , vi,l ⟩ ≤ Õ(σ0 ) in Lemma H.11. So
                                                                  (0)
we only prove the case when r ∈
                              / ∪i∈[k],l∈[2] Mi,l .
                                                                            (0)
We assume that there exists an wr′ ∈
                                   / ∪i∈[k],l∈[2] Mi,l such that induction hypothesis C.3 (a)-(c)
                                                                                             (t)
holds for every (X, y) ∈ Z. We want to see if the sequence ⟨wr′ , vi,l ⟩ will increase more quickly
                   (t)
than maxr∈M(0) ⟨wr , vi,l ⟩.
                 i,l

                                                                                 (t)
Stage I. We first consider when t ≤ T0 . In this stage, Λi,l ≤ ϱ. We define two sequences. First, we
                               (0)                           (t)        s 1/(q−1) 1

take wr∗ = argmaxr∈M(0) ⟨wr , vi,l ⟩ and define xt := ⟨wr∗ , vi,l ⟩ · qk          ϱ . We also define
                         i,l
              (t)         s 1/(q−1) 1

yt = max{⟨wr′ , vi,l ⟩ · qk         ϱ , σ0 }. From Claim H.7, when t ≤ T0 , we have that
                                                                          sη
                             (t+1)                (t)                                               (t)
                       ⟨wr∗          , vi,l ⟩ = ⟨wr∗ , vi,l ⟩ + Θ     ReLU(⟨wr∗ , vi,l ⟩)
                                                                  k
                                                                  sη   1
                                                (t)
                                            ≥ ⟨wr∗ , vi,l ⟩ + Θ           ([⟨wr∗ , vi,l ⟩]+ )q .
                                                                  k qϱq−1
                                      q−2
              1+C/(log(k)−C)
Let S =         1+1/ log(k)                 , C > 1. We have
                                                                         sη
                            (t+1)                (t)                                               (t)
                       ⟨wr′         , vi,l ⟩ = ⟨wr′ , vi,l ⟩ + Θ      ReLU(⟨wr′ , vi,l ⟩)
                                                                  k
                                                                  sη   1
                                                (t)                           (t)
                                            ≤ ⟨wr′ , vi,l ⟩ + Θ           ([⟨wr′ , vi,l ⟩]+ )q S.
                                                                  k qϱq−1
Then following the same process as the proof of Lemma F.5, we have
                                                          (t)
                                                       ⟨wr′ , vi,l ⟩ ≤ Õ(σ0 ).

The proof of Stage II is also similar to Lemma F.5.


                                                                      46
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


H.2.4      N OISE CORRELATION
As our noise correlation result is similar to Lemma F.6, we don’t repeat it here but just prove it holds
under MAE framework and under our new parameter assumptions.

Proof of Lemma F.6 under MAE framework. For every r ∈ [km], for every (X ∗ , y ∗ ) ∈ Z and every
p∗ ∈ [P ], we have that
                                                                                      
                          X                        1   X
      ⟨−∇wr L(X), ξp∗ ⟩ =      Ar,p ⟨xp , ξp∗ ⟩ −       ⟨wr′ , ξp∗ ⟩ReLU(⟨wr′ , xp ⟩) .
                                                   θ ′
                                      p∈[P ]                         r ∈[km]
                                                         √
When X ̸= X ∗ , we have |⟨x√                                                ∗          ∗
                              p , ξp∗ ⟩| ≤ Õ(σp ) ≤ o(1/ d); and when X = X but p ̸= p , we have
|⟨xp , ξp∗ ⟩| ≤ Õ(σp ) ≤ o(1/ d). Therefore, we have

E(X,y)∼Z ⟨−∇wr L(X), ξp∗ ⟩ = E(X,y)∈Z IX=X ∗ ⟨−∇wr L(X), ξp∗ ⟩ + IX̸=X ∗ ⟨−∇wr L(X), ξp∗ ⟩ .

                                                                                  (0)
Now we begin to prove (a). For every vi,l ∈ V, for every r ∈ Mi,l , for every p∗ ∈ Pvi,l (X ∗ ), using
the induction hypothesis C.3, when t ∈ [0, T0 ], we have that for the first term,

E(X,y)∼Z IX=X ∗ ⟨−∇wr L(X), ξp∗ ⟩
                                                                                                                  

     1                                    1   X                                           1                     (t)
 = E(X ∗ ,y∗ )∼Z Ar,p∗ ⟨xp∗ , ξp∗ ⟩ −             ⟨wr′ , ξp∗ ⟩ReLU(⟨wr′ , xp∗ ⟩) ± o √        ± õ(σ0 )ReLU(Λi,l )
    N                                     θ ′                                              d
                                            r ∈[km]

For the second term,

                                                        1                   (t)
               E(X,y)∼Z IX̸=X ∗ ⟨−∇wr L(X), ξp∗ ⟩ = ±o √     ± õ(σ0 )ReLU(Λi,l )
                                                         d
Thus, we have
                                                  η
                                                                         (t)              η                           (t)
   ⟨wr(t+1) , ξp∗ ⟩ ≤ ⟨wr(t) , ξp∗ ⟩ + Õ              õ(σ0 )ReLU(Λi,l ) + o             √         + õ(ησ0 )ReLU(Λi,l ),
                                                  N                                         d
Now we use the results from Lemma H.9, when t ≤ T0 ,

                                                                      (t)           η
                    ⟨wr(t) , ξp∗ ⟩ ≤ ⟨wr(t−1) , ξp∗ ⟩ + õ(ησ0 )ReLU(Λi,l ) + o    √
                                                                                     d
                                                              TX0 −1
                                         (0)                               (t)        ηT0
                                     ≤ ⟨wr , ξp∗ ⟩ + õ(ησ0 )        ReLU(Λi,l ) + o √
                                                               t=0                       d
                                     ≤ õ(σ0 ).
                                           √                                       (t)
So when N ≥ ω̃              k
                         σ0q−1
                                     and       d ≥ ω̃(k/σ0q−1 ), we have ⟨wr , ξp∗ ⟩ ≤ õ(σ0 ). Therefore, for
t ∈ [T0 , T ], we have

                                                            η(t − T0 )                η(t − T0 )
               ⟨wr(t) , ξp∗ ⟩ ≤ ⟨wr(T0 ) , ξp∗ ⟩ + Õ                        +o          √               ≤ õ(σ0 ),
                                                                N                          d
       √
when       d ≥ ω̃(k). Following the similar process, we could also prove (b)-(e).

H.2.5      P ROOF OF T HEOREM H.2
Theorem H.2 can be easily obtained following the similar steps in the proof of Theorem C.4 when we
have Lemma H.10-Lemma H.12.


                                                              47
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


H.2.6    P ROOF OF T HEOREM H.3
Theorem H.3 can be easily obtained following the same steps in the proof of Theorem G.2 in
Section G.

H.3     D ISCUSSION ON BE I T METHODS

We have proved that the pretraining phase can capture all features both under Teacher-Student
framework and MAE framework. Now we have a discussion on BEiT framework (Bao et al., 2021).
For BEiT, if we regard the pretrained encoder of BEiT as a fixed teacher and stuck an additional layer
to map the patch token feature of BEiT encoder to discrete pseudo label, then this setting becomes
very similar to our setting. The only different is the BEiT encoder (teacher) is fixed, while our teacher
encoder is learned online (updated along with the weights of the student). Since there are a lot of
similarities between these two frameworks, our proof methods can naturally extend to BEiT with the
suitable choices of additional layers.


                                                  48
