Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


EMP: E FFECTIVE M ULTIDIMENSIONAL P ERSISTENCE
FOR G RAPH R EPRESENTATION L EARNING

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT

         Topological data analysis (TDA) has become increasingly popular in a broad
         range of machine learning tasks, ranging from anomaly detection and manifold
         learning to graph classification. Persistent homology being the key approach
         in TDA provides a unique topological fingerprint of the data by assessing the
         evolution of various hidden patterns in the data as we vary a scale parameter.
         Current PH tools are limited to analyze the data by filtering with single parameter
         while in many applications, several relevant parameters are equally important to
         get a much finer information on the data. In this paper, we overcome this problem
         by introducing Effective Multidimensional Persistence (EMP) framework which
         enables to investigate the data by varying multiple scale parameters simultaneously.
         EMP framework provides a highly expressive summary of the data by integrating
         the multiple descriptor functions to the process successfully. EMP naturally adapts
         to many known single PH summaries and converts them into multidimensional
         summaries, for example, EMP Landscapes, EMP Silhouettes, EMP Images, and
         EMP Surfaces. These summaries deliver a multidimensional fingerprint of the data
         as matrices and arrays which are suitable for various machine learning models.
         We apply EMP framework in graph classification tasks and observe that EMP
         boosts the performances of various single PH descriptors, and outperforms the
         most state-of-the-art methods on benchmark datasets. We further derive theoretical
         guarantees of the proposed EMP summary and prove the stability properties.


1   I NTRODUCTION

In the past decade, topological data analysis (TDA) proved to be a powerful machinery to discover
many hidden patterns in various forms of data which are otherwise inaccessible with more traditional
methods. In particular, for graph machine learning tasks, while many traditional methods fail, TDA
and, specifically, tools of persistent homology (PH), have demonstrated a high potential to detect local
and global patterns and to produce a unique topological fingerprint to be used in various machine
learning tasks. This makes PH particularly attractive for capturing various characteristics of the
complex data which may play the key role behind the learning task performance.
In turn, multiparameter persistence, or multipersistence (MP) is a novel idea to further advance the
PH machinery by analysing the data in much finer way simultaneously along multiple dimensions.
However, because of the technical problems related to commutative algebra because of its multidi-
mensional structure, it has not been defined for general settings yet (See Section 2.1). In this paper,
we develop an alternative approach to utilize multipersistence idea very efficiently for various types
of data, with main focus on graph representation. In particular, we bypass technical issues with the
MP by obtaining a very practical summaries by utilizing slicing idea in a structured way. In turn, we
obtain suitable multidimensional topological fingerprints of the data as matrices and arrays where
ML models can easily detect the hidden patterns developed in the complex data.

Our contributions can be summarized as follows:

       • We develop a new computationally efficient and highly expressive EMP framework which
         provides multidimensional topological fingerprints of the data. EMP expands many pop-
         ular summaries of single persistence to multidimensions by adapting an effective slicing


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


         direction. As such, our EMP framework provides a practical way to utilize the promising
         multipersistence approach in real-life applications.
       • We illustrate the utility of EMP summaries in various settings and compare our results to
         state-of-the-art methods. Our numerical experiments demonstrate that EMP summaries
         outperforms SOTA in several benchmark datasets for graph classification tasks.
       • We derive theoretical stability guarantees of the new topological summaries.


2     R ELATED W ORK

2.1   M ULTIPARAMETER P ERSISTENCE

Persistent homology (PH), being a key tool in topological data analysis (TDA), delivers invaluable and
complementary information on the intrinsic properties of data that are inaccessible with conventional
methods (Chazal & Michel, 2021; Hensel et al., 2021). In the past decade, PH has become quite
popular in various ML tasks, ranging from manifold learning to medical image analysis, material
science to finance (TDA applications library (Giunti, 2022)). One of the key benefits of PH is that it
allows us to extract the evolution of subtler patterns in the data shape dynamics at multiple resolution
scales which are not accessible with more conventional, non-topological methods (Wasserman, 2018).
Multipersistence (MP) is a highly promising approach to significantly improve the success of single
parameter persistence (SP) in applied topological data analysis, but there are some issues to convert
this novel idea into an effective feature extraction method as desired (See Appendix D.3). Except for
some special cases, MP theory suffers from the problem of the nonexistence of barcode decomposition
because of the partially ordered structure of the index set {(αi , βj )} (Botnan & Lesnick, 2022).
Lesnick & Wright (2015) suggested to bypass this issue via slicing technique by studying one-
dimensional fibers of the multiparameter domain where one restricts the multidimensional persistence
module to a single direction (slice) and to use single persistence on this one dimensional slice. Later,
by using this novel idea, Carrière & Blumberg (2020) combined several slicing directions (vineyards)
and obtained a vectorization by summarizing the persistence diagrams (PDs) in these directions.
There are several promising recent studies in this direction (Botnan et al., 2021; Vipond, 2020), but
these approaches are not computationally feasible, and cannot provide the expected effectiveness of
MP approach in real life applications. Here we develop a highly efficient way to use MP approach for
various forms of data, and provide a multidimensional topological vectorization with EMP summaries.

2.2   G RAPH R EPRESENTATION L EARNING

After the success of convolutional neural networks (CNN) on image-based tasks, graph neural
networks (GNNs) have emerged as a powerful tool for graph-level classification and representation
learning. A wide variety of models are developed based on numerous theories (see Appendix A
for further details). However, to our best knowledge, most of existing approaches do not account
for the important topological information on the shapes of the node neighborhoods. While GNNs
produce great performances in many graph learning tasks, they tend to suffer from over-smoothing
problems and are vulnerable to graph perturbations. To address these challenges, TDA provides a
computationally efficient alternative to GNNs, and can be used as an effective feature extractor to
be combined with the deep learning methods Hofer et al. (2020); Bodnar et al. (2022); Horn et al.
(2021). Recently, this direction has been explored in many works, and single persistent homology
give highly competitive results with kernel-based methods Togninalli et al. (2019); Rieck et al. (2019);
Le & Yamada (2018); Zhao & Wang (2019); Kyriakis et al. (2021) and neural networks Hofer et al.
(2019); Carrière et al. (2020) in graph classification tasks. In this work, we apply MP approach for the
first time in this setting, and our EMP model outperforms most deep learning models in benchmark
datasets.


3     BACKGROUND

We start from providing the basic background for our framework. Since we mainly focus on graph
representation learning in this paper, we explain our construction on graph setting. Note that


                                                   2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


our techniques can easily be adapted to other types of data, e.g., point clouds and images (See
Appendix D.1).

3.1   P ERSISTENT H OMOLOGY

Persistent Homology (PH) is a mathematical machinery to capture the hidden shape patterns in the
data by using algebraic topology tools. PH extracts this information by keeping track of evolution
of the topological features (components, loops, cavities) created in the data while looking at it in
different resolutions Dey & Wang (2022). Appendix B provides additional background on classic PH
for the avid reader.
For a given graph G, consider a nested sequence of subgraphs G1 ⊆ . . . ⊆ GN = G. For each
Gi , define an abstract simplicial complex Gbi , 1 ≤ i ≤ N , yielding a filtration of complexes Gb1 ⊆
. . . ⊆ GbN . Here, clique complexes are among the most common ones, i.e., a clique complex Gb is
obtained by assigning (filling with) a k-simplex to each complete (k + 1)-complete subgraph in G,
e.g., a 3-clique, a complete 3-subgraph, in G will be filled with a 2-simplex (triangle). Then, in this
sequence of simplicial complexes, one can systematically keep track of the evolution of topological
patterns mentioned above. A k-dimensional topological feature (or k-hole) may represent connected
components (0-hole), loops (1-hole) and cavities (2-hole). For each k-hole σ, PH records its first
appeareance in the filtration sequence, say Gbbσ , and first disappearence in later complexes, Gbdσ
with a unique pair (bσ , dσ ), where 1 ≤ bσ < dσ ≤ N . We call bσ the birth time of σ and dσ the
death time of σ. We call dσ − bσ the life span of σ. PH records all these birth and death times
of the topological features in persistence diagrams (PD). Let 0 ≤ k ≤ D where D is the highest
dimension in the simplicial complex GbN . Then the kth persistence diagram PDk (G) = {(bσ , dσ ) |
σ ∈ Hk (Gbi ) for bσ ≤ i < dσ }. Here, Hk (Gbi ) represents the k th homology group of Gbi which
keeps the information of the k-holes in the simplicial complex Gbi . For sake of notation, we skip the
dimension (subscript k). With the intuition that the topological features with long life span (persistent
features) describe the hidden shape patterns in the data, these PDs provide a unique topological
fingerprint of G.
As one can easily notice, the most important step in the PH machinery is the construction of the
nested sequence of subgraphs G1 ⊆ . . . ⊆ GN = G. For a given unweighted graph G = (V, E)
with V = {v1 , . . . , vN } the set of nodes and E ⊂ {{vi , vj } ∈ V × V, i 6= j} the set of edges,
the most common technique is to use a filtration function f : V → R with a choice of thresholds
I = {αi } where α1 = minv∈V f (v) < α2 < . . . < αN = maxv∈V f (v). For αi ∈ I, let
Vi = {vr ∈ V | f (vr ) ≤ αi }. Let Gi be the induced subgraph of G by Vi , i.e., Gi = (Vi , Ei ) where
Ei = {ers ∈ E | vr , vs ∈ Vi }. This process yields a nested sequence of subgraphs G1 ⊂ G2 ⊂ . . . ⊂
GN = G, called the sublevel filtration induced by the filtration function f . We denote PDs obtained
via sublevel filtration for a filtration function f as P D(G, f ). The choice of f is crucial here, and
in most cases, f is either an important function from the domain of the data, e.g., atomic number
in protein or a function defined from intrinsic properties of the graph, e.g., degree and betweenness.
Similarly, for a weighted graph, one can use sublevel filtration on the weights of the edges and obtain
a suitable filtration reflecting the domain information stored in the edge weights. (For further details
on different filtrations see Aktas et al. (2019); Hofer et al. (2020).)

3.2   S INGLE P ERSISTENCE V ECTORIZATIONS

While PH extracts hidden shape patterns from data as persistence diagrams (PD), PDs being col-
lection of points in R2 by itself are not very practical for statistical and machine learning purposes.
Instead, the common techniques are by faithfully representing PDs as kernels Kriege et al. (2020) or
vectorizations Hensel et al. (2021). This provides a practical way to use the outputs of PH in real
life applications. Single Persistence Vectorizations transform obtained PH information (PDs) into a
function or a feature vector form which are much more suitable for machine learning tools than PDs.
Common single persistence (SP) vectorization methods are Persistence Images Adams et al. (2017),
Persistence Landscapes Bubenik (2015), Silhouettes Chazal et al. (2014), and various Persistence
Curves Chung & Lawson (2019). These vectorizations defines a single variable or multivariable
functions out of PDs, which can be used as fixed size 1D or 2D vectors in applications, i.e 1 × n
vectors or m × n vectors. For example, a Betti curve for a PD with n thresholds can also be expressed


                                                   3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


as 1 × n size vectors. Similarly, Persistence Images is an example of 2D vectors with the chosen
resolution (grid) size. See the examples given in Section 4.2 for further details.

3.3   M ULTIDIMENSIONAL P ERSISTENCE

MultiPersistence (MP) is a novel idea to significantly boost the performance of the single parameter
persistence technique described above. The reason for the term “single” is that we are filtering the
data in only one direction G1 ⊂ · · · ⊂ GN = G. The construction of the filtration is the key to get
fine analysis of the data to find the hidden patterns. If one uses one function f : V → R which
has very valuable domain information (e.g., amount for blockchain networks, atomic number for
protein networks), then this induces a single parameter filtration as above. However, various data
have more than one very natural domain functions to analyze the data, and using them simultaneously
would give a much better understanding of the hidden patterns. With this intuition, multiparameter
persistence (MP) theory is suggested as natural generalization of single persistence (SP).
In simple terms, if one uses only one filtration function, sublevel sets induces a single parameter
filtration Gb1 ⊂ · · · ⊂ GbN = G.
                                b Instead, if one uses two or more functions, then it would give a way
to study the data in much finer resolution. For example, if we have two functions f : V → R and
g : V → R with very valuable complementary information of the network, MP idea is presumed to
produce a unique topological fingerprint combining the information from both functions. These pair
of functions f, g induces a multivariate filtration function F : V → R2 with F (v) = (f (v), g(v)).
Again, one can define a set of nondecreasing thresholds {αi }m                 n
                                                                  1 and {βj }1 for f and g respectively.
                                                                      −1
Then, Vij = {vr ∈ V | f (vr ) ≤ αi , g(vr ) ≤ βj }, i.e., Vij = F ((−∞, αi ] × (−∞, βj ]). Then,
let Gij be the induced subgraph of G by Vij , i.e., the smallest subgraph of G generated by Vij .
Then, instead of a single filtration of complexes, we get a bifiltration of complexes {Gbij | 1 ≤ i ≤
m, 1 ≤ j ≤ n}. One can imagine {Gbij } as a rectangular grid of size m × n such that for each
1 ≤ i0 ≤ m, {Gbi0 j }nj=1 gives a nested (horizontal) sequence of simplicial complexes. Similarly, for
each 1 ≤ j0 ≤ n, {Gbij0 }m  i=1 gives a nested (vertical) sequence of simplicial complexes (See Figure 2
in the Appendix).
By computing the homology groups of these complexes, {Hk (Gbij )}, we obtain the induced bigraded
persistence module (a rectangular grid of size m × n). Again, the idea is to keep track of the
k-dimensional topological features via the homology groups {Hk (Gbij )} in this grid. As explained in
Appendix D.3, because of the technical issues related to commutative algebra, there are still issues
to define a mathematical output like "Multipersistence Diagram", and hence, to obtain an effective
vectorization of the MP module (Section 3). These technical issues prevent this promising approach
to reach its full potential in real life applications.
In this paper, we overcome this problem by producing very practical vectorizations by utilizing
slicing idea in the multipersistence grid in a structured way. The key point in our approach is that
we produce multidimensional vectors (matrices and arrays) as unique topological multidimensional
fingerprints of the data. In other words, by using MP approach, we extract multidimensional features
of the data as same size matrices and arrays which are quite suitable for various machine learning
models, and we can facilitate the appropriate ML method to analyze these unique fingerprints and
detect the patterns developing in these multi-resolution view of the data.

4     E FFECTIVE M ULTIDIMENSIONAL P ERSISTENCE S UMMARIES
We now introduce our Effective MultiPersistence (EMP) framework which describes a way to expand
most single persistence vectorizations (Section 3.2) as multidimensional vectorizations by utilizing
MP approach. In particular, by using the existing single parameter persistence vectorizations, we
produce multidimensional vectorization by effectively using the one of the filtering direction as
“slicing direction” in the multipersistence module.

4.1   EMP F RAMEWORK

In simple terms, for d = 2, for a given two filtration functions f, g, the main idea is to use first
filtration function f to get a single parameter filtering of the data, i.e., G1 ⊆ . . . ⊆ Gm = G. Then,


                                                   4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


use the second function in each subgraph to obtain persistence diagram P D(Gi , g) for 1 ≤ i ≤ m.
In particular, we obtain m persistence diagrams {P D(Gi , g)}m i=1 . Then, by applying the chosen
SP vectorization ϕ to each PD, we obtain m different same length vector ϕ  ~ (P D(Gi , g)), say 1 × k
vector. Then, by combining all m 1D-vectors, we obtain EMP vectorization Mϕ such that Miϕ =
~ (P D(Gi , g)) where Miϕ represents the ith row of Mϕ which is a 2D-vector (matrix) of size m × k
ϕ
(See Figure 3 in Appendix). For d > 2, the construction is similar and given below.
Here, we give the details for sublevel filtration for two filtration functions. In Appendix D.2, we
explain how to modify the construction for weight filtrations or power filtrations. Let G = (V, E) be
a graph, and let f, g : V → R be two filtration functions with threshold sets {αi }m   i=1 and {βj }j=1
                                                                                                       n

respectively. Let Vi = {vr ∈ V | f (vr ) ≤ αi }. Let Gi be the induced subgraph of G by Vi . This gives
a filtering of the graph (nested subgraphs) as G1 ⊆ . . . ⊆ Gm = G. Recall that g : V → R is another
filtration function for G. Now, we fix 1 ≤ i0 ≤ m, and consider Gi0 . By restricting g on Gi0 , we get
persistence diagram P D(Gi0 , g) as follows. Let Vi0 j = {vr ∈ Vi0 | f (vr ) ≤ βj }, and let Gi0 j be the
induced subgraph of Gi0 by Vi0 j . This defines a finer filtering of the graph Gi0 as Gi0 1 ⊆ Gi0 2 . . . ⊆
Gi0 n = Gi0 . Corresponding clique complexes defines a filtration Gbi0 1 ⊆ Gbi0 2 . . . ⊆ Gbi0 n = Gbi0 .
This filtration gives the persistence diagram P D(Gi0 , g). Hence, for each 1 ≤ i ≤ m, we obtain a
persistence diagram P D(Gi , g).
The next step is to use the vectorization on these m persistence diagrams. Let ϕ be a single persistence
vectorization, e.g., Persistence Landscape, Silhouette, Entropy, Betti, Persistence Image. By applying
the chosen SP vectorization ϕ to each PD, we obtain a function ϕi = ϕ(P D(Gi , g)) where in most
cases it is a single variable function on the threshold domain [β1 , βn ], i.e., ϕi : [β1 , βn ] → R. For
the multivariable case (e.g., Persistence Image), we give explicit description in the examples section
below. Most such vectorizations being induced from a discrete set of points P D(G), they naturally
can be expressed as a 1D vector of length k. In the examples below, we explain this conversion in
detail. Then, let ϕ~ i be the corresponding 1 × k vector for the function ϕi . Now, we are ready to
define our EMP summary Mϕ which is a 2D-vector (a matrix)

                                      Miϕ = ϕ
                                            ~i     for   1 ≤ i ≤ m,

where Miϕ is the ith -row of Mϕ . Hence, Mϕ is a 2D-vector of size m × k. Each row Miϕ is the
vectorization of the persistence diagram P D(Gi , g) via the SP vectorization method ϕ. We use the
first filtration function f to get a finer look at the graph as G1 ⊆ . . . ⊆ Gm = G. Then, we use the
second filtration function g to obtain the persistence diagrams P D(Gi , g) of these finer pieces. In
a way, we look at G with a two dimensional resolution {Gij } and we keep track of the evolution of
topological features in the induced bifiltration {Gbij }. The main advantage of this technique is that
the outputs are fixed size matrices (or arrays) for each dataset which is highly suitable for various
machine learning models.

Order of the Filtration Functions. We need to note that for given two filtration functions f, g, the
order is quite important for our algorithm. In particular, let Mϕ (f, g) represent the above construction
where we first apply f to get filtering {Gi }m  i=1 , and then we obtain m different P D(Gi , g). Hence,
Mϕ (f, g) would be a m × k matrix. On the other hand, if we apply g first, we would get a filtering
{G j }nj=1 . Then, by using sublevel filtration with g for each G j , we would get n persistence diagrams
P D(G j , f ). Assuming the produced vectors ϕ    ~ j for [α1 , αm ] domain has length k 0 , then Mϕ (g, f )
                      0
would give us n × k size matrices. In particular, in the first one Mϕ (f, g) we use “horizontal” slicing
in the bipersistence module, while in the latter Mϕ (g, f ), we use “vertical” slicing.
For the question “Which function should be used first”, the answer is that the function with more
important domain information should be used as second function (g in the original construction), as
we get much finer information via persistence diagram P D(Gi , g) for the second function.

Higher Dimensional Multipersistence. Similarly, for d = 3, let f, g, h be filtration functions and
let {Gij } be the bifiltering of the data, e.g., sublevel filtration for two functions f, g. Then, again by
using the third function h, we find m · n persistence diagrams {P D(Gij , h)}m,n     i,j=1 . Similarly, for a
given SP vectorization ϕ, one obtains a 1D-vector ϕ       ~ (P D(Gij , g)) of size 1 × k for each i, j. This
produces a 3D-vector (array) Mϕ of size m × n × k where Mij           ϕ =ϕ  ~ (P D(Gij , g)). For d > 3, one
could follow a similar route.


                                                     5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 1: For the same network and the same filtration functions, EMP Betti Summary (left), EMP Silhouette
(center), and EMP Entropy Summary (right) can produce highly different topological summaries emphasizing
different information in persistence diagrams.

4.2    E XAMPLES OF EMP S UMMARIES

Here, we discuss explicit constructions of EMP summaries for most common SP vectorizations. As
noted above, the framework is very general and it can be applied to most SP vectorization methods. In
all the examples below, we use the following setup: Let G = (V, E) be a graph, and let f, g : V → R
be two filtration functions with threshold sets {αi }m               n
                                                      i=1 and {βj }j=1 respectively. As explained above,
we first apply sublevel filtering with f to get a sequence of nested subgraphs, G1 ⊆ . . . ⊆ Gm = G.
Then, for each Gi , we apply sublevel filtration with g to get persistence diagram P D(Gi , g). Therefore,
we will have m PDs. In the examples below, for a given SP vectorization ϕ, we explain how to obtain
a vector ϕ~ (P D(Gi , g)), and define the corresponding EMP Mϕ . Note that we skip the homology
dimension (subscript k for P Dk (G)) in the discussion. In particular, for each dimension k = 0, 1, . . . ,
we will have one EMP Mϕ (G) (a matrix or array) corresponding to {~           ϕ(P Dk (Gi , g))}. The most
common dimensions are k = 0 and k = 1 in applications.

EMP Landscapes.             Persistence Landscapes λ are one of the most common SP vectorizations
introduced by Bubenik (2015). For a given persistence diagram P D(G) = {(bi , di )}, λ produces a
function λ(G) by using generating functions Λi for each (bi , di ) ∈ P D(G), i.e., Λi : [bi , di ] → R is
a piecewise linear function obtained by two line segments starting from (bi , 0) and (di , 0) connecting
to the same point ( bi +d2 ,
                            i bi −di
                                 2 ). Then, the Persistence Landscape function λ(G) : [ 1 ,  q ] → R for
t ∈ [ 1 ,  q ] is defined as
                                          λ(G)(t) = maxi Λi (t),
where { k }q1 are thresholds for the filtration used.
Considering the piecewise linear structure of the function, λ(G) is completely determined by its
values at 2q − 1 points, i.e., bi ±d
                                  2
                                     i
                                       ∈ { 1 ,  1.5 ,  2 ,  2.5 , . . . ,  q } where  k.5 = ( k +  k+1 )/2. Hence,
a vector of size 1 × (2q − 1) whose entries the values of this function would suffice to capture all the
information needed, i.e. ~λ = [λ( 1 ) λ( 1.5 ) λ( 2 ) λ( 2.5 ) λ( 3 ) . . . λ( q )]
Considering we have threshold set {βj }nj=1 for the second filtration function g, ~λi = ~λ(P D(Gi , g))
will be a vector of size 1 × 2n − 1. Then, as Miλ = ~λi for each 1 ≤ i ≤ m, EMP Landscape Mλ (G)
would be a 2D-vector (matrix) of size m × (2n − 1).

EMP Silhouettes. Silhouette Chazal et al. (2014) is another very popular SP vectorizations method
in machine learning applications. The idea is similar to Persistence Landscapes, but this vectorization
uses the life span of the topological features more effectively. For P D(G) = {(bi , di )}N
                                                                                          i=1 , let Λi be
the generating function for (bi , di ) as defined in Landscapes above. Then, Silhouette function ψ is
defined as                                  PN
                                                  w Λ (t)
                                 ψ(G) = i=1    Pm i i , t ∈ [ 1 ,  q ],
                                                 i=1 wi
where the weight wi is mostly chosen as the life span di − bi , and { k }qk=1 represents the thresholds
for the filtration used. Again such a Silhouette function ψ(G) produces a 1D-vector ψ(G)   ~     of size
1 × (2q − 1) as in Persistence Landscapes case. Similar to the EMP Landscapes, with the threshold set


                                                        6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                ~i = ψ(P
{βj }nj=1 for the second filtration function g, ψ    ~ D(Gi , g) will be a vector of size 1 × 2n − 1.
             i      ~
Then, as Mψ = ψi for each 1 ≤ i ≤ m, EMP Landscape Mψ (G) would be again a 2D-vector
(matrix) of size m × (2n − 1) (Figure 1).

EMP Persistence Images. Next SP vectorization in our list is Persistence Images Adams et al.
(2017). Different than the most SP vectorizations, Persistence Images produces 2D-vectors. The idea
is to capture the location of the points in the persistence diagrams with a multivariable function by
using the 2D Gaussian functions centered at these points. For P D(G) = {(bi , di )}, let φi represent
a 2D-Gaussian centered P    at the point (bi , di ) ∈ R2 . Then, one defines a multivariable function,
Persistence Surface, µ e = i wi φi where wi is the weight, mostly a function of the life span di − bi .
To represent this multivariable function as a 2D-vector, one defines a k ×l grid (resolution size) on the
domain of µe, i.e., threshold domain of P D(G).RThen, one obtains the Persistence Image, a 2D-vector
         ~ = [µrs ] of size k × l where µrs = ∆rs µ
(matrix) µ                                             e(x, y) dxdy and ∆rs is the corresponding pixel
(rectangle) in the k × l grid.
This time, the resolution size k × l is independent of the number of thresholds used in the filtering,
the choice of k and l is completely up to the user. Recall that by applying the first function f , we
have the nested subgraphs {Gi }m    i=1 . For each Gi , the persistence diagram P D(Gi , g) obtained by
sublevel filtration with g induces a 2D vector µ  ~i = µ ~ (P D(Gi , g)) of size k × l. Then, define EMP
Persistence Image as Miµ = µ  ~ i , where Miµ is the ith -floor of the array Mµ . Hence, Mµ (G) would
be a 3D-vector (array) of size m × k × l where m is the number of thresholds for the first function f
and k × l is the chosen resolution size for the Persistence Image µ   ~.

EMP Surfaces and EMP Betti Summaries. Next, we give an important family of SP vectoriza-
tions, Persistence Curves Chung & Lawson (2019). This is an umbrella term for several different
SP vectorizations, i.e., Betti Curves, Life Entropy, Landscapes, et al. Our EMP framework naturally
adapts to all Persistence Curves to produce multidimensional vectorizations. As Persistence Curves
produce a single variable function in general, they all can be represented as 1D-vectors by choosing
a suitable mesh size depending on the number of thresholds used. Here, we describe one of the
most common Persistence Curves in detail, i.e., Betti Curves. It is straightforward to generalize the
construction to other Persistence Curves.
Betti curves are one of the simplest SP vectorization as it gives the count of topological feature
at a given threshold interval. In particular, βk (∆) is the total count of k-dimensional topological
feature in the simplicial complex ∆, i.e., βk (∆) = rank(Hk (∆)) (See Figure 2 in the Appendix). In
particular, βk (G) : [ 1 ,  q+1 ] → R is a step function defined as
                                        βk (G)(t) = rank(Hk (Gbi ))
for t ∈ [ i ,  i+1 ), where { i }q1 represents the thresholds for the filtration used. Considering this is a
step function where the function is constant for each interval [ i ,  i+1 ), it can be perfectly represented
                                ~
by a vector of size 1 × q as β(G)      = [β(1) β(2) β(3) . . . β(q)].
                                                                             ~i = β(P
Then, with the threshold set {βj }nj=1 for the second filtration function g, β    ~ D(Gi , g)) will be
                                     i
a vector of size 1 × n. Then, as Mβ = β   ~i for each 1 ≤ i ≤ m, EMP Betti Summary Mβ (G) would
be a 2D-vector (matrix) of size m × n (Figure 1). In particular, each entry Mβ = [mij ] is just the
Betti number of the corresponding clique complex in the bifiltration {Gbij }, i.e., mij = β(Gbij ). This
matrix Mβ is also called bigraded Betti numbers in the literature, and computationally much faster
than other vectorizations Lesnick & Wright (2022).


4.3   S TABILITY OF EMP S UMMARIES

We now show that when the source single parameter vectorization ϕ is stable, then so is its induced
EMP vectorization Mϕ . (We give the details of stability notion in persistence theory and examples of
stable SP vectorizations in Appendix C.1.)
Let G + = (V + , E + ) and G − = (V − , E − ) be two graphs. Let ϕ be a stable SP vectorization with the
stability equation
                         d(ϕ(G + ), ϕ(G − )) ≤ Cϕ · Wpϕ (P D(G + ), P D(G − ))                       (1)


                                                     7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


for some 1 ≤ pϕ ≤ ∞. Here, ϕ(G ± ) represent the corresponding vectorizations for P D(G ± ) and
Wp represents Wasserstein-p distance as defined in Appendix C.1.
Now, by taking d = 2 for EMP construction, let f, g : V ± → R be two filtration functions with
                                                                         ±
threshold sets {αi }m            n                                                    ±
                    i=1 and {βj }j=1 respectively. Then, by defining Vi = {vr ∈ V | f (vr ) ≤ αi },
                            ±
their induced subgraphs {Gi } give the filtration Gb1 ⊂ Gb2 ⊂ . . . Gbm as before. For each 1 ≤ i ≤ m,
we will have persistence diagram P D(Gi , g) as detailed in Section 4.1. We define the induced
matching distance between the multiple persistence diagrams as
                                                     m
                                                     X
                   Dp ({P D(Gi+ )}, {P D(Gi− )}) =         Wp (P D(Gi+ , g), P D(Gi− , g)).          (2)
                                                     i=1



Now, we define the distance between induced EMP Summaries as
                                                           m
                                                           X
                          D(Mϕ (G + ), Mϕ (G − )) =              d(ϕ(Gi+ ), ϕ(Gi− ))                 (3)
                                                           i=1

Theorem 4.1. Let ϕ be a stable SP vectorization. Then, the induced EMP Vectorization Mϕ is also
                                                    bϕ > 0 such that for any pair of graphs G + and G − ,
stable, i.e., with the notation above, there exists C
we have the following inequality.

                  D(Mϕ (G + ), Mϕ (G − )) ≤ C
                                            bϕ · Dp ({P D(G + )}, {P D(G − )})
                                                   ϕ



The proof is given in Appendix C.2.

5     E XPERIMENTS
5.1   DATASETS

To verify our EMP summaries on graph representation learning, we evaluate EMP summaries with
random forest on nine widely used benchmark datasets, i.e., (i) three molecule graphs (Sutherland
et al., 2003): BZR_MD, COX2_MD, and DHFR_MD; (ii) two biological graphs (Kriege & Mutzel,
2012; Borgwardt et al., 2005): MUTAG and PROTEINS; and (iii) four social graphs: IMDB-
Binary (IMDB-B), IMDB-Multi (IMDB-M), REDDIT-Binary (REDDIT-B), and REDDIT-Multi-5K
(REDDIT-M-5K). We also calculate (i) average node-level centrality measures: average degree
centrality, average betweenness centrality, average closeness centrality, average clustering centrality,
average eigenvector centrality, and average Katz centrality; and (ii) average edge-level centrality
measures: average betweenness centrality, average Ricci curvature, and average Ricci positive
curvature, and feed these node-/edge-level measures into random forest model. Furthermore, it is
worth noting that COX2_MD and DHFR_MD all have three node features, whereas PROTEINS has
one node feature. We use all these available features as input to a random forest model. Further
details on the datasets and experimental setup are provided in Appendix E.1.

5.2   E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP

We vectorize our proposed EMP representations and use random forest (RF) for the graph classifica-
tion task. For RF, we set the number of trees in the forest as 1000, the minimum number of samples
as 2, and the function to measure the split quality as Gini impurity. We apply filtrations based on the
available information of each dataset, either using their graph structure or their provided node/edge
features. Our pool of filtration functions include, but is not limited to: type of atom, closeness,
edge-betweenness, weighted degree, katz centrality, ricci curvature, and distance between atoms. In
this experiments, first we apply a sublevel filtration on nodes, and secondly a power filtration over
edges. To test our EMP framework we use three vectorizations: Betti curves, silhouette functions,
and entropy summary functions, thus producing EMP matrix representations which can be embedded
in classic and modern machine learning algorithms.
We compare EMP summary with two types of state-of-the-art baselines, covering six graph kernels,
one graph neural networks, and one topological method. Graph kernels: (i) comprised of the


                                                     8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Table 1: Classification accuracy (in % ± standard deviation) of EMP summary on nine benchmark datasets.
The best results are in bold font and the second best results are marked underlined.


 Model      BZR_MD COX2_MD DHFR_MD              MUTAG       PROTEINS      IMDB-B    IMDB-M REDDIT-B REDDIT-5K
 CSM    77.63±1.29    OOT            OOT       87.29±1.25      OOT          OOT        OOT        OOT        OOT
 HGK-SP 60.08±0.88 59.92±0.66     67.95±0.00   80.90±0.48   74.53±0.35   73.34±0.47 51.58±0.42    OOM        OOM
 HGK-WL 52.64±1.20 57.15±1.20     66.08±1.02   75.51±1.34   74.53±0.35   72.75±1.02 50.73±0.63    OOM        OOM
 MLG    51.46±0.61 51.15±0.00     67.95±0.00   78.53±2.25   75.55±0.71   52.56±0.42 34.27±0.33    OOM        OOM
 WL     67.45±1.40 60.07±2.22     62.56±1.51   85.75±1.96   73.06±0.47   71.15±0.47 50.25±0.72 77.95±0.60 51.63±0.37
 WL-OA 68.19±1.09 62.37±2.11      64.10±1.70   86.10±1.95   73.50±0.87   74.01±0.66 49.95±0.46 87.60±0.33    OOM
 GNNs   69.87±1.29 66.05±3.16     73.11±1.59   80.42±2.07   70.31±1.93   66.53±2.33 48.93±0.88 89.90±1.90 56.10±1.60
 FC-V   75.61±1.13 73.41±0.79     76.78±0.69   87.31±0.66   74.54±0.48   73.84±0.36 46.80±0.37 89.41±0.24 52.36±0.37
 EMP        77.77±0.95 70.48±1.38 80.50±1.07 88.79±0.63 72.78±0.54 75.34±0.29 48.75±0.22 91.03±0.22 54.41±0.32



subgraph matching kernel (CSM) Kriege & Mutzel (2012), (ii) Shortest Path Hash Graph Kernel
(HGK-SP) Morris et al. (2016), (iii) Weisfeiler–Lehman Hash Graph Kernel (HGK-WL) Morris
et al. (2016), (iv) Multiscale Laplacian Graph Kernel (MLG) Kondor & Pan (2016), (v) Weisfeiler–
Lehman (WL) Shervashidze et al. (2011), and (vi) Weisfeiler-Lehman Optimal Assignment (WL-
OA) Kriege et al. (2016); graph neural networks: graph neural networks (GNN) Kipf & Welling
(2017); topological method: filtration curves (FC-V) O’Bray et al. (2021). For all methods, we report
the average accuracy of 10 runs of 10-fold CV along with standard deviation, and running time for
computation of each EMP representation. The source code is freely available1 .

5.3    E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS

Table 1 shows the results of different methods on nine graph datasets. Out-of-time (OOT) results
indicate that a method could not complete the classification task within 12 hours, and OOM means
“out-of-memory” (from an allocation of 128 GB RAM). We observe the following phenomena:

         • Compared with all baselines, out of 9 benchmark datasets, the proposed EMP summaries
           achieve the best performance on 5 datasets (BZR_MD, DFHR_MD, MUTAG, IMDB-B,
           REDDIT-B), and second best in 2 datasets (COX2_MD, REDDIT-5K).
         • EMP summary consistently outperforms Filtration Curves on all datasets except COX2_MD
           and PROTEINS, indicating that multiparameter structure of the EMP summaries can better
           capture the complex structural properties and local topological information in heterogeneous
           graphs.
         • Moreover, EMP Summaries consistently delivers the competitive results with GNNs in all
           benchmark datasets. This indicates that EMP summary introduces powerful topological and
           geometric schemes for node features and graph representation learning.

To further investigate the effectiveness of the EMP vectorization function in graph representation
learning, we have conducted ablation studies of various EMP summaries on the benchmark datasets,
see Appendix G. Furthermore, Appendix F includes an analysis of computational complexity.

6     D ISCUSSION

We have proposed a new computationally efficient summary for multidimensional persistence for
various forms of data, and include focus-cases on graph machine learning. The new Effective
Multidimensional Persistence (EMP) framework provides a practical way to employ the promising
multidimensional persistence idea in real-life applications. As such, EMP summaries are highly
compatible with machine learning models and can boost the performances of popular single persistent
summaries in a unified manner. In a graph classification task, EMP summaries outperform state-of-the-
art methods in several benchmark datasets. Furthermore, we have shown that EMP maintain important
stability guarantees. Therefore, EMP makes an important step toward bringing the theoretical concepts
of multipersistence to the machine learning community and advances the use of persistent homology
  1
    https://www.dropbox.com/sh/o9ter2umpus04fi/AABj40YYB0JTFVeENt2qfAKXa?
dl=0


                                                            9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


in various settings. In future work, we aim to enhance the EMP framework by using more than one
slicing direction in the multipersistence grid and, thus, effectively combining the outputs of multiple
slicing directions with deep learning approaches.


                                                  10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


R EFERENCES
Sami Abu-El-Haija, Bryan Perozzi, Amol Kapoor, Nazanin Alipourfard, Kristina Lerman, Hrayr
  Harutyunyan, Greg Ver Steeg, and Aram Galstyan. Mixhop: Higher-order graph convolutional ar-
  chitectures via sparsified neighborhood mixing. In International Conference on Machine Learning,
  2019.
Sami Abu-El-Haija, Amol Kapoor, Bryan Perozzi, and Joonseok Lee. N-GCN: Multi-scale graph
  convolution for semi-supervised node classification. In Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, pp.
  841–851, 2020.
Henry Adams, Tegan Emerson, Michael Kirby, Rachel Neville, Chris Peterson, Patrick Shipman,
  Sofya Chepushtanova, Eric Hanson, Francis Motta, and Lori Ziegelmeier. Persistence images: A
  stable vector representation of persistent homology. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 18,
  2017.
Mehmet E Aktas, Esra Akbas, and Ahmed El Fatmaoui. Persistence homology of networks: methods
 and applications. Applied Network Science, 4(1):1–28, 2019.
Nieves Atienza, Rocío González-Díaz, and Manuel Soriano-Trigueros. On the stability of persistent
  entropy and new summary functions for topological data analysis. Pattern Recognition, 107:
  107509, 2020.
Cristian Bodnar, Francesco Di Giovanni, Benjamin Paul Chamberlain, Pietro Liò, and Michael M
  Bronstein. Neural sheaf diffusion: A topological perspective on heterophily and oversmoothing in
  gnns. arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.04579, 2022.
Karsten M Borgwardt, Cheng Soon Ong, Stefan Schönauer, SVN Vishwanathan, Alex J Smola, and
  Hans-Peter Kriegel. Protein function prediction via graph kernels. Bioinformatics, 21(suppl_1):
  i47–i56, 2005.
Magnus Bakke Botnan and Michael Lesnick. An introduction to multiparameter persistence. arXiv
 preprint arXiv:2203.14289, 2022.
Magnus Bakke Botnan, Steffen Oppermann, and Steve Oudot. Signed barcodes for multi-parameter
 persistence via rank decompositions and rank-exact resolutions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.06800,
 2021.
Joan Bruna, Wojciech Zaremba, Arthur Szlam, and Yann LeCun. Spectral networks and locally
  connected networks on graphs. In ICLR, 2014.
P. Bubenik. Statistical topological data analysis using persistence landscapes. JMLR, 16(1):77–102,
   2015.
Mathieu Carrière and Andrew Blumberg. Multiparameter persistence image for topological machine
 learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33, 2020.
Mathieu Carrière, Frédéric Chazal, Yuichi Ike, Théo Lacombe, Martin Royer, and Yuhei Umeda.
 Perslay: A neural network layer for persistence diagrams and new graph topological signatures. In
 AISTATS, pp. 2786–2796, 2020.
Frédéric Chazal and Bertrand Michel. An introduction to topological data analysis: fundamental and
  practical aspects for data scientists. Frontiers in Artificial Intelligence, 4, 2021.
Frédéric Chazal, Brittany Terese Fasy, Fabrizio Lecci, Alessandro Rinaldo, and Larry Wasserman.
  Stochastic convergence of persistence landscapes and silhouettes. In Proceedings of the thirtieth
  annual symposium on Computational geometry, pp. 474–483, 2014.
Y. Chen, Y.R. Gel, and K. Avrachenkov. LFGCN: Levitating over graphs with levy flights. In IEEE
   ICDM, 2020.
Yu-Min Chung and Austin Lawson. Persistence curves: A canonical framework for summarizing
  persistence diagrams. arXiv preprint arXiv:1904.07768, 2019.


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


M. Defferrard, X. Bresson, and P. Vandergheynst. Convolutional neural networks on graphs with fast
  localized spectral filtering. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pp. 3844–3852,
  2016.
Tamal Krishna Dey and Yusu Wang. Computational Topology for Data Analysis. Cambridge
  University Press, 2022.
Herbert Edelsbrunner and John Harer. Computational topology: an introduction. American Mathe-
  matical Soc., 2010.
Herbert Edelsbrunner and Salman Parsa. On the computational complexity of Betti numbers:
  reductions from matrix rank. In Proceedings of the twenty-fifth annual ACM-SIAM symposium on
  discrete algorithms, pp. 152–160. SIAM, 2014.
David Eisenbud. Commutative algebra: with a view toward algebraic geometry, volume 150. Springer
  Science & Business Media, 2013.
Barbara Giunti. Tda applications library, 2022.       https://www.zotero.org/groups/
  2425412/tda-applications/library.
Felix Hensel, Michael Moor, and Bastian Rieck. A survey of topological machine learning methods.
  Frontiers in Artificial Intelligence, 4:52, 2021.
Christoph Hofer, Florian Graf, Bastian Rieck, Marc Niethammer, and Roland Kwitt. Graph filtration
  learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 4314–4323. PMLR, 2020.
Christoph D Hofer, Roland Kwitt, and Marc Niethammer. Learning representations of persistence
  barcodes. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 20(126):1–45, 2019.
Max Horn, Edward De Brouwer, Michael Moor, Yves Moreau, Bastian Rieck, and Karsten Borgwardt.
 Topological graph neural networks. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
 2021.
Megan Johnson and Jae-Hun Jung. Instability of the Betti sequence for persistent homology and a
 stabilized version of the Betti sequence. arXiv preprint arXiv:2109.09218, 2021.
Thomas N. Kipf and Max Welling. Semi-supervised classification with graph convolutional networks.
  ICLR, 2017.
Johannes Klicpera, Aleksandar Bojchevski, and Stephan Günnemann. Predict then propagate: Graph
  neural networks meet personalized pagerank. In ICLR, 2019.
Risi Kondor and Horace Pan. The multiscale laplacian graph kernel. Advances in neural information
  processing systems, 29, 2016.
Nils Kriege and Petra Mutzel. Subgraph matching kernels for attributed graphs. In Proceedings of
  the 29th International Coference on International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 291–298,
  2012.
Nils M Kriege, Pierre-Louis Giscard, and Richard Wilson. On valid optimal assignment kernels and
  applications to graph classification. Advances in neural information processing systems, 29, 2016.
Nils M Kriege, Fredrik D Johansson, and Christopher Morris. A survey on graph kernels. Applied
  Network Science, 5(1):1–42, 2020.
Panagiotis Kyriakis, Iordanis Fostiropoulos, and Paul Bogdan. Learning hyperbolic representations
  of topological features. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2021.
P. Langley. Crafting papers on machine learning. In Pat Langley (ed.), International Conference on
   Machine Learning, pp. 1207–1216, Stanford, CA, 2000. Morgan Kaufmann.
Tam Le and Makoto Yamada. Persistence fisher kernel: A Riemannian manifold kernel for persistence
  diagrams. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pp. 10007–10018, 2018.


                                                12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Michael Lesnick. The theory of the interleaving distance on multidimensional persistence modules.
 Foundations of Computational Mathematics, 15(3):613–650, 2015.
Michael Lesnick and Matthew Wright. Interactive visualization of 2-D persistence modules. arXiv
 preprint arXiv:1512.00180, 2015.
Michael Lesnick and Matthew Wright. Computing minimal presentations and bigraded Betti numbers
 of 2-parameter persistent homology. SIAM Journal on Applied Algebra and Geometry, 6(2):
 267–298, 2022.
Meng Liu, Hongyang Gao, and Shuiwang Ji. Towards deeper graph neural networks. In Proceedings
 of the 26th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery & Data Mining,
 KDD ’20, pp. 338–348, New York, NY, USA, 2020. Association for Computing Machinery.
 ISBN 9781450379984. doi: 10.1145/3394486.3403076. URL https://doi.org/10.1145/
 3394486.3403076.
Federico Monti, Karl Otness, and Michael M Bronstein. MotifNet: a motif-based graph convolutional
  network for directed graphs. In IEEE DSW, pp. 225–228, 2018.
Christopher Morris, Nils M Kriege, Kristian Kersting, and Petra Mutzel. Faster kernels for graphs
  with continuous attributes via hashing. In 2016 IEEE 16th International Conference on Data
  Mining (ICDM), pp. 1095–1100. IEEE, 2016.
Leslie O’Bray, Bastian Rieck, and Karsten Borgwardt. Filtration curves for graph representation. In
  Proceedings of the 27th ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery & Data Mining, pp.
  1267–1275, 2021.
Nina Otter, Mason A Porter, Ulrike Tillmann, Peter Grindrod, and Heather A Harrington. A roadmap
  for the computation of persistent homology. EPJ Data Science, 6:1–38, 2017.
Meng Qu, Yoshua Bengio, and Jian Tang.              GMNN: Graph Markov Neural Networks.
 arXiv:1905.06214, 2019.
Bastian Rieck, Christian Bock, and Karsten Borgwardt. A persistent weisfeiler-lehman procedure for
  graph classification. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 5448–5458, 2019.
Nino Shervashidze, Pascal Schweitzer, Erik Jan Van Leeuwen, Kurt Mehlhorn, and Karsten M
  Borgwardt. Weisfeiler-lehman graph kernels. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 12(9), 2011.
Jeffrey J Sutherland, Lee A O’brien, and Donald F Weaver. Spline-fitting with a genetic algorithm:
  A method for developing classification structure-activity relationships. Journal of chemical
   information and computer sciences, 43(6):1906–1915, 2003.
Matteo Togninalli, Elisabetta Ghisu, Felipe Llinares-López, Bastian Rieck, and Karsten Borgwardt.
 Wasserstein weisfeiler-lehman graph kernels. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
 Systems, pp. 6439–6449, 2019.
Petar Veličković, Guillem Cucurull, Arantxa Casanova, Adriana Romero, Pietro Lio, and Yoshua
  Bengio. Graph attention networks. ICLR, 2018.
Oliver Vipond. Multiparameter persistence landscapes. J. Mach. Learn. Res., 21:61–1, 2020.
Larry Wasserman. Topological data analysis. Annual Review of Statistics and Its Application, 5:
  501–532, 2018.
Yiding Yang, Xinchao Wang, Mingli Song, Junsong Yuan, and Dacheng Tao. Spagan: shortest
  path graph attention network. In International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, pp.
  4099–4105, 2019.
Qi Zhao and Yusu Wang. Learning metrics for persistence-based summaries and applications for
  graph classification. In NeurIPS, pp. 9855–9866, 2019.


                                               13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                           Appendix
A    A DDITIONAL L ITERATURE ON G RAPH R EPRESENTATION L EARNING

After the success of convolutional neural networks (CNN) on image-based tasks, graph neural
networks (GNNs) have emerged as a powerful tool for graph classification and representation learning.
Based on the spectral graph theory, Bruna et al. (2014) introduced a graph-based convolution in
Fourier domain. However, complexity of this model is very high since all Laplacian eigenvectors are
needed. To tackle this problem, ChebNet Defferrard et al. (2016) integrated spectral graph convolution
with Chebyshev polynomials. Then, Graph Convolutional Networks (GCNs) of Kipf & Welling
(2017) simplified the graph convolution with a localized first-order approximation. More recently,
there have been proposed various approaches based on accumulation of the graph information from
a wider neighborhood, using diffusion aggregation and random walks. Such higher-order methods
include approximate personalized propagation of neural predictions (APPNP) Klicpera et al. (2019),
higher-order graph convolutional architectures (MixHop) Abu-El-Haija et al. (2019), multi-scale
graph convolution (N-GCN) Abu-El-Haija et al. (2020), and Lévy Flights Graph Convolutional
Networks (LFGCN) Chen et al. (2020). In addition to random walks, other recent approaches
include GNNs on directed graphs (MotifNet) Monti et al. (2018), graph convolutional networks
with attention mechanism (GAT, SPAGAN) Veličković et al. (2018); Yang et al. (2019), and graph
Markov neural network (GMNN) Qu et al. (2019). Most recently, Liu et al. Liu et al. (2020) consider
utilizing information on the node neighbors’ features in GNN, proposing Deep Adaptive Graph
Neural Network (DAGNN). However, DAGNN, and other state-of-the-art approaches, does not
account for the important information on the shapes of the node neighborhoods.

B    F URTHER BACKGROUND ON S INGLE P ERSISTENT H OMOLOGY

Here, we give further details on single parameter persistent homology. To sum up, PH machinery is a
3-step process. The first step is the filtration step, where one can integrate the domain information into
the process. The second step is the persistence diagrams, where the machinery records the evolution
of topological features (birth/death times) in the filtration sequence of the simplicial complexes. The
final step is the vectorization (fingerprinting), where one can convert these records to a function or
vector to be used in suitable ML models.

i. Constructing Filtrations: As PH is the machinery to keep track of the evolution of topological
features in a sequence, the most important step is inducing this nested sequence of simplicial
complexes, ∆0 ⊂ ∆1 ⊂ · · · ⊂ ∆m . This is the key step where one can inject valuable domain
information into the PH process by using important domain functions. Two most common methods
are Sublevel/superlevel filtration and Vietoris-Rips (VR) filtration. We already described sublevel
filtration in Section 3.1.
VR filtration is another common method especially used for point clouds, where coarse geometry
of the data set X play key role (Chazal & Michel, 2021). Let X = {x1 , x2 , ..., xN } be the given
data set. For a given threshold  i , one forms a Vietoris-Rips complex ∆i by adding a k-simplex
to X for any subset {xn0 , xn1 , ..., xnk }, where the pairwise distances are all d(xnr , xns ) <  i . In
particular, if a pair of points xn0 , xn1 has distance <  i , then in the induced simplicial complex
∆i , we add an edge en0 n1 between the corresponding vertices xn0 and xn1 . If three such points
xn0 , xn1 , xn2 have pairwise distances <  i , then we fill the triangle en0 n1 ∪ en1 n2 ∪ en2 n0 with a
2-simplex, and so on. For each  i , one obtains a simplicial complex ∆i by using this procedure.
Changing threshold values  1 <  2 < . . . <  m results in a hierarchical nested sequence of simplicial
complexes ∆1 ⊂ ∆2 ⊂ · · · ⊂ ∆m that is termed the Vietoris-Rips filtration of the data set X . Note
that VR filtration can also be considered as a sublevel filtration for the distance function to X from
the ambient space Rd , i.e., f : Rd → R with f (y) = d(y, X ) where X ⊂ Rd .

ii. Persistence Diagrams: The second step in PH process is to obtain persistence diagrams (PD)
for the filtration ∆0 ⊂ ∆1 ⊂ · · · ⊂ ∆m . As explained in Section 3.1, PDs are collection of
2-tuples, marking the birth and death times of the topological features appearing in the filtration, i.e.
PDk (X ) = {(bσ , dσ ) | σ ∈ Hk (∆i ) for bσ ≤ i < dσ }. Current algorithmic advancements make
possible to efficiently compute persistence diagrams via modern software libraries (Otter et al., 2017).


                                                   14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


iii. Vectorizations: While PH extracts hidden shape patterns from data as persistence diagrams (PD),
PDs, a collection of points in R2 by itself, are not very practical for statistical and ML purposes.
Instead, the common techniques are faithfully representing PDs as kernels (Kriege et al., 2020) or
vectorizations (Hensel et al., 2021). One can consider this step as converting PDs into a useful format
to be used in the ML process as fingerprints of the dataset. This provides a practical way to use
the outputs of PH in real-life applications. Single Persistence Vectorizations transform obtained PH
information (PDs) into a function or a feature vector form which is much more suitable for ML tools
than PDs. Common single persistence (SP) vectorization methods are Persistence Images (Adams
et al., 2017), Persistence Landscapes (Bubenik, 2015), Silhouettes (Chazal et al., 2014), Betti Curves
and various Persistence Curves (Chung & Lawson, 2019). These vectorizations define a single
variable or multivariable function out of PDs, which can be used as fixed-size 1D or 2D vectors
in applications, i.e., 1 × n vectors or m × n vectors. For example, a Betti curve for a PD with n
thresholds can also be expressed as 1 × n size vectors. Similarly, Persistence Images is an example of
2D vectors with the chosen resolution (grid) size. See the examples given in Section 4.2 for further
details.



C     S TABILITY

C.1   S TABILITY OF S INGLE P ERSISTENCE S UMMARIES

For a given PD vectorization, the stability is one of the most important properties for statistical
purposes. Intuitively, stability question is whether a small perturbation in PD cause a big change
in the vectorization or not. To make this question meaningful, one needs to define what "small"
and “big" means in this context. Therefore, we need to define distance notion, i.e., metric in the
space of persistence diagrams. The most common such metric is called Wasserstein distance (or
matching distance) which is defined as follows. Let P D(X + ) and P D(X − ) be persistence diagrams
two datasets X + and X − (We omit the dimensions in PDs). Let P D(X + ) = {qj+ } ∪ ∆+ and
P D(X − ) = {ql− } ∪ ∆− where ∆± represents the diagonal (representing trivial cycles) with infinite
multiplicity. Here, qj+ = (b+        +            +
                                j , dj ) ∈ P D(X ) represents the birth and death times of a hole σj
in X + . Let φ : P D(X + ) → P D(X − ) represent a bijection (matching). With the existence of the
diagonal ∆± in both sides, we make sure the existence of these bijections even if the cardinalities
|{qj+ }| and |{ql− }| are different. Then, the pth Wasserstein distance Wp defined as

                                          X                 p1
                          +          −        +      + p
              Wp (P D(X ), P D(X )) = min   kqj − φ(qj )k∞ ,                   p ∈ Z+ .
                                              φ
                                                    j


Then, a vectorization (function) ϕ(P D(X )) is called stable if d(ϕ+ , ϕ− ) ≤ C ·
Wp (P D(X + ), P D(X − )) where ϕ± = ϕ(P D(X ± )) and d(., .) is a suitable metric on the space
of vectorizations used. Here, the constant C > 0 is independent of X ± . This stability inequality
interprets as the changes in the vectorizations are bounded by the changes in PDs. Two nearby
persistence diagrams are represented by nearby vectorizations. If a given vectorization ϕ satisfies
such a stability inequality for some d and Wp , we call ϕ a stable vectorization Atienza et al. (2020).
Persistence Landscapes Bubenik (2015), Persistence Images Adams et al. (2017), Stabilized Betti
Curves Johnson & Jung (2021) and several Persistence curves Chung & Lawson (2019) are among
well-known examples of stable vectorizations.


C.2   P ROOF OF T HEOREM 4.1: S TABILITY OF EMP S UMMARIES

Proof. As ϕ is a stable SP vectorization, for any 1 ≤ i ≤ m, we have d(ϕ(Gi+ ), ϕ(Gi− )) ≤
Cϕ · Wpϕ (P D(Gi+ ), P D(Gi− )) for some Cϕ > 0 by Equation (1), where Wpϕ is Wasserstein-p


                                                  15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


distance. Notice that the constant Cϕ > 0 is independent of i. Hence,
                                                        m
                                                        X
                     +
           D(Mϕ (G ), Mϕ (G ))  −
                                        =                     d(ϕ(Gi+ ), ϕ(Gi− ))
                                                        i=1
                                                        m
                                                        X
                                        ≤                     Cϕ · Wpϕ (P D(Gi+ ), P D(Gi− ))
                                                        i=1
                                                          m
                                                          X
                                        =            Cϕ         Wpϕ (P D(Gi+ ), P D(Gi− ))
                                                          i=1
                                        =            Cϕ · Dpϕ ({P D(Gi+ )}, {P D(Gi− )})
where the first and last equalities are due to Equation (2) and Equation (3), while the inequality
follows from Equation (1) which is true for any i. This concludes the proof of the theorem.


D     EMP F RAMEWORK

D.1    EMP FOR OTHER T YPES OF DATA

So far, to keep the exposition simple, we described our construction in the graph setup. However,
our framework is suitable for various types of data. Let X be a an image data or a point cloud. Let
f : X → R and g : X → R be two filtration functions on X . For example, it can be grayscale
function for image data, or density function on point cloud data.
Let f : X → R be the filtration function with threshold set {αi }m        1 . Let Xi = f
                                                                                            −1
                                                                                               ((−∞, αi ]).
Then, we get a filtering of X as nested subspaces X1 ⊂ X2 ⊂ · · · ⊂ Xm = X . By using the
second filtration function, we obtain finer filtrations for each subspace Xi where 1 ≤ i ≤ m. In
particular, fix 1 ≤ i0 ≤ m and let {βj }nj=1 be the threshold set for the second filtration function
g. Then, by restricting g to Xi0 , we get a filtration function on Xi0 , i.e., g : Xi0 → R which
produces filtering Xi0 1 ⊂ Xi0 2 ⊂ · · · ⊂ Xi0 n = Xi0 . By inducing a simplicial complex Xbi0 j
for each Xi0 j , we get a filtration Xbi0 1 ⊂ Xbi0 2 ⊂ · · · ⊂ Xbi0 n = Xbi0 . This filtration results in a
persistence diagram (PD) P D(Xi0 , g). For each 1 ≤ i ≤ m, we obtain P D(Xi , g). Note that after
getting {Xi }m  i=1 via f , instead of using second filtration function g, one can apply power filtration
or Vietoris-Rips construction based on distance for each Xi0 in order to get a different filtration
Xbi0 1 ⊂ Xbi0 2 ⊂ · · · ⊂ Xbi0 n = Xbi0 .
By using m PDs, we follow a similar route to define our EMP summaries. Let ϕ be a single
persistence vectorization. By applying the chosen SP vectorization ϕ to each PD, we obtain a
function ϕi = ϕ(P D(Xi , g)) on the threshold domain [β1 , βn ], which can be expresses as a 1D (or
2D) vector in most cases (Section 4.2). Let ϕ ~ i be the corresponding 1 × k vector for the function ϕi .
Define the corresponding EMP Mϕ as Miϕ = ϕ        ~ i where Miϕ is the ith row of Mϕ . In particular, Mϕ
is a 2D-vector (a matrix) of size m × k where m is the number of thresholds for the first filtration
function f , and k is the length of the vector ϕ
                                               ~.

D.2    EMP WITH OTHER F ILTRATIONS

Weight filtration For a given weighted graph G = (V, E, W), it is common to use edge weights
W = {ωrs ∈ R+ |  rs ∈ E} to describe filtration. By choosing the threshold set similarly
I = {αi }m1 with α1 = min{ωrs ∈ W} < α2 < . . . < αm = max{ωrs ∈ W}. For αi ∈ I, let
Ei = {ers ∈ V | ωrs ≤ αi }. Let G i be a subgraph of G induced by Vi . This induces a nested
sequence of subgraphs G1 ⊂ G2 ⊂ · · · ⊂ Gm = G (See top row in Figure 2).
In the case of weighted graphs, one can apply the EMP framework just by replacing the first filtering
(via f ) with weight filtering. In particular, let g : V → R be a filtration function with threshold set
{βj }nj=1 . Then, one can first apply weight filtering to get G1 ⊂ · · · ⊂ Gm = G as above, and then
apply f to each Gi to get a bilfiltration {Gij } (m × n resolution). One gets m PDs as P D(Gi , g) and
induce the corresponding Mϕ . Alternatively, one can change the order by applying g first, and get
a different filtering G1 ⊂ G2 ⊂ · · · ⊂ Gn = G induced by g. Then, apply to edge weight filtration


                                                   16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                                                                                                                                                          Interview Questions
                                                                                    Interview QuestionsIgnacio Segovia-Dominguez
                                              Introduction toInterview
                                                               LATEXQuestions
                                                             Interview   QuestionsIgnacio Segovia-Dominguez
                                                                                    Interview   Questions
                                                                                                                                 Interview Questions
                                                                                                                                                                                                  The University of Texas at Dallas / NASA Jet Propulsion Lab, Caltech
                                                            Ignacio Segovia-Dominguez
                                                                    I                    2
                                                                                                           InterviewAQuestionsIgnacio Segovia-Dominguez                                I / NASA
                                                                1
                                                            Ignacio Segovia-Dominguez Introduction
                                                                                   Ignacio Segovia-Dominguez to L
                                                                                         G University
                                                                                       The
                                                                                                        F 3
                                                                                                                       T   X
                                                                                                                           1 I
                                                                                                  2 of Texas at Dallas / NASA
                                                                                                          Ignacio Segovia-Dominguez
                                                                                                                                            2 University of Texas at 1
                                                                                                                                          The
                                                                                                                         E Interview Questions
                                                                                                                                            G Jet Propulsion
                                                                                                                                                       2
                                                                                                                                                            F 3
                                                                                                                                                                   Filtration:
                                                                                                                                                                Lab,
                                                                                                                                                                                 Dallas
                                                                                                                                                                             Caltech
                                                                                                                                                                                                    2 Jet Propulsion
                                                                                                                                                                                                    G
                                                                                                                                                                                                            4
                                                                                                                                                                                                               2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    F 3Lab, Caltech
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1 I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             5 The
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     2      4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     G University   F 3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                2 of Texas at Dallas / NASA Jet Propulsion Lab, Caltech
                                                              Author’s Name
                                                              2 A
                                                           Filtration:
                                                                                2      The     4
                                                                                               D
                                                                                                               Filtration: / NASA
                                                                                       3 University of Texas2atADallas
                                                                                                               B0 = 1              2
                                                                                                                                          The
                                                                                                                                          3 3
                                                                                                                                              Jet Propulsion
                                                                                                                                              University
                                                                                                                                                   D
                                                                                                                                                    4           Lab,
                                                                                                                                                          of Texas  B20atCaltech
                                                                                                                                                                    B0 = 2
                                                                                                                                                                              A=Dallas
                                                                                                                                                                                     1
                                                                                                                                                                                           2 / NASA
                                                                                                                                                                                                  3 3
                                                                                                                                                                                                  The      D
                                                                                                                                                                                                            4
                                                                                                                                                                                                      Jet Propulsion
                                                                                                                                                                                                      University  of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Lab,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Texas
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             2 Caltech
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Filtration:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    at
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Dallas
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              /
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   3 3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                NASA   Jet
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            D    Ignacio
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Propulsion
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Segovia-Dominguez
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Lab, Caltech


                                                degree
                                                           Filtration:
                                                                                      B                  2
                                                                                                              Filtration:
                                                                                                               B0 = 2                     B                  2                                    B                  2                                            B                  2
                                                            B0 = 1                                                                                                  B0 = 3                                                  B0 = 1                                The University of Texas at Dallas / NASA Jet Propulsion Lab, Caltech
                                                            B0 = 1          22
                                                                    June 4, 2021                               B0 = 13 2                                            Filtration:
                                                                                                                                                                    B      0    = Author’s Name
                                                                                                                                                                                     4   2             4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            B      0   =            2   2        5      4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              5
                                                            B0 = 2          3                                  B0 = 24                                              B10 = 01                                                Filtration:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            B      0 =3
                                                                                                       E                                                   E                                                       E                                                               E
                                                                                                    Interview Questions Interview Questions Interview Questions Interview Questions
                                                            B0 = 3          4                                  B01 = 30                                             B10 = 12                                                B0 = 41
                                                                                   4 C       2       3                                4 C        2       3                                    4 C        2       3                                            4 C         2      3
                                                 4
                                                            B01 = 4         0                                  B01 = 41
                                                                                                                                   June 4,Interview
                                                                                                                                             2021 Questions         B10 = 23                                                B10 = 02
                                                                                                     Ignacio              Segovia-Dominguez              IgnacioInterview Questions
                                                                                                                                                                                Segovia-Dominguez                Ignacio               Segovia-Dominguez
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Interview
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Interview Ques
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Ignacio Segovia-Dominguez
                                                            B1 = 0          1                                  B1 = 02                                              B0 = 4                                                  B10 = 13

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Ques
                                                                        1 I
                                                                                                            3 B1 = 1 I                                              B1 =1 0I filtration:
                                                                                         2                                 1                2
                                                                                                                                                            F 3 Second
                                                                                                                                                                                                    2                                   12          4I               2
                                                                                         G University ofF TexasSecond
                                                            B1 = 1                                                                                                                                          4       F 3 B10 =Segovia-Dominguez                              4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Ignacio                                                            F 3
                                                                                                                                                                             Interview           Ques
                                                                            2
                                                                                       The                     B1at=Dallas    2 filtration:
                                                                                                                                      / NASAG University
                                                                                                                                          The Jet Propulsion    Lab,
                                                                                                                                                          of Texas   V11atCaltech
                                                                                                                                                                                =Dallas       / NASAG University
                                                                                                                                                                                                  The Jet Propulsion
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  of Texas
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Lab,B1atCaltech=Dallas               5/ NASA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  TheG University of Texas
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Jet Propulsion   Lab,atCaltech
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Dallas / NASA Jet Propulsion Lab, Caltech

                                                                                                                                                                             Interview           Ques
                                                            B1 = 2
                                                             Abstract                                                                                               B                1                                                              0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Ignacio       Segovia-Dominguez
                                                                                                                                                                             Interview
                                                                                                                                                                            Ignacio              Ques
                                                                                                                                                                                        Segovia-Do
                                                           Second             filtration:                                                                                                                                  Second                       filtration:
    1   I                2                                    2 A                                                V       A                                          BV
                                                                                                                                                                            Ignacio
                                                                                                                                                                              A =    2
                                                                                                                                                                                        Segovia-Do
                                                                                                                                                                                                  The University  of  Texas B       atA= Dallas     1         / NASA   Jet Propulsion   Lab, Caltech

                                                                                                                                                                             Interview           Ques
                                                                                2      3                          21                                                 2  2                                                    2
                                   4                                                                                               2      3                                 1              2      3                                 1                      2       3

                         G                F 3 text goes here.
                                                            Filtration:
                                                           Second
                                                              V1              filtration:
                                                                                      B                  2
                                                                                                              Filtration:
                                                                                                              Second
                                                                                                                 V2              filtration:
                                                                                                                                          B
                                                                                                                                                                     V  3
                                                                                                                                                                            Ignacio
                                                                                                                                                                   Filtration:
                                                                                                                                                                                        Segovia-Do
                                                                                                                                                                                                 B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Filtration:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            V  11      =            2             The
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       University of  Texas at Dallas / NASA Jet Propulsion Lab, Caltech

                                                                                                                                                                            Ignacio     Segovia-Do
                                                                                                                                                             2                                                       2                                                               2
                 5               The abstract                B
                                                             V120      =    1                                  B V        =   1                                    Filtration:
                                                                                                                                                                    Second
                                                                                                                                                                    BV40        =    1   filtration:    Abstract            B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            V20        =            1

                                                                                                                                                                            Ignacio     Segovia-Do
                                                                                                                   30
                                      2                                                                            1
                                                                                                                                                              The University of Texas at Dallas
                                                                                                                                                                                         Dallas / NASA
                                                                                                                                                                                                / NASA JJ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Filtration:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Second
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            V30 = 2 filtration:
                                                                                                                                                              The UniversityIgnacio
                                                                                                                                                                             of Texas atSegovia-Do
                                                             V230 = 2
                                                             B                                                 B V240 = 2                                           BV190 1= 1       2                                      B
                                                                                                                                                              The UniversityIgnacio
                                                                                                                                                                             of Texas atSegovia-Do
2 A                               4                          V340 = 3
                                                             B
                                                                                                       E
                                                                                                               B V390 1= 3 The abstract text
                                                                                                                                                           E
                                                                                                                                                                    B
                                                                                                                                                                             of Texas at Dallas / NASA
                                                                                                                                                                     V290 =goes      3
                                                                                                                                                                                     2          here.              E        V410 = 13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   E
             2       3
                     D       3                               V490 1= 4
                                                             B                                                 B V            4                               The
                                                                                                     Interview QuestionsInterview Questions Interview Questions
                                                                                                                          =                                       University
                                                                                                                                                                Interview
                                                                                                                                                                    BV
                                                                                                                                                                          Questions
                                                                                                                                                                                =    4
                                                                                                                                                                                     3   Dallas / NASA J                    V 290 1= 24
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            B
                                                                                                       The University
                                                                                                           University of
                                                                                                                      of Texas
                                                                                                                         Texas at
                                                                                                                               at Dallas
                                                                                                                                  Dallas // NASA
                                                                                                                                            NASA
                                                                                                                      90                                                   0
                                                                                                                                                                          9+   1
                                                                                                     3             4                                     3              3                                        3                                                               3
                                             Interview QuestionsInterview                Filtration:   The
                                                                          Questions Interview  Questions                                 / NASA JJ
                                                             B         =    0                                  B V        =   0                                     BV=401 1 4  =    0                                      V 3901 = 30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            B
              1 B Comparison  2 3with other multiparameter
                                                             V 91 1
                                                             B
                                                             V 99+  descrip-
                                                                   1 1= 1
                                                                        1 I
                                                                                         Filtration:
                                                                                         Filtration:
                                                                                         2            The  University
                                                                                                         Interview
                                                                                                     Ignacio   B V=91 =
                                                                                                                       11
                                                                                                                     99+
                                                                                                                      of Texas
                                                                                                                   Questions
                                                                                                                          1 1
                                                                                                                           1 I at Dallas
                                                                                                                           Segovia-Dominguez2            Ignacio    BV=91 =
                                                                                                                                                                                Segovia-Dominguez
                                                                                                                                                                                11 0 1
                                                                                                                                                                                       I            2            Ignacio    B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            V 49+  01 1= 4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Segovia-Dominguez
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1 I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     2           Ignacio       Segovia-Dominguez
                       5                     1    Comparison
                                                             B
                                                             V=9+  1 1= 2
                                                                      with   other       Filtration:
                                                                                         B   =
                                                                                         G UniversityIgnacio
                                                                                             =  1
                                                                                       multiparameter
                                                                                         B      1
                                                                                                               B V=9+
                                                                                                                  descrip- Segovia-Dominguez
                                                                                                                       1 1= 2
                                                                                                                                            G University Ignacio    BV 91 Segovia-Dominguez
                                                                                                                                                                    ...         =1   2
                                                                                                                                                                                                    G University Ignacio    V=91 1= 020
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Segovia-Dominguez      5      G University
            2  5 tors                                        V= 1                        Filtration:
                                                                                       The
                                                                                         B = 21
                                                                                         Filtration:
                                                                                                       of Texas  V=at1 Dallas / NASA
                                                                                                               ...                        The  Jet Propulsion   Lab,
                                                                                                                                                          of Texas  BV 9+  1atCaltech
                                                                                                                                                                                 Dallas / NASA
                                                                                                                                                                               1= 2
                                                                                                                                                                                                  The Jet Propulsion
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  of Texas
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Lab,V=91at
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            B        Caltech
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       = Dallas     10            The
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              / NASA              of Texas
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Jet Propulsion
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 IgnacioLab,atCaltech
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Dallas / NASA Jet Propulsion Lab, Caltech
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Segovia-Dominguez
                                                                                         B =
                                                                                         B
                   4                                        Second                     The
                                                                              filtration:  University  of  Texas
                                                                                                              Second
                                                                                                                 V= A  at   Dallas    / NASA
                                                                                                                                          The
                                                                                                                                 filtration:   Jet Propulsion
                                                                                                                                              University  of    Lab,
                                                                                                                                                              TexasSecond   atCaltech
                                                                                                                                                                                 Dallas
                                                                                                                                                                     V= A1 filtration:        / NASA
                                                                                                                                                                                                  The
                                                                                                                                                                                         filtration:  University
                                                                                                                                                                                                      Jet  Propulsion
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  of  Texas
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Lab,Second  at
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1ACaltech
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Dallas       0       / NASA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        filtration:    Jet Propulsion   Lab, Caltech
                                                             V= A
                                                              2
                                                            ...
                                                              Filtration:                Filtration:
                                                                                         B =
                                                                                             =1
                                                                                             =1
                                                                                                21
                                                                                                 2
                                                                                                                  2
                                                                                                              Filtration:
                                                                                                               First
                                                                                                                 V1 filtration:
                                                                                                                                                                   First
                                                                                                                                                                     2
                                                                                                                                                                    Filtration:
                                                                                                                                                                   Second                filtration:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            B2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ...
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            V 9+
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Filtration:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       =
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1 0          2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0            The University of Texas at Dallas / NASA Jet Propulsion Lab, Caltech

                         th
                            E                     tors        V
                                                            ... 1
                                                              Filtration:
                                                              B20 =filtration:
                                                           First
                                                              V             1            B
                                                                                         B =
                                                                                         B      3
                                                                                                2
                                                                                                32
                                                                                             = 13
                                                                                                               ...
                                                                                                              Filtration:
                                                                                                               B
                                                                                                               U V210 = 1
                                                                                                                                                                   U
                                                                                                                                                                   UB
                                                                                                                                                                     V1=
                                                                                                                                                                    Filtration:
                                                                                                                                                                     V120 = 1
                                                                                                                                                                    ...
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            V=1 1 0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Second
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            V=20 =filtration:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           First                    10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0 filtration:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Filtration:
                 4BkC(C) is 2
                            the k 3 Betti number of C         B310 =filtration:
                                                           First
                                                           U  V
                                                              B420 = 3
                                                                            2
                                                                            1                                  B V320 = filtration:
                                                                                                              First
                                                                                                               U
                                                                                                                 V4130 = 3
                                                                                                                              2
                                                                                                                              1
                                                                                                                                       BB =   = 22 4
                                                                                                                                                   3
                                                                                                                                                   4               UBV230 = 2        1                                     UV1130 = 20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ...
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            V2240 = 130
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0
                                                                            2                                  B              2                                     BV340 =filtration:
                                                                                                                                                                    First            3
                                                                                                                                                                                     2                                     B
                                                           U  V 1
                                                                        B   (C) is the      k Betti
                                                                                                               U
                                                                                                         numberQuestions
                                                                                                                      of C              B =
                                                                                                                                        B      =3
                                                                                                                                              th    3
                                                                                                                                                   04
                                                                                                                                                                   U                                                       U
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0
                                                                        Interview      Questions     Interview                  Interview        Questions       Interview Questions
                                                              B        =                                       B          =                                         B           =                                          B           =
                                                                                                                                                  34
                                                              V2390 1       4
                                                                            3                             k UV 2490 1 3       4                                      V48190 11 3     4                                      First
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            V3309 1 filtration:  2  4
                                                           U
                                                                                                                                       B      =    0               U                                                       U                         0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1
                                                              B4910 = 0
                                                              V             4                                  B V 83910 1= 0 4         B      =    4
                                                                                                                                                   10
                                                                                                                                                                    BV82910 1= 0     4                                     BV441091 = 300
                                                                                                                                        B =
                                                                                                                                                                   U                                                                                  0
                  B1 = 0             B0 = 02           B =1
                                                           U    3
                                                                             B =2                  B
                                                                                                              U
                                                                                                                                        B     = 44 0
                                                                                                                                                   1     Ignacio         3 Segovia-Dominguez                     Ignacio
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           U                          1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Segovia-Dominguez
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       = 410
                                                           U  B89+
                                                              V     1 =1
                                                                4 111 I
                                                                            0     0                  Ignacio  UB V  4 Segovia-Dominguez
                                                                                                                    89+0
                                                                                                                       1  =
                                                                                                                          11 I
                                                                                                                              1
                                                                                                                              0
                                                                                                                                        B =         0
                                                                                                                                                    1     k        UBV  8+9+
                                                                                                                                                                          9 1 11=
                                                                                                                                                                                 1 I
                                                                                                                                                                                     1
                                                                                                                                                                                     0                                     B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           UV   8291
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   9+ 111 0I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1                           Ignacio Segovia-Dominguez
                                                           U  B=1 1= 2
                                                              V
                                                                        Interview
                                                                            1
                                                                             B = 0Questions        B Interview
                                                                                                       =0      B
                                                                                                               U
                                                                                                                     Questions
                                                                                                                 V=88+
                                                                                                                         B = 1Interview
                                                                                                                          =2
                                                                                                                       1 11   1
                                                                                                                                        B     =B Questions
                                                                                                                                                   0
                                                                                                                                                   2
                                                                                                                                                   1
                                                                                                                                                   2  =   2      Interview
                                                                                                                                                                   UBV=<
                                                                                                                                                                     B   49+
                                                                                                                                                                            Questions
                                                                                                                                                                            1 1= 1
                                                                                                                                                                                     2
                                                                                                                                                                                     1                                     B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           UV8=391 =   1 0          21
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1
                                                                                                                                        B =
                                                                8 1
                                                           U  B
                                                              V88+
                                                                =1 1   =    2          The University of  Texas
                                                                                                              UB       at
                                                                                                                       1
                                                                                                                 V=8<1 =1 2 Dallas    /B  The
                                                                                                                                        NASA  University
                                                                                                                                              Jet
                                                                                                                                               = 0121     of
                                                                                                                                                   Propulsion
                                                                                                                                                          0   Texas
                                                                                                                                                                Lab,
                                                                                                                                                                   UB       at   Dallas
                                                                                                                                                                             Caltech
                                                                                                                                                                     V=8<1 11= 2              / NASA
                                                                                                                                                                                                 The  University
                                                                                                                                                                                                      Jet
                                                                                                                                                                                                        0  Propulsion
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  of  Texas
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Lab,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           UV8+ =
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    at
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Caltech
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       =
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1 11 1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 49+
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Dallas  1   1        /0NASA   Jet Propulsion
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  The University
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1 filtration:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Lab,atCaltech
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  of Texas   kDallas / NASA Jet Propulsion Lab, Caltech
                                                              Second          filtration:                     Second             filtration:  = 12                  Second               filtration:                       Second
                                                           U ...
                  In our final set of experiments, we test our MPGF method in time series
                                                                  < 11
                                                          Filtration:
                                                                8+                                   Ignacio  U...8+
                                                                                                                Filtration:            BB =
                                                                                                                     < 1Segovia-Dominguez                Ignacio     V=8 Segovia-Dominguez
                                                                                                                                                                    ...
                                                                                                                                                                    U
                                                                                                                                                                  Filtration:                                    Ignacio   B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           U...
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            V=< 81 11  Segovia-Dominguez
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       =1 21
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1                           Ignacio Segovia-Dominguez
                                                              Second
                                                              V1              filtration:                     Second
                                                                                                                 V1< 1 filtration:      B
                                                                                                                                       Second  =    2               Second               filtration:                      Filtration:                11
                                                                                                                                                  22 filtration:
                                                                                                               ...                                                   V18+1
                                                                                                                                                                    ...                                                     V1=<
                                                           U      < 1
                                                              V210 = filtration:
                                                                             In ournew The University of Texas
                                                                                        final
                                                                                                              U
                                                                                                                 V21<0at=Dallas
                                                                                                                 B
                                                                                               set of experiments,                      B =
                                                                                                                                       Second
                                                                                                                                      / NASA  =MPGF    filtration:
                                                                                                                                          The University  of Texas
                                                                                                                                              Jet Propulsion    Lab,
                                                                                                                                                                   B
                                                                                                                                                                    U
                                                                                                                                                                     V21<0atCaltech
                                                                                                                                                                               =Dallas        / NASA
                                                                                                                                                                                                  The University
                                                                                                                                                                                                       Jet Propulsion
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  of Texas
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           U
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Lab,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Second
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0at
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Caltech
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       =Dallas                / NASA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 11 filtration:        Jet Propulsion
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  The University        Lab,atCaltech
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  of Texas     Dallas / NASA Jet Propulsion Lab, Caltech
                                                                                                                    per- we test our                          method in time series
                                                           B               1                                                  1                                                     1                                      BFirst
   1 I                                                      First                                             First          filtration:
                                                                                                                                       B                           First         1filtration:                                         1 filtration:
                                                                                                                                                                   Dimension:                                               V28+
                   2
            classification 4 problems     and compare results with other
                                                           U...   <                         multiparameter    U
                                                                                                                                        Second         filtration:  U                                                       ...
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            U
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       = 21
                   G approaches.    F 3                    BU V1320 = 2
                                                            ...
                                                           Filtration:  classification     problems      and
                                                                                                              U  V3210 = 2
                                                                                                                 B
                                                                                                               Dimension:
                                                                                                               ...
                                                                                                               compare
                                                                                                                 Filtration:           Second
                                                                                                                            results withV
                                                                                                                                        V other        filtration:
                                                                                                                                                          new
                                                                                                                                                                   B
                                                                                                                                                                   0 V132<0 =38<
                                                                                                                                                                   First
                                                                                                                                                                   U
                                                                                                                                                                multiparameter per-
                                                                                                                                                                   Filtration:
                                                                                                                                                                                    2
                                                                                                                                                                                   filtration:                             BV13<
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            U    10 1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Filtration: =1
           5sistence           2        Here,   we  focus  BU V2430 = 3
                                                           Dimension:
                                                            on   17
                                                              V3409 =
                                                                      time    series   datasets     from    the
                                                                                                              U0B
                                                                                                               1B
                                                                                                                 V4320 =38<
                                                                                                                  UCR
                                                                                                                 V4390 1=38<
                                                                                                                              3
                                                                                                                                        Second
                                                                                                                                         V
                                                                                                                                       Second          filtration:
                                                                                                                                                       filtration:
                                                                                                                                                                   B
                                                                                                                                                                   U
                                                                                                                                                                   1
                                                                                                                                                                   B
                                                                                                                                                                     V12430 =38<
                                                                                                                                                                    ...
                                                                                                                                                                               =
                                                                                                                                                                                    3                                      B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           First
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            V24<
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Dimension:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            U             13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 20 filtration:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           141
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ...31390 =
                                                           B               41                                                 41                                                    41                                     B
                                                           Dimension:
                                                           0U          138<
                                                                        sistenceinapproaches.                 Dimension:
                                                                                                              U                         V series
                                                                                                                                      Second           filtration: U
                                                                                                                                                                   0 V23409 dim                                            U
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0V             2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       138<
                                                                                       table 1. We Here,choosewesuch  focus on 17 time                      datasets from the UCR
                                                                                                                                                                                1
                                                                                                                          = 02                                                 =                                                          1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          202
2 A         archive [1], 4using training/testing
                                            1
                                                           B
                                                           1U
                                                           0  V4109 =
                                                        sizes as described
                                                                       138<02                                 U0BV 4910dim138<
                                                                                                                                        VV                         B
                                                                                                                                                                   U
                                                                                                                                                                   1 V34190 dim
                                                                                                                                                                    Dimension:  1
                                                                                                                                                                                    02                                     B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           U
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1V424910 =38<
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           2   113
         2       3 3                                       B  V8109+   = 13
                                                                   9 dim
                                                                        archive     [1], using   training/testingB
                                                                                                                 V89+     = 13
                                                                                                                       0dim
                                                                                                                                        V                          B
                                                                                                                                                                    0V8419+
                                                                                                                                                                               = 13                                        BV 3899+0dim
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Dimension: =3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1 1
                                                                                                        newly state- sizes as described                in table 1. We choose such
                                                           0U                                                 U      91                                                   90 1138<                                         U
                           Dproblems because we aim to contrast
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1
                                                           1         1138<                                    1          138<                                      U
                                                                                                                                                                   0-dim                                                   0              2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          3
            benchmark                                      B
                                                           1U          =
                                                              V8=109+dim   24our MPGF         versus          U  B
                                                                                                                 V=89+ 1
                                                                                                                       01 =
                                                                                                                         dim
                                                                                                                              24
                                                                                                                                        VV                         B
                                                                                                                                                                    1V8=19+0 1 =    24                                     B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           UV =48910dim=  13   224
                 B
                                                                       1                                       0-dim                                               U
                                                                                                                                                                   1-dim      138<                                         10          138<
                                     2
                                                           0
                                                            B          =0
                                                                                                              0
                                                                                                                 B=1 1= 0               V                          B            =0                                          B      1 1=   2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          4                          edge weight
                                                         2Second
                                                           1U V8+
                                                           0-dim  =1dim
                                                                     11 benchmark problems because we aim to contrast
                                                                                                             3U
                                                                                                              1  V
                                                                                                               1-dim8+dim
                                                                                                                Second
                                                                                                                         1
                                                                                                                 B=1 = 1 filtration:     V our MPGF versus newly state-
                                                                                                                                                                 4 0-dim
                                                                                                                                                                   U0V88+
                                                                                                                                                                  Second
                                                                                                                                                                         =1 dim
                                                                                                                                                                              11
                                                                                                                                                                                     1 filtration:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         5 UV =88+
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0-dim
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            1    9+       3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        38<         0
            of-the-art results
                             5
                                    of multiparameter      persistence
                                                            B
                                                            U ...
                                                              V
                                                           1-dim
                                                           0-dim  =
                                                                  <1 =  1   approaches,
                                                                            1 filtration:     as  described   U  in
                                                                                                               0-dim
                                                                                                               ...
                                                                                                                 V
                                                                                                              0-dim <[2].  1            V
                                                                                                                                        V
                                                                                                                                                                   B
                                                                                                                                                                   1-dim
                                                                                                                                                                   U...
                                                                                                                                                                     V
                                                                                                                                                                    1 8+dim
                                                                                                                                                                         =
                                                                                                                                                                         <
                                                                                                                                                                           1 =   1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Second
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           UB
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ...
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            V
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1-dim
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0 = 8< 1   =1 4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      dim
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          39912 filtration:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       =4
                                                                                                                                                                              1

               5 To keep
                                                            BV...1<1 = 2
                                                           0-dim
                                                            U           of-the-art results of multiparameter persistence
                                                                                                              U  V11 = 2
                                                                                                                 B
                                                                                                               1-dim
                                                                                                               ...                       V approaches, as described in [2].
                                                                                                                                                                   B
                                                                                                                                                                   0
                                                                                                                                                                   UV
                                                                                                                                                                    ...1<1- dim =2                                         UB
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            V1=8+
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0-dim      1 3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1 dim                  1
       2               4
                                                           1-dim
                             all experiments under same conditions, we parallelize the MPGF
                                                             VFirst
                                                           1-dim
                                                           0-dim          filtration:
                                                                                                              1-dim
                                                                                                              First
                                                                                                               0 V
                                                                                                                    <
                                                                                                               ...2- dim
                                                                                                              0-dim          filtration:V                          1
                                                                                                                                                                    0-dim
                                                                                                                                                                    First
                                                                                                                                                                    V 2- dim
                                                                                                                                                                                 1
                                                                                                                                                                                   filtration:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           First
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            V
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ...
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1-dim
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 <
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              2< 1 filtration:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          49 1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               4    9     1
Figure 2:methodMultidimensional          persistence     on
                                                             ...
                                                             a
                                                                2
                                                                graph
                                                           Second            To keep(original
                                                                          network
                                                                              filtration: all experiments
                                                                                                       graph:     under
                                                                                                                   left).
                                                                                                               1Second     Black        V
                                                                                                                           same conditions,
                                                                                                                                   numbers
                                                                                                                                         V
                                                                                                                                 filtration:           denote
                                                                                                                                                                   U...
                                                                                                                                                                    1-dim
                                                                                                                                                         we parallelize
                                                                                                                                                                  the
                                                                                                                                                                   Second
                                                                                                                                                                         <
                                                                                                                                                                          the MPGF       filtration:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           U0-dim
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Second         499 filtration:
                                                           0VFirst        filtration:                         First
                                                              U31- dim                                        U  V13- dim    filtration:                            First
                                                                                                                                                                    U31 filtration:
                                                                                                                                                                    V                                                       V31<- dim                     1
                                                           1-dim                                              1-dim                                                 0-dim                                                  0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           U
                        and run Eon a AWS machine with Xeon Platinum 8175M. Similarly, we
                                                           1
                                                           0
                                                             VU4121- dim
                                                            Dimension:                                           V2141
                                                                                                              Dimension:
                                                                                                              U
                                                                                                              0        - dim
                                                                                                                                        V
                                                                                                                                        V
                                                                                                                                                                    ...
                                                                                                                                                                    V
                                                                                                                                                                   Dimension:
                                                                                                                                                                    U4121
                                                                                                                                                                    1-dim                                                  1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            1-dim
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          First
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            V
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Dimension:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            U 12- dim
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0-dim
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ...                   99+1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          filtration:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                999+
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1
degree values                                                           method       andweights
                                                                                           run on aofAWS        machine with       Xeon  V Platinum 8175M. Similarly, we
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1
                C ofTaken’s
                        each   node
                                 3 whilst red       numbers
                                                          series,show      the   edge                     the   network.      Hence,    Vshape properties                                                                                           9 1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   99+1
                                                             VU                                               U  V                                                  V
                                                                                                                                                                   Dimension:
                                                                                                                                                                    U                                                     U V
            apply               embeddings     on time     10 32- dim
                                                                2 9    138<
                                                                    filter   based    on   distance    to     1
                                                                                                              0 32- dim
                                                                                                            the      29
                                                                                                                  point   138<                                     00 32- dim
                                                                                                                                                                      2  9     1 38<                                        1-dim
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0 13 38<
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              2  9     1
            4            2                                   V                                                   V
                                                                        apply Taken’s embeddings on time series, filter                 V                           V                                                       V
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Dimension:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          =9+
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          =               1
                                                                                                                   each row filtersVVV bybased             on distance to the point                                                            =99+
                                                            1U3943 38<                                        U4339 38<
                                                                                                              1                                                     U3439- dim
                                                                                                                                                                   11
                                                                                                                                                                   0             38<                                      U 0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            1 3249- dim 38<         9+1
are computedcloudon andtwo    filtration
                          density         functions
                                    estimates,          (i.e., adegree
                                                 train using0VU49+84 dim
                                                                  XGBoost  and edge weight).            While5-fold
                                                                                                              U  V8449+dim                        degree,       each
                                                                                                                                                                   0V
                                                                                                                                                                    U4849+dim                                             U V 4389+ - dim =              11
                                                                        cloud classifier,     and    perform
                                                                      1
                                                                      1                                       0          11                                        1          138<
                                                                                                                                                                              1                                            01          dim
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1138<
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          =
                                                            1VU=89 dim11         and density      estimates,  U
                                                                                                              1  train using a XGBoost
                                                                                                                 V8=9 dim11              V
                                                                                                                                        ...          classifier, and perform 5-fold
                                                                                                                                                                   1V
                                                                                                                                                                   0U=89 dim  11                                          U1V=489 dim  138<    =9+11      1
column filters
            cross the    corresponding
                    validation;             subgraph
                                   see further   and otherusing
                                                             V     its cross
                                                              details
                                                              U =
                                                            0-dim  9    edge     weights. For
                                                                         in [2].validation;          each cell, lower left corners
                                                                                                              U  V
                                                                                                              0-dim = 9                 V
                                                                                                                                        ...
                                                                                                                                        VVin [2].represent the      V
                                                                                                                                                                    U =
                                                                                                                                                                   0-dim
                                                                                                                                                                   1     8 dim
                                                                                                                                                                          9                                               U V 88+dim
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           00-dim
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              =   9       =
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          =
                                                           ...
                                                             VU8+
                                                            1-dim
                                                                  8+
                                                                  8 1
                                                                   9+
                                                                   < 111                                      U8+
                                                                                                              1-dim
                                                                                                                   8+
                                                                                                                   8 1
                                                                                                see further and other details...
                                                                                                                 ...
                                                                                                                 V  < 9+111             ...
                                                                                                                                        V                          ...
                                                                                                                                                                    V
                                                                                                                                                                    U8+
                                                                                                                                                                   1-dim
                                                                                                                                                                   0-dim
                                                                                                                                                                         8+
                                                                                                                                                                         <
                                                                                                                                                                              1
                                                                                                                                                                          9+111                                           U...
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            V
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           11-dim
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              8<
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1 = 1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  9+dim11
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          =
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               =
corresponding        threshold
                  Table   2 shows values.   For each
                                      the accuracy        otherB6 and
                                                      of cell,
                                                             V
                                                            0-dim
                                                              U=< 11         B represent
                                                                       methods
                                                                             Table   along
                                                                                       2 shows 0 the
                                                                                              with the corresponding
                                                                                                      our   proposedof other
                                                                                                                 V<
                                                                                                              0-dim
                                                                                                              U
                                                                                                         accuracy    = 11
                                                                                                                        1 filtration:   V
                                                                                                                              Betti6 numbers.
                                                                                                                                        ...
                                                                                                                                       First
                                                                                                                                      methods
                                                                                                                                        ...      filtration:
                                                                                                                                                                    V=< 11
                                                                                                                                                                   0-dim
                                                                                                                                                                    U
                                                                                                                                                         along with our proposed
                                                                                                                                                                   1-dim                                                  U V8+
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0-dim
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               =< 11 =
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0-dim
                                                          First
                                                             V...=< filtration:
                                                            1-dim
                                                              U                                                 First
                                                                                                                 V<
                                                                                                              1-dim
                                                                                                              U...   =
                                                                                                                                       First
                                                                                                                                       ...       filtration:      First
                                                                                                                                                                    ...=< filtration:
                                                                                                                                                                    V
                                                                                                                                                                   1-dim
                                                                                                                                                                   0-dim
                                                                                                                                                                    U                                                     First
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          U V=< 1 filtration:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            1-dim
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ...
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1-dim
            MPGF: Multiparameter Persistence Image (MP-I) U ...1- dim
                                                            0                     [2],  Multiparameter        0Persis-
                                                                                                                U...1- dim
                                                                        MPGF: Multiparameter Persistence Image (MP-I)                   First    filtration:      U...
                                                                                                                                                                   0...1- dim                                               ...
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0 1<- dim
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0-dim
                                                                                                                                       First     filtration:
                                                                                                                                                      [2], Multiparameter Persis-
                                                                                                                                                                   1-dim
                                                                                                               ...                                                                                                        U
                                                                                                                                        U
                                                                                                                                        U                                                                                                      1
                                                            1Dimension:                                       Dimension:
                                                                                                                                        First    filtration:       1Dimension:                                             Dimension:
                                                          U     2- dim                                          U
                                                                                                              1 2- dim                                            U0   2- dim                                             U 1 2- dim
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1-dim
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ...                 1
            tence Kernel (MP-K) [3], Multiparameter Persistence
                                                          UFirst
                                                              Dimension:
                                                              0 3 38<               Landscape
                                                                          filtration:
                                                                        tence Kernel       (MP-K)  (MP-L)      [REF],
                                                                                                                 First
                                                                                                       [3], Multiparameter
                                                                                                              Dimension:
                                                                                                                U    3 38<   filtration:U
                                                                                                                                       First
                                                                                                                                  Persistence    filtration:       First
                                                                                                                                                        Landscape (MP-L) [REF],
                                                                                                                                                                  U Dimension:
                                                                                                                                                                   10  3- dim      filtration:
                                                                                                                                                                                 38<                                      UFirst
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0 3- dim       filtration:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        38<     1
                                                                                                              0
                                                                                                                                        U filtration:
                                                                                                                                      First                                                                               Dimension:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               2
                                                          U
            1D Persistence Landscape (P-L) [4], 1D Persistence
                                                              041 38<
                                                              1
                                                                                  Image (P-I)
                                                                        1D Persistence
                                                                                                              0U41 38<
                                                                                                              1
                                                                                                   [5], Persistence
                                                                                              Landscape       (P-L) [4], 1D Persistence U
                                                                                                                                        U
                                                                                                                                                                  U 0 41 38<
                                                                                                                                                                    1
                                                                                                                                                      Image (P-I) [5], Persistence
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          U1 41- dim    38<
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                2
                                                          U   182 dim
                                                              0      138<                                     1U82 dim
                                                                                                              0          138<                                     U 1 82 dim
                                                                                                                                                                    0         138<                                        U82 dim
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0           138<     1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               3
to any GSpace                                      {Gji   } (nwe×focus m                                                              U U                   n PDs the amount of                                                                2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               3
            j , one     getsKernel
                               a bifiltration                                resolution)        this    time.       AsofHere,
                                                                                                                          a result,   one        gets
                                                          U   083 dim
                                                              1                                               0 83 dim
                                                                                                              1 U                                                 U 0 83 dim
                                                                                                                                                                    1                                                     1 83 dim
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          U             38<    12
                      Scale            (PSS-K) [6].    Here,            Space  onScale
                                                                                   contrasting
                                                                                          Kernel    the   amount
                                                                                                     (PSS-K)       [6].         we focusU on            contrasting                                                                             3
                                                      b
                                                          U     4 dim
                                                              0-dim
                                                              18+    1                                        1U8+
                                                                                                              0-dim  4 dim
                                                                                                                         1            U                           U     4 dim
                                                                                                                                                                    0-dim
                                                                                                                                                                    1 8+      1                                           U
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          00-dim
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              8+4 dim 1 2      4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               4
                                                                                                                                        U                                                                                                      2
as P D(Gsignificant
              i , ω) andinformation,
                             induce theforcorresponding   U
                                                a machine learning
                                                          U
                                                              1-dim
                                                              0-dim
                                                                <
                                                                8 11
                                                              0-dim
                                                              1-dim
                                                                <
                                                                8
                                                                      M   ϕ   . The difference
                                                                           method,
                                                                        significant      contained inis
                                                                                        information,          that
                                                                                                            the
                                                                                                          for   U<
                                                                                                                atopo-
                                                                                                              1-dim
                                                                                                              0-dim
                                                                                                              0-dim
                                                                                                                U<
                                                                                                              1-dim
                                                                                                                       in the learning
                                                                                                                   machine
                                                                                                                     8 11
                                                                                                                     8                U U
                                                                                                                               first case
                                                                                                                                        U
                                                                                                                                             method,(first    apply in the topo-
                                                                                                                                                                  U
                                                                                                                                                             contained
                                                                                                                                                                  U
                                                                                                                                                                    1-dim
                                                                                                                                                                    0-dim
                                                                                                                                                                       <
                                                                                                                                                                       8 11
                                                                                                                                                                    0-dim
                                                                                                                                                                    1-dim
                                                                                                                                                                       <
                                                                                                                                                                       8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          U
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          U
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1-dim
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0-dim
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0-dim
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                8 dim
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                <
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                <
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      11 4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            883
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               3 1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               4        1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               84 1
             then g),
weights, logical      summaries.                           ...
                                                           U
                          the filtration function plays more
                                                           U
                                                              1-dim
                                                              0-dim
                                                              0
                                                                8+1
                                                                  <- dim
                                                              1-dim
                                                                        logical
                                                                        1
                                                                                   summaries.
                                                                               important       role as Mϕ uses P D(Gi ,UUUg) while in the
                                                                                                              1-dim
                                                                                                              0-dim
                                                                                                              0
                                                                                                                 ...
                                                                                                                 U8+1
                                                                                                                 U<- dim
                                                                                                              1-dim        1
                                                                                                                                                                   U
                                                                                                                                                                   U
                                                                                                                                                                    1-dim
                                                                                                                                                                    0-dim
                                                                                                                                                                   ...
                                                                                                                                                                    0
                                                                                                                                                                       8+1
                                                                                                                                                                        <- dim
                                                                                                                                                                    1-dim        1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1-dim
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ...
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           U
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1-dim 8+1 84
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0 <- dim
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0-dim
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           U            14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        1
                                                          Dimension:         The    classification
                                                                                                 thatresults     are   consistent with
                                                                                                              0Dimension:               U our hypothesis that MPGF cap-
                                                                                                                                                                  Dimension:                                              Dimension:         88+1       1
second caseThe         classification   resultsapply
                                                 are consistent
                                                              1    with
                                                              0 <- dim     our    hypothesis            MPGF  1     cap-                                                                                                   1 <- dim
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1-dim
                                                                                                                 U<- dim                                            1
                                                                                                                                                                    0 <- dim
                                                                                                                          role as MUUUϕproduced
                                                           U                                                                                                       U                                                       U
                   (first  apply g, then               weights)        weights        have more         important                             is induced           by                                                                     888+ 8 1      1
                                                          0...1 - dim   38<                                   10...- dim   38<                                      1 - dim
                                                                                                                                                                  0...           38<                                      0...- dim
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0             38<    8+
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              88+
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               < 11
            tures significant multidimensional informationtures
                                                          1 38<                  significant
                                                                          produced             multidimensional
                                                                                         by filtration     functions. informationU
                                                                                                                1 38<
                                                                                                                                        U by applying        by filtration functions.
                                                                                                                                                                  1 38<                                                   1 - dim
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1             38<
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          88+  <           1
P D(Gj ,We   ω).notice
                    Notethatalsothethatproposed
                                         there ismethod
                                                     a veryoutperforms
                                                               different
                                                          0Dimension:
                                                          10 dim
                                                                     dim        filtration
                                                                        We notice       that   method
                                                                                               the           for
                                                                                                      proposed
                                                                                  current state-of-the-art ap-
                                                                                                                    weighted
                                                                                                                         dim
                                                                                                                0Dimension:
                                                                                                                    method
                                                                                                                10 dim
                                                                                                                                 graphs
                                                                                                                                      U U
                                                                                                                               outperforms            current     0Dimension:dim
                                                                                                                                                                 state-of-the-art
                                                                                                                                                                  10 dim          ap-                                     0Dimension:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          10 dim
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     dim        <1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               8+
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               <
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               <
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        11
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        11
                                                                        38<                                                38<          U
                                                                                                                                        ...
                                                                                                                                                                                 38<                                                      8+
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        38<
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                <          1
the following         theonfollowing      VR-complexes     1 38<  method.
                                                                        proaches on 23.5%                        1 38<
                                                                                                                0-dim
                                                                                                                                      U U
                                                                                                                                        ...                        1 38<
                                                                                                                                                                  0-dim                                                                        <           1
                                                                                             most of of benchmark
                                                                                                        best results problems. Furthermore,                     most of best results
                                                          0-dim                                                                                                                                                            1 38<
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0-dim                < 1
            proaches         23.5% of benchmark         problems.
                                                           0 dim
                                                          1-dim         Furthermore,                             0 dim
                                                                                                                1-dim                   U
                                                                                                                                        ...
                                                                                                                                        U                          0 dim
                                                                                                                                                                  1-dim                                                    0 dim
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1-dim                <<
                                                          0-dim
                                                           1 dim        are splitusamong        MP-K,that   MP-L0-dim
                                                                                                                 1 dim                U
                                                                                                                      and MPGF, leading ...                       0-dim
                                                                                                                                                                   1 dim
                                                                                                                                                        us to conclude that these                                         0-dim
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1 dim               <
            are split among MP-K, MP-L and MPGF, leading                                to conclude               these                 ...
                                                                                                                                       Dimension:
                                                                                                                                        ...
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               <
                                                          1-dim
                                                           0-dim                                                1-dim
                                                                                                                 0-dim
                                                                                                                                       Dimension:
                                                                                                                                       ...
                                                                                                                                                                  1-dim
                                                                                                                                                                   0-dim                                                  1-dim
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0-dim
                                                          0        - dim
Power (Vietoris-Rips) Filtration There is a highly different filtration technique using
                                                           1-dim                                                01-dim - dim            Dimension:     distances  01-dim   - dim                                          01-dim   - dim
                                                          10-dim   - dim                                        10-dim - dim           Dimension:
                                                                                                                                       0       38<
                                                                                                                                               38<
                                                                                                                                       0Dimension:                10-dim   - dim                                          10-dim   - dim
                                                           1-dim                                                 1-dim
                                                                                                                                       10 38<
                                                                                                                                       Dimension:                  1-dim                                                   1-dim
between the data points in the dataset. The technique is called power filtration for
                                                           0 - dim                                               0 - dim               10 38<
                                                                                                                                      Dimension:
                                                                                                                                       0
                                                                                                                                        1 dim
                                                                                                                                                unweighted
                                                                                                                                               38<                 0 - dim                                                 0 - dim
                                                                                                                               1       0       38<
                                                                                                                                        1 dim
                                                           1 - dim                                               1 - dim                                           1 - dim                                                 1 - dim
graphs Aktas et al. (2019), while it is called1 Vietoris-Rips filtration for other types of data                                      010      38<
                                                                                                                                              Edelsbrunner
                                                                                                                                             dim
                                                                                                                                               38<
                                                                                                                                       1     dim
                                                                                                                                               38<
& Harer (2010). The idea is for a point cloud X = {x1 , x2 , . . . , xN }, one uses the pairwise                                        0 dim
                                                                                                                                      101      38<
                                                                                                                                             dim
                                                                                                                                             dim        distances
                                                                                                                                      00
                                                                                                                                       0-dim
                                                                                                                                       1
                                                                                                                                        1 dim
                                                                                                                                       0-dim
                                                                                                                                        0-dimdim
d(xr , xs ) to construct the simplicial complexes in the filtration. In particular, for 10-dim                                         1
                                                                                                                                       1-dim
                                                                                                                                          a
                                                                                                                                       1-dim dim
                                                                                                                                              threshold
                                                                                                                                             dim                  set
                                                                                                                                        0-dim
                                                                                                                                        1-dim
                                                                                                                                       0-dim
                                                                                                                                       0-dim
 1 <  2 < · · · <  n = diam(X ), one forms a Vietoris-Rips complex ∆j by adding0-dim                                                   0-dim
                                                                                                                                       1-dim
                                                                                                                                          a   k-simplex            to
                                                                                                                                        0-dim
                                                                                                                                        1-dim
                                                                                                                                       1-dim
                                                                                                                                       0-dim
                                                                                                                                       1-dim
                                                                                                                                       1-dim
X for any subset {xr0 , xr1 , . . . , xrk }, where the pairwise distances are all <  j . If 1-dim                                       0-dim
                                                                                                                                        1-dim
                                                                                                                                      a0-dim
                                                                                                                                           -pair
                                                                                                                                       0-dim
                                                                                                                                       0      dim of points
                                                                                                                                       1-dim
                                                                                                                                       0   -  dim
                                                                                                                                        1-dim
                                                                                                                                        0
                                                                                                                                       1-dim
                                                                                                                                       1    - dim
xr1 , xr2 has distance <  j , then in the induced simplicial complex ∆j , we add an edge                                               0
                                                                                                                                       1
                                                                                                                                      1-dim- dimbetween the
                                                                                                                                       00 - dim
                                                                                                                                        1
corresponding vertices xr and xs . If three such points xr1 , xr2 , xr3 have pairwise 011distances                                     1   -  dim
                                                                                                                                           -- dim              <  j ,
                                                                                                                                              dim
then we fill the triangle er1 r2 ∪ er2 r3 ∪ er3 r1 with a 2-simplex, and so on. This procedure                                        1 -- dimdim
                                                                                                                                                          induces
in a hierarchical nested sequence of simplicial complexes ∆1 ⊂ ∆2 ⊂ . . . ⊂ ∆m that is termed
Vietoris-Rips filtration induced by the point cloud X . For unweighted graphs, one takes the vertex set
V as the point cloud, and defines the distances d(vi , vj ) as the shortest distance in the graph where
each edge has length 1. For weighted graphs, one can do the same by defining edge lengths induced
by the weights.
One can adapt Vietoris-Rips filtrations to our EMP setting as follows. Start with a filtration function
f : X → R with threshold set {αi }m        1 and obtain X1 ⊂ X2 ⊂ · · · ⊂ Xm = X where Xi =
f −1 ((−∞, αi ]). Then, apply Vietoris-Rips filtration to each Xi0 for threshold set { j }nj=1 which
produces a filtration Xbi0 1 ⊂ Xbi0 2 ⊂ · · · ⊂ Xbi0 n where Xbi0 j is the Vietoris-Rips complex of Xi0
for threshold  j . Construct P D(Xi , V R) of these filtrations for each 1 ≤ i ≤ m. The following
steps are same Section 4.2. For a given SP vectorization ϕ, let ϕ   ~ i be the corresponding 1 × k vector
induced by ϕ(P D(Xi , V R)) with domain [ 1 ,  n ]. Then, define EMP Mϕ as Miϕ = ϕ         ~ i where Miϕ
        th
is the i row of Mϕ . Again, Mϕ is a 2D-vector (a matrix) of size m × k where m is the number of
thresholds for the filtration function f , and k is the length of the vector ϕ~.


                                                                                                           17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


D.3   M ULTIPARAMETER P ERSISTENCE T HEORY

Multipersistence theory is under intense research because of its promise to significantly improve the
performance and robustness properties of single persistence theory. While single persistence theory
obtains the topological fingerprint of single filtration, a multidimensional filtration with more than
one parameter should deliver a much finer summary of the data to be used with ML models. However,
because of the technical issues in the theory, multipersistence has not reached to its potential yet
and remains largely unexplored by the ML community. Here, we provide a short summary of these
technical issues. For further details, Botnan & Lesnick (2022) gives a nice outline of current state of
the theory and major obstacles.
In single persistence, the threshold space {αi } being a subset of R, is totally ordered, i.e., birth
time < death time for any topological feature appearing in the filtration sequence {∆i }. By using
this property, it was shown that “barcode decomposition” is well-defined in single persistence
theory in 1950s [Krull-Schmidt-Azumaya Theorem Botnan & Lesnick (2022)–Theorem 4.2]. This
decomposition makes the persistence module M = {Hk (∆i )}N        i=1 uniquely decomposable into
barcodes. This barcode decomposition is exactly what we call a Persistence Diagram.
However, when one goes to higher dimensions, i.e. d = 2, then the threshold set {(αi , βj )} is
no longer totally ordered, but becomes partially ordered (Poset). In other words, some indices
have ordering relation (1, 2) < (4, 7), while some do not, e.g., (2,3) vs. (1,5). Hence, if one
has a multipersistence grid {∆ij }, we no longer can talk about birth time or death time as there
is no ordering anymore. Furthermore, Krull-Schmidt-Azumaya Theorem is no longer true for
upper dimensions Botnan & Lesnick (2022)–Section 4.2. Hence, for general multipersistence
modules barcode decomposition is not possible, and the direct generalization of single persistence to
multipersistence fails. On the other hand, even if the multipersistence module has a good barcode
decomposition, because of partial ordering, representing these barcodes faithfully is another major
problem. Multipersistence modules are an important subject in commutative algebra, where one can
find the details of the topic in Eisenbud (2013).
While complete generalization is out of reach for now, several attempts have been tried to utilize
MP idea (Lesnick, 2015). One of the first such novel idea came from Lesnick & Wright (2015)
where they suggest to use one dimensional slices in the MP grid, and to get the signature of the
most dominant features. Later, Carrière & Blumberg (2020) combined several slicing directions
(vineyards) and obtained a vectorization by summarizing several persistence diagrams (PDs) in these
directions. Slicing techniques use the persistence diagrams of predetermined one-dimensional slices
in the multipersistence grid, and then combine (compress) them as one dimensional output Botnan &
Lesnick (2022). In that respect, one major issue is that the topological summary highly depends on
the predetermined slicing directions in this approach, and how to decide this direction. The other
problem is the loss of information when compressing the information in various persistence diagrams.
As explained above, MP approach has still technical problems to reach its full potential, and there are
several attempts to utilize this idea. In this paper, we do not claim to solve theoretical problems of
multipersistence homology, but offer a novel, highly practical multidimensional topological summary
by advancing the existing methods. We use the grid directions in the multipersistence module as
natural slicing directions and produce mutidimensional topological summary of the data. As a
result, these multidimensional topological fingerprints are capable of capturing very fine topological
information hidden in the data. Furthermore, in the case the data provides more than two very
important filtration functions, our framework easily accommodates these functions and induces
corresponding substructures. Then, our EMP model capture the evolving topological patterns of these
substructures and summarize them in matrices and arrays which are highly practical output format to
be used with various ML models.
Our model is highly different from previous work mostly because of its practicality and computational
efficiency. Among these, the closest method to ours is Carrière & Blumberg (2020) which employs
slicing techniques a different way. Like us, they have predetermined slicing options (vineyards),
and they compute the single persistence diagrams on these slices and combine them in a unique
way by using weight functions induced from lifespans of the topological features in this collection
of persistence diagram. In our approach, we use only horizontal slices and do not compress the
information. First, choosing horizontal slices computationally very feasible to obtain persistence
diagrams. Second, we offer a variety of options on how to vectorize these persistence diagrams.


                                                  18
Ignac


                                                                                                                                                   of Texas at San Antonio? society as a whole. UTSA is in the top of hispanic serving ins
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     supportive eT


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               in th
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         the Unive
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   I


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 institutions in the nation
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 su


                                                                                                                                                          UTSA is a vibrant and supportive environment for researcher and the commercializ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         forintervi


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Thus, gener


                                                                                                                                                          of research discoveries. Thus, generating positive impact in the diverse communitie
                           of Tex


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          to the C
                                     The University of Texas at Dalla


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        researcher
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          I expect
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Kindly find below the list of questio


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              UTS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             andof
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             comi
                University Seg


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               the
                                                                                       V1 at Dallas / NASA Jet Propulsion


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             point
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             and discoveries.
                                       Segovia-Dominguez


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        College
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Antonio?


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       impact
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            in
  Interview Questions


                                                                                                                            Kindly find below the list of questions I expect to hear during job interviews, and some point I may


                                                                                                                                                                                       to the Carlos Alvarez College of Business in the University


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         the commercialization
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    positive impact in the diverse communities and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             as a whole.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      some
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            is a vibrant
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              reasonjob
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              interview.


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         is
            TheIgnacio


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              coming
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          questions
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Lab, Caltech
                                                                                                                                                      Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                                                                                          society as a whole. UTSA is in the top of hispanic serving institutions in the nation.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               UTSA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          positivein
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              I mayI may


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          the University


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 the commercialization
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 and and


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    hear during


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    for
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              UTSAAlvarez


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                of Business
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        communities


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          the nation.


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              discoveries.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        University


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               commercialization
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       point point


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              of research

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           environment
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      forSan
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Antonio?
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 communities
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        nation.


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         interviews,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                whole.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  and some


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               to your
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             list ofthe


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    of research society
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            (a) UTSA is a vibrant
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           mention during the interview.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Lab, Caltech


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Texas at
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                in thein
                                         filtration:


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                in the in


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      (a)Carlos



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    generating
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      V 9 Lab, Caltech


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          the diverse
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         of Business
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           and some


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         institutions


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ofreason
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         during
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     First filtration:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         9+1 Lab, Caltech
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Jet9 Propulsion


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   What’s
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               job interviews,
                                                                                                                                                                                            Ignacio Segovia-Dominguez


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        diverse


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 serving
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  of Business
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1 F


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  institutions


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                College
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            D


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Dimension:


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      and the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            2


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              I expect

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    San
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          H


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      below the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          6


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     U8 1 4 2 2


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               researcher
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          5
                                                                                                               V1 Questions


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       as
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Jet Propulsion


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       job interviews,


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   supportive
                                                                                                                                                                                  1. What’s your reason for coming to the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                in the in
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Ignacio Segovia-Dominguez


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               serving
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               College


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 job


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              hispanic and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Kindly find mention
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      2


                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Dimension:0 38<
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1 38<
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    G


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              impact
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     E


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  1. What’s your
                                  Second


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Questions


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         -fordim
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         - dim


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    society
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   3


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  for0researcher
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0 dim
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1 dim
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Jet Propulsion


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0-dim
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1-dim


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              at
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0-dim
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1-dim


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Thus,
                                                                          Secondoffiltration:


                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Segovia-Dominguez


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       serving
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       College
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               3


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     U< 1


                                                                                                                                                                           Kindly find below the list of questions 1.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               1
                              Ignacio


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      V= 1


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 to hear during
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1impact


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        researcher
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     U8+11


                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Carlos Alvarez
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     U8 C


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               of hispanic
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                I expect to hear during
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           V4 / Questions


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Alvarez
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            I


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 positive
                                                                                    Texas


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Texas
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Propulsion


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    3 5


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     U<
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              M filtration:             1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     U2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     U3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     U4
                                                                                                                      V2
                                                                                                                      V3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      V4


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        =
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ...


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ...
                                                                                                                                                                                            Segovia-Dominguez


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         environment
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     U
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      V

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      V

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      V



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      L
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             / NASA


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           hispanic
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              during


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Alvarez



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           positive
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      NASA


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  5


                                                                                                                                                                                                                 to thediscoveries.
                                                                                                            Questions


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    the Carlos

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 environment
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    generating
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     / NASA


                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Antonio?
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        oftop
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            2



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            4


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        B 2


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       hear
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0 38<
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1 38<


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                for of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Interview
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              9 at Dallas


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     <= 5


                                                                                                                                                                                                                               - dim
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1 - dim
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     4 J


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Carlos



                                                                                                                                                                                                                            generating
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0 dim
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1 dim


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   topthe
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        5


                                                                                                                                                                                                                           vibrant
                                                                   The University


                                                                                                                                                                           mention during the interview.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           U48 O
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            A 3 2


                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0-dim
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1-dim
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0-dim
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1-dim

                                                                                                                                                                                                                     and supportive
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    to


                                                                                                                                                                                                               is in the top
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           U< 1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           V= 1



                                                                                                                                                                                                                           First
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              9 1


                                                                                                                                                                                                                               is in
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           V 9+1
                                                                                                                                                                                              of TexasInterview

                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Dallas


                                                                                                                                                                                                                           U8 1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  3


                                                                                                                                                                                                                           U8+1


                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Thus,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           expect


                                                                                                                                                                                                                         to theto
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Jet


                                                                                                                                                                                                                        is in the
                                                                                                    Interview

                                                                                                                                                                                                                 at Dallas


                                                                                                                                                                                                                           U<


                                                                                                                                                                                                               and supportive
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           U21
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           U2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           U3
                                                                                                               V2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           V3


                                                                                                                                                                                                                           V=
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     of Texas


                                                                                                                                                                                                                  for coming
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ...


                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ...


                                                                                                                                                                                                                   expect
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           U8


                                                                                                                                                                                         find below the list of questions


                                                                                                                                                                                                           Betti curves
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Interview Questions                                                 Interview Questions


                                                                                                                                                                                                     environment
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 UTSAUTSA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           V
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         atV


                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Thus,0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Interview Questions
                                                                                                                                                                                                               NASA


                                                                                                                                                                                                              discoveries.
                                                                                                                                                                           V3 at Dallas / Ignacio


                                                                                                                                                                                                                         I


                                                                                                                                                                                                    of research
                                                                                                                                                                                               Texas atI San

                                                                                                                                                                                                                      a
                                                                                                                                                                                                               of Texas


                                                                                                                                                                                                            for coming
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Ignacio Segovia-Dominguez Ignacio Segovia-Dominguez


                                                                                                                                                                                                       San Antonio?
                                                                                                                                                                                                              questions
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Ignacio Segovia-Dominguez


                                                                                                                                                                                                         as a whole.


                                                                                                                                                                                                                  is
                                                                                                                                                                                                          Graph


                                                                                                                                                                                                        is a vibrant
                                                                                                                                                                                                   The University


                                                                                                                                                                                                    the interview.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Interview Questions


                                                                                                                                                                                                      discoveries.


                                                                                                                                                                                Thus, generating
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 The University of Texas at Dallas / NASA Jet                                     The Propulsion
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          University       Lab,of Texas
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Caltech  at Dallas / NASA Jet Propulsion Lab, Caltech


                                                                                                                                                                                            at SanatAntonio?
                                                                                                                                                                                                  your reason


                                                                                                                                                                                                    UTSA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Interview Questions
                                                                                            Second filtration:


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      The University of Texas at Dallas / NASA Jet Propulsion Lab, Caltech


                                                                                                                                                               your reason for coming
                                                                                                                                                                                                 as a whole.


                                                                                                                                           Kindly find below the list ofofquestions
                                                                                                                                                                                                is a vibrant
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Second filtration: Ignacio Segovia-Dominguez
                                                                                                                                                                                            The University


                                                                                                                                                                                             the interview.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Interview Questions


                                                                                                                                                                                whole. UTSA
                                                                                                                                                                                                          of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Second filtration:


                                                                                                                                                                                               of research
                                                                                                                                                                                           your reason
                                                                                          Interview


                                                                                                                                                                                                           …
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Ignacio             ofSegovia-Dominguez
                                                                                                                                                                           FirstRfiltration:

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Second filtration:


                                                                                                                                                                                                     list
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            V1                                                                        V1 The University                        Texas at Dallas / NASA Jet Propulsion Lab, Caltech


                                                                                                                                                                                               society
                                                                                                                                                                                                      2
                                                                                                                                                                                                1 F



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Ignacio                  Segovia-Dominguez


                                                                                                                                                                                         (a) UTSA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Interview Questions
                                                                                                                                                                                Second filtration:


                                                                                                                                                                                                    D
                                                                                                                                                                                                    2


                                                                                                                                                                                           research


                                                                                                                                                                for comingmodule
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           V


                                                                                                                                                                           Dimension:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            V2                                                                        V2


                                                                                                                                                                                                the


                                                                                                                                                                     as asupportive
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       The University                   of 1Texas at Dallas / NASA Jet Propulsion Lab, Caltech


                                                                                                                                                                                    duringduring
                                                                                                                                                                                                 H


                                                                                                                                                                                                 6


                                                                                                                                                                           U U2 4 2 2


                                                                                                                                                                                       of Texas
                                                                                                                                                                              = I1 3 5


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Interview Questions
                                                                                                                                                                                First filtration:


                                                                                                                                                                                            (a)
                                                                                                                                                                                    1. What’s
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            V3                                                Second filtration:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   The University               of VTexas                  V2 / NASA Jet Propulsion Lab, Caltech
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    at Dallas


                                                                                                                                                                           0-dimofsociety
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       3


                                                                                                                                                                                  find below
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Ignacio             VSegovia-Dominguez


                                                                                                                                                                                  (a) UTSA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            VSecond            filtration
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Interview Questions


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       EMP Summaries
                                                                                                                                                                                Dimension:
                                                                                                                                                                            filtration
                                                                                                                                                                           V 9 filtration:


                                                                                                                                                                                             2
                                                                                                                                                                                            2


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Second filtration:
                                                                                                                                                                                            G


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      V4                   V3
                                                                                                                                                                                            E


                                                                                                                                                                                    38<
                                                                                                                                                                           1 38<
                                                                                                                                                               The University


                                                                                                                                           mention during the interview.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            V 9 1 The Ignacio               Segovia-Dominguez
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                1


                                                                                                                                                                                 of Texas


                                                                                                                                                                           0 - dim
                                                                                                                                                                           1 - dim
                                                                                                                                                                           3 filtration:


                                                                                                                                                                                mention
                                                                                                                                                                           0 dim
                                                                                                                                                                           1 dim
                                                                                                                                                                           1. What’s
                                                                                                                                                                                     38<
                                                                                                                                                                                1 38<
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Second filtration:                                          V 9 1 Jet Propulsion V4
                                                                                                                                                                   Ignacio


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               1Texas atVDallas


                                                                                                                                                                                0 - dim
                                                                                                                                                                                1 - dim
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         University         V
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            of                               / NASA                                         Lab, Caltech


                                                                                                                                                                       KindlyKindly


                                                                                                                                                                           1-dim
                                                                                                                                                                           0-dim
                                                                                                                                                                           1-dim
                                                                                                                                                                       0 dim0 dim
                                                                                                                                                                           ...1 dim
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     F
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Ignacio         VofSegovia-Dominguez


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   D
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2
                                                                                                                                                                       V54 V V4 3


                                                                                                                                                                                0-dim
                                                                                                                                                                       1-dim1-dim
                                                                                                                                                                       Dimension:


                                                                                                                                                                       0-dim0-dim
                                                                                                                                                                       1-dim1-dim
                                                                                                                                                                                     1


                                                                                                                                                                  N 1 ...Q 6... 8


                                                                                                                                                                                                           H


                                                                                                                                                                                                                           6


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               2
                                                                                                                                                                                                           5



                                                                                                                                                                                0 1


                                                                                                                                                                    Silhouette
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1
                                                                                                                                                                             1 U< 1
                                                                                                                                               The University of Texas


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            V9                                                                        V9                   V 9 1 Caltech
                                                                                                                                                                       V= 1 V= 1


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              V3
                                                                                                                                                                    2 V9 1 V9 1
                                                                                                                                                                                    1


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            1 Texas atVDallas
                                                                                                                                                                       V 9+1 V 9+1


                                                                                                                                                                               3 C


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    The University                                         / NASA         Jet Propulsion                  Lab,
                                                                                                                                                                                V3 1


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 2
                                                                                                                                                                       U 1 U8 1

                                                                                                                                                                       U8+1 U8+1


                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       G
                                                                                                                                                                                   1

                                                                                                                                                                               8 1


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               2
                                                                                                                                                                           U8+1


                                                                                                                                                           Vectorization
                                                                                                                                                                       U1 U1U15


                                                                                                                                                                                                           3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               2
                                                                                                                                                                       U<U U<


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               4
                                                                                                                                                                       V3 V 9+


                                                                                                                                                                       mention
                                                                                                                                                                       U37 2U3
                                                                                                                                                                     5 U4 U U4
                                                                                                                                                                       V1 V 9V1
                                                                                                                                                                       V2 V2


                                                                                                                                                                    4 V= 2 V=


                                                                                                                                                                                                       3


                                                                                                                                                                       0 U38<
                                                                                                                                                                       1 U38<
                                                                                                                                                                       V 9 V=V59


                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1
                                                                                                                                                                       ... ...
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Second filtration:
                                                                                                                                                                       U8 4U8


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            V 1                                                                       V 9+1                V9



                                                                                                                                                                               <
                                                                                                                                                                               <
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       C
                                                                                                                                                                       Second


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          V2Dallas / NASA                JetVPropulsion


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            V3


                                                                                                                                                                            dim
                                                                                                                                                                       1 - dim
                                                                                                                                                                                                       I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      The University       of9+Texas     at                                                           Lab, Caltech


                                                                                                                                                                                                               5


                                                                                                                                                                       1 dim
                                                                                                                                                                           V1
                                                                                                                                                                           V2

                                                                                                                                                                              4


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                4
                                                                                                                                                                      3 ...


                                                                                                                                                                               8


                                                                                                                                                                       0-dim
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   L
                                                                                                                                                                                                               3
                                                                                                                                                                 B 2 8U

                                                                                                                                                                       U<U
                                                                                                                                                                             L
                                                                                                                                                                           V


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Second filtration:           V= 1                                                                      V= 1


                                                                                                                                                                       0 -0
                                                                                                                                                                                                       5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           V 9+1
                                                                                                                                                                       First


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             V1                           V3                V4                V9 1


                                                                                                                                                        discoveries.
                                                                                                                                                                           3


                                                                                                                                                                                                           2



                                                                                                                                                                                                                       4


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           B 2
                                                                                                                                                                       UP


                                                                                                                                                          societyand
                                                                                                                                                                   First



                                                                                                                                                                                                                           N
                                                                                                                                                                         2


                                                                                                                                                                                                <= 5



                                                                                                                                                                                                       J
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Second filtration:                       V=                                                                        V=


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              V9


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           O
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           V= 1



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               V1            V2                           V4                V9 1
                                                                                                                                                                                                       4


                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1


                                                                                                                                                    (a) Antonio?
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             3

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     A 3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   M


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ...                                                                       ...
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   V1          V2            V3                           V9 1              V9                V 9+1                                        V=
                                                                                                                                                                 7 K


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   V2          V3            V4                           V9                V 9+1             V= 1                                        ...


                                                                                                                                     (a) UTSA is a vibrant
                                                                                                                                                    interview.
                                                                                                                                           Second filtration:



                                                                                                                                                               4 J


                                                                                                                                                                 5


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           First filtration:                                                         First filtration:
                                                                                                                                                                O
                                                                                                                                                        A 3 2


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   V3          V4            V9 1                         V 9+1             V= 1              V=
                                                                                                                                                               1


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     F


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   D
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2
                                                                                                                                                                                                               H


                                                                                                                                                                                                                             6
                                                                                                                                           First filtration:


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               2


                                                                                                                                1. What’s your reason
                                                                                                                                                                                                           5


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1                                                                    U1                                                 ...                    U1                   First filtration:
                                                                                                                                                             3


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   V4          V9 1          V9                           V= 1              V=


                                                                                                                                                theWhat’s
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2


                                                                                                                                                                                                           …           G



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               2
                                                                                                                                                                                                           3
                                                                                                                                                          M


                                                                                                                                                           8


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   4                                                       U2                                                                        U2                                  1 - Dim
                                                                                                                                                                                                       3



                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1


                                                                                                                                                                                                                             8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 R


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       C
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   V9 1        V9            V 9+1                        V=                ...                                                           U1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1
                                                                                                                                                                                                       I


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           5
                                                                                                                                                                                                               5


                                                                                                                                                summary
                                                                                                                                                         2


                                                                                                                                           Dimension:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           N 1 Q 6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   L


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           U3                                                 First filtration:      U3
                                                                                                                                                                                                               3


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      3


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ...
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   7



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               V 9+1         V= 1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           P



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   V9
                                                                                                                                                                                                       5


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          U2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   3


                                                                                                                                          of research
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       5


                                                                                                                                   of Texas at San
                                                                                                                                                                                                           2



                                                                                                                                                                                                                         4
                                                                                                                                                                                                               7 K


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           B 2


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           U4                               First filtration:                        U4
                                                                                                                                                                                                       J


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   V 9+1       V= 1          V=                                                               U1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               O
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     2


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          U3
                                                                                                                                                                                                       4


                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1


                                                                                                                            Dimension: 0 38<
                                                                                                                                                 38<
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             3

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     A 3


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          First filtration:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     M


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           U8 1                                                                      U8 1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   8


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0 - Dim


                                                                                                                                           0 - dim
                                                                                                                                           1 - dim
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   V= 1        V=            ...                                            U1                U2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         2


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          U4


                                                                                                                                           0 dim
                                                                                                                                           1 dim


                                                                                                                                           0-dim
                                                                                                                                           1-dim
                                                                                                                                           0-dim
                                                                                                                                           1-dim
                                                                                                                                           U< 1                                                                                                                    V=          ...                         U8             U1                U2                U3                     U8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          U8 1


                                                                                                                            mention during 1.
                                                                                                                            Second filtration:


                                                                                                                                           V= 1
                                                                                                                                           V9 1

                                                                                                                                           V 9+1


                                                                                                                                           U8 1



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             First filtration:
                                                                                                                                           U8+1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ...                                     U8+1           U2                U3                U4                     U8+1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          U8 T
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              U8 …


                                                                                                                                       Entropy
                                                                                                                                           U<
                                                                                                                                           U1
                                                                                                                                           U2
                                                                                                                                           U3
                                                                                                                                           U4


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1                     U1 2                         U3 3
                                                                                                                                           V1
                                                                                                                                           V2
                                                                                                                                           V3
                                                                                                                                           V4


                                                                                                                                           V=


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               First filtration:           U< 1                                                                      U< 1
                                                                                                                                           V9



                                                                                                                                           ...


                                                                                                                                           ...
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            U4
                                                                                                                                           U8
                                                                                                                            First filtration:


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1                                      U8+1


                                                                                                                                           1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   First filtration:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               U1            U2            U<             U4                U8 1              U8                     U<
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          U< 1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   U1          U2            U3            ...            U8 1              U8                U8+1                   ...
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          U<
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   U2          U3            U4                           U8                U8+1              U< 1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Kindly find    U8+below      theUlist
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               < 1of questions            I expect   Kindly to hear  find...
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           during
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              below job  the interviews,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                list of questions     and some
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             I expect   point to Ihear
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     mayduring job interviews, and some point I may


                                                                                                                            0 38<
                                                                                                                            1 38<
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   U3          U4            U8 1                                                             U<


                                                                                                                            0 - dim
                                                                                                                            1 - dim
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           mention during U< 1 the interview.                                        mention during the interview.


                                                                                                                            0 dim
                                                                                                                            1 dim
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   U4          U8 1          U8                                             U<                ...


                                                                                                                            0-dim
                                                                                                                            1-dim
                                                                                                                            0-dim
                                                                                                                            1-dim
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Kindly find below the list of questions I expect to hear during job interviews, and some point I may
                                                                                                                            U< 1
                                                                                                                            V= 1
                                                                                                                            V9 1


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               U8            U8+1                                           ...
                                                                                                                            V 9+1


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   U8 1                                                   U<
                                                                                                                            U8 1

                                                                                                                            U8+1


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                1.  What’s       your     reason      for    coming       to    the    Carlos
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1.    What’s Alvarez
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          mentionyour  College
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          reason
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           during
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Kindly find below the list of questions I expect to hear during job      offor
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         theBusiness
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 coming
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 interview. in
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             to  the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   the  University
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Carlos       Alvarez       Collegeand
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              interviews,         of Business
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       some point   in the  University
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         I may
                                                                                                                            U<


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   U8          U8+1          U< 1                         ...
                                                                                                                            U1
                                                                                                                            U2
                                                                                                                            U3
                                                                                                                            U4
                                                                                                                            V1
                                                                                                                            V2
                                                                                                                            V3
                                                                                                                            V4


                                                                                                                            V=
                                                                                                                            V9


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    of Texas at SanKindly      Antonio?                                          ofquestions
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Texas at San             Antonio?
                                                                                                                            ...


                                                                                                                            ...
                                                                                                                            U8


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   U8+1        U< 1          U<                                                           find    below during
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              mention          the listthe     of     interview.         I expect         to hear during job interviews, and some point I may
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1. What’s your reason for coming to the Carlos Alvarez College of Business in the University
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   U< 1        U<            ...                      (a)Kindly
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             UTSAfind   is amention
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              below the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              vibrant        during
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            and  list  ofthe
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   supportive    interview.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             questions  environmentI(a)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      expectUTSA    toofresearcher
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   for   hear
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        is        during
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             a vibrant
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Texas        at   and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              San jobtheinterviews,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       supportive
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           commercialization
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Antonio?               and some point
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          environment                    I may and the commercialization
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 for researcher
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   U<          ...                                        mention        during      the interview.1. What’s your reason for coming to the Carlos Alvarez College of Business in the University
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             of research       discoveries.         Thus, generating positive               of research
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      impactdiscoveries.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    in the diverse       Thus,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             communities
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   generatingand       positive impact in the diverse communities and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Kindly find below thesociety      list of as         1. What’s
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          questions                   your
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        oftoTexasreason     at forSancoming Antonio?     to the Carlos               Alvarez         College         of Business in the University
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ...                                                                       a whole.I UTSA   expect     is inhear the during
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           top of hispanicjob     interviews,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            society     (a)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          as aUTSA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        serving        andissome
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  whole.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       institutions
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  UTSA     point
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    a vibrant
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            in
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            is inthe Ithe
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    and  maysupportive
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        nation.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             top of hispanic    environment         for researcher
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      serving institutions          in theand   the commercialization
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            nation.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Kindly findmention
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               below the       list of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          during               1. What’s
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    thequestions
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          interview.      I expectyour  of   Texas
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         toreason       at
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              hear duringforSan  coming Antonio?
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      job          to the Carlos
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              interviews,             and someAlvarez     point College mayof Business
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Idiscoveries.                   ingenerating
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           the University
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      (b)    "Forty-five       percent       of   UTSA     (a)students
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    UTSAwill       is
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    (b) a be
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           vibrant
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            "Forty-five
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                the       andin
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       first    of   research
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  supportive
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 percent
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    their      families
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 of     environment
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      UTSA   to   students
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  earn      a Thus,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 for
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               degree.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  will researcher
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          be the firstand   positive
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            in the      impact in
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       families      tothe
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                theircommercialization  earndiverse   communities and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               a degree.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Kindly find mention
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   below during
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           the list the                             of   Texas
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          interview.I expect to hear during
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      of questions                                  at    San     Antonio?
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  job interviews,                 andand   some        pointsociety
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  I may
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Sixty-five      percent (a)   are   UTSA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 minorities."  is aofAlvarez
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       vibrant
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          research               supportive
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             discoveries.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Sixty-five              Thus,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              percent           as
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      environment
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               are   a whole.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  generating          UTSA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               for positive
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     minorities."     researcher   isimpact
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       inandthe top
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  in theof diverse
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            hispaniccommunities
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        commercialization serving institutions
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            and      in the nation.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   mention during the interview.  1.  What’s      your    reason      for   coming         to   the   Carlos                             College        of   Business            in   the   University
                                                                                                                                                      Figure 3: Illustration of the EMP framework for networks. Using the pair of filtration functions f ,                         1. What’s your
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1. What’s your  of Texas
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            reason
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          reasonatfor
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      of Texas
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    at for
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Sancoming
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Antonio?
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       San   I relate
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           coming
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         tothe
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Antonio?
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              theextend
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       (a)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Carlos
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          to UTSA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         with the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 theCarlos
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        student
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  research
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              where
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Alvarez  neither
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          is a vibrantresearch
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     population
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Alvarez
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 society
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  discoveries.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      parents
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 College
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                as    a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        discoveries.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    society
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      nor
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         supportive
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Collegebecause
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          whole.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           (b)of"Forty-five Thus,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     as
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ofaBusiness
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              grandparents
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Business
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            IIwhole.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          UTSA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         generating
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           in
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Thus,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                environment
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               relate
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                was    a(b)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        is
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   extend
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             percent
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          with
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        wentin
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               generating
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            UTSA   the for
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          first-generation
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              in
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ofpositive
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                where
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          is
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          student
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                "Forty-five
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   the     University
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         top
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 to college.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Sixty-five
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        University
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 UTSA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               impact
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             neither
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     positive
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               inresearcher
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    the totop
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      hispanic
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                students
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ofimpact
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         population
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            college
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       percent
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            inwill
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          parents
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     percent
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ofhispanic
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           student
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       serving
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   arediverse
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        nor
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         be
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   in
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             because
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           UTSA        the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        to I diverse
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       serving
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    commercialization
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        students
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      institutions
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      communities
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                grandparents
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          minorities."
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               the   first
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     awill
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     went
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              in their
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           communities
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               was institutions
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          in
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              be theinfirst
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        first-generation
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             and    nation.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              to college.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           families
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           theinand
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                tonation.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    college
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        to earn a degree.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             studenttotoearn a degree.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    their families

                                                                                                                                                      g we define non-decreasing thresholds {αi }m               n
                                                                                                                                                                                                     1 and {βj }1 , respectively, based on node features, red,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          of Texas at San Antonio?
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         (a) UTSA is aof
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        (a) UTSA is a vibrant and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               vibrant
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      (c) UTSA is a society
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  research anddiscoveries.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 supportive
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             access(b)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   supportive
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          (b)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              minority-serving
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     environment
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Thus,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             "Forty-five
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        to other      resources
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       environment
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           as a"Forty-five
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   whole.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                generating
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Sixty-five
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  percent
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  UTSA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            institution,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              forof
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       and call
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         percent
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Sixty-five
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Iresearcher
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      positive
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      percent
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       relate
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        UTSA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       for
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 isfor
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   thus
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    (c)inresearcher
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     with
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              proposals.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ofUTSA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        impact
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        are
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   topapplying
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                UTSA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          percent
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             when
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               thethe
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        students
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            access
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         are
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        is
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      inwill
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ofastudents the commercialization
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               hispanic
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                I relate
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                minorities."
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                minority-serving
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            commercialization
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               minorities."
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      student
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        to other
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 diverse
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 be    extend
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     population
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  serving
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                with
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                will
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        to research     be
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  communities
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                first
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        resources     where
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               institutions
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         thegrants
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               student
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             the    first
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              institution,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 neither
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           because
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        inand
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            their
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         I may
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              in
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           I was
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  callfamilies
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          for
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     in the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               population
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   their
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    thus
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    have
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                parents
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 nation.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   because
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             families
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            when
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              nor agrandparents
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      atofirst-generation
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                proposals.  earn
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                I was
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           to earn
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     applying          a adegree.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            first-generation
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   to research
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      degree. to college
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    grants I may
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          went tostudent
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      college.to
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  tohave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     college student to
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            (a) UTSA is aofvibrant researchand  discoveries.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              society    as a whole.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  supportive        Thus,     generating
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             UTSA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    environment
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Sixty-five   isfor   positive
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              inpercent
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  the    topare
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Iresearcher
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    relate       ofimpact
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                withthehispanic
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        andthe     in
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            extend
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       minorities."      the    diverse
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          serving
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         commercialization
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    studentwhere    populationcommunities
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         institutions
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        neither           because
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      parents    in the  and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       norInation.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            was      a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             grandparentsfirst-generation
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       went     to   to  college
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    college.          student      to
                                                                                                                                                      and edge features, blue. Both, filtrations and vectorizations run in parallel to better use computational                   of research
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  society
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              society   (b)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      (d) UTSA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          as a"Forty-five
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  discoveries.   whole.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Thus,    Igenerating
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               am interested
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                percent
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             butthealso
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         is in
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      topthrough
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  UTSA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      intop
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 positive a place
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             I relateforming
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               students
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       where
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   hispanic
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                impact
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 the    extend
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           with thestudents   inwill
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           student
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Iserving
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   the candiverse
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       where
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          be
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           (c) institutions
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    UTSA  that
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               make
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    (d)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            population
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   is
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    can
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           aIcommunities
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        first
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               bigger
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       institutions
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      neither    in
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        (c)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               am interested
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     parents
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      their
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    because
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        a minority-serving
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            but
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             improvealso
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                UTSA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           impact,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             infamilies
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            through
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            social
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   the  innot
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    nor
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    I was
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                access   and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              aisplace
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          nation.  a minority-serving
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  only
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             grandparents
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  to
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          from
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       earn
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               toaeconomic
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             institution,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             forming
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           wheremy
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       I can
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      went
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  degree.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    first-generation
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    otherstudents
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             resources
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 thus
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ownmake
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           when
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    development,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            that
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                to
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     institution,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   work    a bigger thus
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     college.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 tocan
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     college
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        call
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      applying
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        impact,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               forstudent
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            improve proposals.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     to research
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         social
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                whennotapplying
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          only fromtomy
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                to andgrants
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          economic
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          research
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             own work
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  I maydevelopment,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           have
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     grants I may have
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        (b)as"Forty-five
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               a whole. UTSA    percent
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Sixty-fiveis in
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ofpercent
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 UTSA        of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           are    hispanic
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             students     (c)will
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             theminorities."
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    extend        serving
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 where
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 UTSA be the   is afirst
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             neither         in     their
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              parents
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       minority-serving
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    access         to
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           in
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         othernorthe
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               familiesnation. to earn
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      grandparents
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          institution,         acall
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   degree.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 went
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  thus    to
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          whencollege.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     applying          to research        grants    I maythat have
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             and The Carlos            Alvarez        College         of    Business        andhasresources
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    The
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      means Carlos amand
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                I to    reach
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Alvarez   thatfor  proposals.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         College
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           goal.      For
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        of Business
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              instance        has means        to reach            goal. For instance
                                                                                                                                                      resources and produce EMP representations in a timely manner.                                                         (b) "Forty-five   Sixty-five
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  percent of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Sixty-fiveIpercent
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 relate with
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             percent
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           are
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              I relate
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  UTSA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          are
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         with
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       student
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              theminorities."
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   extend
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                minorities."
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  the student
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             students
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             taking (c)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               where
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            will
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             UTSA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       advantage
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    population
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    bepopulation
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          neither parents
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         of   a first
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 access
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          is their
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         becausenor
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        inbecause
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           (d)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       I was
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              their
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               to other
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 minority-serving
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      connections   Ia am
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            grandparents
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            I was
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          families
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 resources
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               with
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               interested
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        first-generation
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             to earn
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     institution,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         accounting
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            taking
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         went in
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        (d)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         a first-generationacall
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          thus degree.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        advantage
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             firms,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    to acollege.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        toplace but where
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             college
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          interested
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      forAmazon,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   when alsoof
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 college in
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           toproposals.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                applying
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  their
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   through
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              student
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                to
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  a place
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             student
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          connections
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Microsoft,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     I cantomake     research
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 forming
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             towhere I can make a bigger impact, not only from my own work
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               H-E-B,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                with
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          a bigger    grants      I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         accounting
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  studentsimpact,   may
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  thatnot   have
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           firms,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         canonly    Amazon,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     from my
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                improve      socialMicrosoft,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ownandwork   H-E-B,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             economic development,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             among others.   access (d)   to other
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 I amresources
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          interestedbut       and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             also       call
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 in athrough    for where
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            among
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          place       proposals.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         others.  I can       make       athat
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            biggercan impact,           not    only    fromeconomic
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 my
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  hasown     work
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              the the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  I relate with     extend     where
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         student
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        (c)   UTSA       neither
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    population
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        is           parents
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       becausenor
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            a minority-serving        I wasgrandparents
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 a first-generation
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             institution,        thuswent   whento to      collegeforming
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      college.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         applying
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          student
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          to   research
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         students
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         The
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          to grantsCarlos     Alvarez
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            I may have
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           improve
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               College     social
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              of      and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Business            means  development,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   to reach that goal. For instance
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 but also         through
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    and               forming          students         that       can    improve          social      andmy   economic          development,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  the extend
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         (c) UTSAwhereisneither
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            a access parents
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                2. What’s
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               minority-serving
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        to other   nor
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 your (d)    I amgreatest
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          grandparents
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          single
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           institution,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      resources
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       interested
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        and thus  went
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               call
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         intoa college.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     research
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       when
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      forThe
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 place     2.The
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              where
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       achievement?
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    applying
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             proposals.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Carlos         What’sCarlosI can   Alvarez
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  your
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        to research
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Alvarez
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       make
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      And
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Collegesingle
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               whya College
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                taking
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              grants
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      bigger
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       greatest
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        isBusiness
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Ithis
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               mayyour
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ofconnections
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ofresearch
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    impact,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               advantage   Business
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        have
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ofnot
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              greatest?
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            has     means
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         only
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      their  has     means
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   from
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                connections
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          achievement?
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  to reach
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 toown
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     reach
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    with
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    And
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 that
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           work
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            why
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        goal.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               thatis goal.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             accounting
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  For this      For greatest?
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               firms,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             your
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        instance
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      instance
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Amazon, Microsoft, H-E-B,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             but also through                formingtakingstudentsadvantage        thatofcantheir  improve
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                among                 social
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                others.      with
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                and    accounting
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          economic           firms,   Amazon,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             development,             Microsoft,       H-E-B,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            (c) UTSA is aaccess          to other
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        (d)   I am resources
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 minority-serving    interested      and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          institution,in a call
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             thusfor
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             place
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             and      when
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     The
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           proposals.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        where    applying
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 taking
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   I canAlvarez
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Carlos          make to
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              advantage
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    amongresearch
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           aCollege
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              biggerothers.grants
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      of their
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             impact,    I may
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     connections
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              of Business   not onlyhave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      has fromwith
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               means   accounting
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        mytoownreach   work firms,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            that        Amazon,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    goal.               Microsoft, H-E-B,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               For instance
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  access(d)to other    resources      and    call for     proposals.                                                                  What’s          your        single     greatest          research        achievement?
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              I am interested        in
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              but also   a through
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            place    whereforming I canstudents
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             taking         make among
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          advantage   a that ofothers.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         bigger   canimpact,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  their     improve
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             connections         2.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          notsocial
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  onlywith from
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          and        my
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   economic
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                accounting    own      work
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        development,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       firms,     Amazon,           Microsoft,        H-E-B, And why is this your greatest?
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              but also
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            (d) I am interested        in athrough
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              and The
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             place      forming
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      whereCarlosI can students
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Alvarez
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           make         that
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     aCollege
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         biggercan      What’s
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2.impact,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ofimprove
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Business    notyour has single
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          social
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             only      means
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        from        greatest
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         and economicto reach
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    my    own work   research
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     that      goal.achievement?
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      development,        For instance And why is this your greatest?
                                                                                                                                                      Hence, depending on the dataset, one can use vectorization methods which emphasize long barcodes                                        and Theforming
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  but also through         Carlos
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              takingAlvarez
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        advantage
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       students     College
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      that
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             among
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  2.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              canofimprove
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          of their
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           others.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        What’s
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Business
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       connections    yourhas
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      social withsingle
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  means
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                greatest
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        accountingto reach
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             economic
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    research
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    that Amazon,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                firms,                achievement?
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            goal. ForMicrosoft,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    development,                  instance H-E-B,  And        why      is  this    your     greatest?
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              taking Alvarez
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  and The Carlos        advantage
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              among     of     2. ofWhat’s
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            their
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         others.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    College          connections
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Business    your  has single
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           withmeans    greatest
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    accounting
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             to reach       research
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            firms,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                that goal.      achievement?
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Amazon,            instanceAnd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      For Microsoft,                    why is this your greatest?
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   H-E-B,
                                                                                                                                                      (Silhouette with p > 1, Entropy, Persistence Image) or the ones which considers all signals equally                                     among others.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  taking advantage
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  among others.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          of their connections with accounting firms, Amazon, Microsoft, H-E-B,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  2. What’s your single greatest research achievement? And why is this your greatest?
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2. What’s your single greatest research achievement? And why is this your greatest?
                                                                                                                                                      (Betti). Our experiments proved that these variety of options can be quite useful as some EMP                    2. What’s your single greatest research achievement? And why is this your greatest?

                                                                                                                                                      vectorizations give much better result than others in different datasets (Appendix G).

                                                                                                                                                      E        F URTHER D ETAILS ON E XPERIMENTS
                                                                                                                                                      E.1         B ENCHMARK DATASETS AND E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP

                                                                                                                                                      In our experiments, we use 11 benchmark datasets for graph classification tasks (see Table 2). We
                                                                                                                                                      have run our models for graph classification tasks on an 8-core DO droplet machine with Intel Xeon
                                                                                                                                                      Scalable processors at a base frequency of 2.5 Ghz. Table 2 summarize the statistics of the datasets in
                                                                                                                                                      our experiments.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Table 2: Summary statistics of the datasets.

                                                                                                                                                           Dataset                        # Graphs Avg. |V| Avg. |E| # Class Node Attr. (Dim.) Edge Attr. (Dim.)
                                                                                                                                                           BZR_MD                             306                                                                21.30                      225.06                                       2                                                      3                                                                           -
                                                                                                                                                           COX2_MD                             303                                                                26.28                     335.12                                       2                                                      3                                                                           -
                                                                                                                                                           DHFR_MD                             393                                                                23.87                     283.02                                       2                                                      -                                                                           1
                                                                                                                                                           MUTAG                               188                                                                17.93                      19.79                                       2                                                      -                                                                           -
                                                                                                                                                           PROTEINS                           1113                                                                39.06                      72.82                                       2                                                      1                                                                           -
                                                                                                                                                           IMDB-B                             1000                                                                19.77                      96.53                                       2                                                      -                                                                           -
                                                                                                                                                           IMDB-M                             1500                                                                13.00                      65.94                                       3                                                      -                                                                           -
                                                                                                                                                           REDDIT-B                           2000                                                               429.63                     497.75                                       2                                                      -                                                                           -
                                                                                                                                                           REDDIT-M-5K                        4999                                                               508.82                     594.87                                       2                                                      -                                                                           -

                                                                                                                                                      The resolution of vectorization is the most significant parameter, which may impact the computational
                                                                                                                                                      performance and results. As such, we use a fixed resolution to get consistent results in all experiments
                                                                                                                                                      and consider time constraints on server usage. We use resolution size of 50×50 for each summary


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


function, and the standard parameters set by the Gudhi library in Python 2 . The order of landscape
summary function is set to 1 (max), whilst the power of weights is set to 1 for silhouette summaries.
Results in Table 1 comes from computing MP using filtration functions as follows. BZR_MD,
COX2_MD, and DHFR_MD use weighted node-degree and edge-power filtrations. PROTEINS
uses node-closeness and edge-betweenness power filtrations. MUTAG, IMDB-BINARY, and IMDB-
MULTI use node-katz centrality and edge-ricci curvature power filtrations. REDDIT-BINARY, and
REDDIT-MULTI-5K use node-katz centrality and edge-ricci curvature filtrations. We performed an
empirical analysis to select previous filter functions for each graph network. We use three types of
vectorizations: Betti curves, silhouette functions and entropy summary functions. For each case we
compute both 0-dim and 1-dim MP topological features.


F       C OMPUTATIONAL C OMPLEXITY

Computational complexity (CC) of persistence diagram PDk (∆) is O(N 3 ), where N is the number
of k-simplices in ∆ (Otter et al., 2017). CC of EMP summary Mdϕ depends on the vectorization
ϕ used and the number d of the filtration functions one uses. If r is the resolution size of the
multipersistence grid, then one needs r(d−1) single persistence diagrams to obtain Mdϕ . Therefore,
CC(Mdϕ ) = O(r(d−1) · N 3 · Cϕ (m)) where Cϕ (m) is CC for ϕ and m is the number of barcodes
in PDk , e.g., if ϕ is persistence landscape, then Cϕ (m) = m2 and hence CC for EMP Landscape
with d = 2 is O(r · N 3 · m2 ). In practice, r is a constant and m is small compared to N , hence the
complexity is again reduced to O(N 3 ). On the other hand, as Betti numbers do not need PDk to be
computed, it is possible to obtain much faster algorithms for EMP Betti Summary (Edelsbrunner &
Parsa, 2014). Recently, Lesnick & Wright (2022) introduced a quite fast algorithm for EMP Betti
summaries with O(M3 ) time where M is the rank of the multipersistence module with minimal
representation.


G       A BLATION S TUDY

G.1      D IFFERENT TYPES OF EMP SUMMARIES

Furthermore, to evaluate the performance of different types of EMP summaries (i.e., EMP Silhouette
(EMP-S), EMP Entropy (EMP-E), and EMP Betti (EMP-B) with different dimensions (i.e., H0 :
0-dimensional topology, and H1 : 1-dimensional topology) and graph-based features (i.e., fV : node
features, and fE : edge features; see more details in Section 5.2 and Appendix E.1). We include
comparative statistics using all combinations of input variables, i.e. ablation study, for 3 datasets in
our analysis: BZR-MD (Table 3), DHFR-MD (Table 4), and REDDIT-BINARY (Table 5).
Each cell shows the classification accuracy (in % ± standard deviation) when using different combi-
nations of variables. The best accuracy result is highlighted using bold font. A row/column named as
’none’ means that either graph-based features, or EMP summaries where not used to compute the
experiments. As such, the top row shows all the accuracy results without using any EMP topological
features. The first/left column shows the results only using EMP topological features. The cell in the
bottom right corner, of each EMP group, contains the accuracy results using all graph-extracted/EMP
features available.
We can observe that: (i) best results contains 1-dimensional EMP summaries, demonstrating the
necessity of capturing higher-order structures (e.g., triangles/cycles), (ii) the choice of the EMP
summary can significantly affect the performance, and (iii) the addition of EMP topological features
generally improves accuracy of versions without EMP summaries, thus, demonstrating the importance
of modeling global and topological graph structures.

G.2      O RDER OF F ILTRATION

With our novel approach, especially sublevel/superlevel filtration, we give a computationally very
efficient way to extract information of substructures of the data induced by multiple functions. Since
    2
        https://gudhi.inria.fr/python/latest/


                                                  20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                            Table 3: Ablation Study on BZR_MD dataset.


                               none                  fV                  fE               fV + fE
    none                          -           67.124 ± 1.959      58.714 ± 0.520      67.642 ± 1.724
    EMP-B H0              67.870 ± 1.677      68.499 ± 1.962      67.514 ± 1.868      68.037 ± 2.035
    EMP-B H1              69.205 ± 1.239      69.157 ± 1.220      68.935 ± 0.818      69.223 ± 1.058
    EMP-B H0 + H1         68.100 ± 1.171      68.492 ± 1.245      68.335 ± 1.445      69.077 ± 1.470
    EMP-E H0              65.190 ± 1.484      64.930 ± 2.045      64.962 ± 1.682      65.288 ± 1.754
    EMP-E H1              77.469 ± 1.144      77.438 ± 0.727      77.441 ± 0.830      77.766 ± 0.952
    EMP-E H0 + H1         73.023 ± 0.818      72.963 ± 1.014      73.057 ± 1.284      73.324 ± 1.086
    EMP-S H0              68.135 ± 1.294      68.525 ± 0.865      68.426 ± 1.235      68.232 ± 0.969
    EMP-S H1              71.068 ± 1.417      71.071 ± 1.167      70.906 ± 1.416      70.743 ± 1.275
    EMP-S H0 + H1         72.282 ± 1.012      72.246 ± 0.883      72.682 ± 0.913      72.904 ± 0.901


                           Table 4: Ablation Study on DHFR_MD dataset.


                               none                  fV                  fE               fV + fE
    none                          -           68.333 ± 0.874      60.707 ± 1.455      68.058 ± 1.159
    EMP-B H0              71.872 ± 0.804      72.097 ± 0.876      71.794 ± 0.541      72.121 ± 0.943
    EMP-B H1              66.638 ± 0.690      68.190 ± 0.933      67.072 ± 0.705      68.774 ± 1.028
    EMP-B H0 + H1         73.959 ± 0.746      74.087 ± 0.820      74.085 ± 0.671      74.213 ± 0.905
    EMP-E H0              74.906 ± 0.968      74.550 ± 0.867      74.521 ± 1.066      74.523 ± 1.027
    EMP-E H1              66.218 ± 1.499      66.424 ± 1.304      66.067 ± 1.152      66.397 ± 0.899
    EMP-E H0 + H1         74.947 ± 0.663      74.849 ± 0.819      74.667 ± 0.922      74.796 ± 0.960
    EMP-S H0              78.434 ± 0.344      78.028 ± 0.597      78.537 ± 0.677      78.309 ± 0.681
    EMP-S H1              75.053 ± 0.909      74.953 ± 0.930      75.056 ± 0.785      75.259 ± 1.051
    EMP-S H0 + H1         80.174 ± 1.081      80.503 ± 1.066      80.174 ± 0.864      80.126 ± 0.939


                            Table 5: Ablation Study on REDDIT-B dataset.


                               none                  fV                  fE               fV + fE
    none                          -           89.680 ± 0.300      79.590 ± 0.394      90.125 ± 0.277
    EMP-B H0              88.925 ± 0.168      90.400 ± 0.145      89.145 ± 0.193      90.520 ± 0.204
    EMP-B H1              80.715 ± 0.235      87.090 ± 0.217      84.620 ± 0.160      88.225 ± 0.280
    EMP-B H0 + H1         89.970 ± 0.309      90.945 ± 0.184      90.025 ± 0.234      91.025 ± 0.221
    EMP-E H0              88.140 ± 0.265      89.875 ± 0.185      88.400 ± 0.210      89.945 ± 0.177
    EMP-E H1              79.850 ± 0.365      87.670 ± 0.303      84.600 ± 0.214      88.640 ± 0.156
    EMP-E H0 + H1         89.285 ± 0.234      90.010 ± 0.234      89.240 ± 0.202      90.045 ± 0.221
    EMP-S H0              86.150 ± 0.261      87.925 ± 0.162      86.940 ± 0.206      88.415 ± 0.241
    EMP-S H1              77.580 ± 0.186      85.435 ± 0.332      81.580 ± 0.222      86.960 ± 0.346
    EMP-S H0 + H1         86.790 ± 0.385      88.250 ± 0.266      87.410 ± 0.315      88.590 ± 0.377



we only use horizontal slices, the first function is only used for finer filtration, and the second function
gives the persistence diagrams. This makes our method a-symmetric (the order is important). Hence,
one can change the order and get different performance results for the model. This asymmetry
enriches our method as one can combine both feature vectors obtained by different order as they do
not contain the same information about the multipersistence grid. To observe the effect of changing
the order of the filtering functions, we run experiments on two benchmark datasets, BZR_MD and


                                                    21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


REDDIT-BINARY. Our experiments show that in some datasets, the order can be highly important,
while in others, it has negligible effect on the performance.
Table 6 (BZR_MD) shows significant changes in the performance for all our vectorizations (EMP-
Betti, EMP-Silhouette and EMP-Entropy). In Figure 4a, we also see in half of the models, one order
is better than the other, while in the other half of the models, the opposite is true. On the other hand,
we observe that for the REDDIT-BINARY dataset, the order is not as important for these functions
(Table 7 & Figure 4b) as the change in performance is not as significant as in BZR_MD.

Table 6: Graph Dataset BZR_MD. Impact on classification accuracy when modifying the filtration
ordering. SV and WE denotes sublevel filtration on nodes and weight fltration on edges, respectively.
The statistical significance, when one order is better that the other, is shown at three levels (0.1, 0.05,
0.01) and the best overall result of each order filtration is in bold font.

           Order       none                  fV                   fE                    fV + fE
none       -           -                     67.124 ± 1.959       58.714 ± 0.520        67.642 ± 1.724
none       -           -                     67.124 ± 1.959       58.714 ± 0.520        67.642 ± 1.724
EMP-B SV           WE 71.414 ± 1.638    71.446 ± 1.166    71.351 ± 1.107    71.610 ± 1.125
H0    WE           SV 76.192 ± 1.188∗∗∗ 76.363 ± 0.861∗∗∗ 75.804 ± 1.025∗∗∗ 75.809 ± 0.989∗∗∗
EMP-B SV           WE 69.047 ± 1.092         69.337 ± 0.833   69.114 ± 0.711            69.798 ± 0.845
H1    WE           SV 69.094 ± 1.231         70.196 ± 0.860∗∗ 69.648 ± 0.894            70.296 ± 0.973
EMP-B SV           WE 72.789 ± 1.544     72.946 ± 1.502     72.848 ± 1.286    73.204 ± 1.568
H0 + H1 W E        SV 75.156 ± 0.647 ∗∗∗ 74.996 ± 0.667 ∗∗∗ 75.160 ± 0.821∗∗∗ 75.055 ± 0.926∗∗∗
EMP-E      SV      WE 71.967 ± 1.091   72.129 ± 1.335    71.803 ± 1.253   72.198 ± 1.280
H0         WE      SV 73.274 ± 0.963∗∗ 74.285 ± 1.206∗∗∗ 73.314 ± 1.258∗∗ 74.812 ± 1.419∗∗∗
EMP-E      SV      WE 72.485 ± 1.209∗∗∗ 72.452 ± 1.121∗∗∗ 72.326 ± 0.725∗∗∗ 72.230 ± 1.330∗∗∗
H1         WE      SV 67.097 ± 1.364    65.853 ± 1.457    66.274 ± 1.370    66.246 ± 1.273
EMP-E SV           WE 75.498 ± 1.338         75.819 ± 1.209∗∗∗ 75.133 ± 1.357 ∗∗ 75.303 ± 1.303∗∗∗
H0 + H1 W E        SV 74.985 ± 1.112         73.410 ± 1.378    73.841 ± 1.200    73.053 ± 1.227
EMP-S      SV      WE 69.191 ± 1.138    69.717 ± 0.859    69.224 ± 0.960     69.417 ± 1.036
H0         WE      SV 75.926 ± 1.051∗∗∗ 76.320 ± 0.952∗∗∗ 75.927 ± 0.597 ∗∗∗ 76.187 ± 0.713∗∗∗
EMP-S      SV      WE 74.067 ± 0.534∗∗∗ 74.428 ± 0.723∗∗∗ 74.432 ± 1.003∗∗∗ 74.659 ± 0.919∗∗∗
H1         WE      SV 70.232 ± 1.211    69.903 ± 1.481    70.065 ± 1.347    70.068 ± 1.141
EMP-S SV           WE 77.658 ± 0.692∗∗∗ 78.025 ± 0.656∗∗∗ 77.794 ± 0.496∗∗∗ 77.861 ± 0.802∗∗∗
H0 + H1 W E        SV 74.760 ± 1.394    75.286 ± 1.054    75.028 ± 1.116    75.128 ± 1.099


                                                   22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Table 7: Graph Dataset REDDIT-BINARY. Impact on classification accuracy when modifying the
filtration ordering. SV and WE denotes sublevel filtration on nodes and weight fltration on edges,
respectively. The statistical significance, when one order is better that the other, is shown at three
levels (0.1, 0.05, 0.01) and the best overall result of each order filtration is in bold font.

          Order          none              fV                  fE                     fV + fE
none      -              -                 89.680 ± 0.300      79.590 ± 0.394         90.125 ± 0.277
none      -              -                 89.680 ± 0.300      79.590 ± 0.394         90.125 ± 0.277
EMP-B SV          WE 88.925 ± 0.168    90.400 ± 0.145    89.145 ± 0.193    90.520 ± 0.204
H0    WE          SV 90.005 ± 0.196∗∗∗ 90.825 ± 0.136∗∗∗ 90.135 ± 0.161∗∗∗ 90.925 ± 0.133∗∗∗
EMP-B SV          WE 80.715 ± 0.235        87.090 ± 0.217    84.620 ± 0.160    88.225 ± 0.280
H1    WE          SV 80.880 ± 0.335        88.300 ± 0.334∗∗∗ 85.030 ± 0.363∗∗∗ 88.895 ± 0.323∗∗∗
EMP-B SV          WE 89.970 ± 0.309        90.945 ± 0.184∗∗ 90.025 ± 0.234            91.025 ± 0.221∗∗
H0 + H1 W E       SV 90.020 ± 0.200        90.650 ± 0.270   90.125 ± 0.154            90.770 ± 0.198
EMP-E     SV      WE 88.140 ± 0.265     89.875 ± 0.185     88.400 ± 0.210    89.945 ± 0.177
H0        WE      SV 89.695 ± 0.157 ∗∗∗ 90.245 ± 0.147 ∗∗∗ 89.850 ± 0.199∗∗∗ 90.450 ± 0.186∗∗∗
EMP-E     SV      WE 79.850 ± 0.365∗∗∗ 87.670 ± 0.303          84.600 ± 0.214∗∗∗ 88.640 ± 0.156∗∗∗
H1        WE      SV 74.560 ± 0.308    87.545 ± 0.196          83.755 ± 0.239    88.350 ± 0.196
EMP-E SV          WE 89.285 ± 0.234    90.010 ± 0.234          89.240 ± 0.202    90.045 ± 0.221
H0 + H1 W E       SV 90.015 ± 0.192∗∗∗ 90.235 ± 0.243∗         90.130 ± 0.200∗∗∗ 90.275 ± 0.171∗∗
EMP-S     SV      WE 86.150 ± 0.261     87.925 ± 0.162    86.940 ± 0.206     88.415 ± 0.241
H0        WE      SV 89.380 ± 0.117 ∗∗∗ 90.345 ± 0.205∗∗∗ 89.545 ± 0.207 ∗∗∗ 90.455 ± 0.156∗∗∗
EMP-S     SV      WE 77.580 ± 0.186∗∗∗ 85.435 ± 0.332    81.580 ± 0.222    86.960 ± 0.346
H1        WE      SV 75.165 ± 0.367    86.775 ± 0.292∗∗∗ 83.125 ± 0.415∗∗∗ 87.295 ± 0.325∗∗
EMP-S SV          WE 86.790 ± 0.385    88.250 ± 0.266    87.410 ± 0.315     88.590 ± 0.377
H0 + H1 W E       SV 89.715 ± 0.279∗∗∗ 90.495 ± 0.248∗∗∗ 89.780 ± 0.337 ∗∗∗ 90.580 ± 0.217 ∗∗∗


                   (a)                                                          (b)

Figure 4: Visual summary of the impact on classification accuracy when modifying the filtration
ordering, for each combination of features and EMP summaries. Whenever statistical hypothesis
support a winner, the corresponding cell is coloured either as blue (SV WE ), or red (WE   SV ).
(a) BZR_MD. (b) REDDIT-BINARY.


                                                 23
