Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


L EARNING C ONTROLLABLE A DAPTIVE S IMULATION
FOR M ULTI - RESOLUTION P HYSICS

 Tailin Wu1∗, Takashi Maruyama1,2∗ , Qingqing Zhao1∗ , Gordon Wetzstein1 , Jure Leskovec1
 1
  Stanford University, 2 NEC Corporation
 tailin@cs.stanford.edu,49takashi@nec.com,cyanzhao@stanford.edu,
 gordonwz@stanford.edu,jure@cs.stanford.edu



                                                A BSTRACT

              Simulating the time evolution of physical systems is pivotal in many scientific
              and engineering problems. An open challenge in simulating such systems is their
              multi-resolution dynamics: a small fraction of the system is extremely dynamic,
              and requires very fine-grained resolution, while a majority of the system is chang-
              ing slowly and can be modeled by coarser spatial scales. Typical learning-based
              surrogate models use a uniform spatial scale, which needs to resolve to the finest
              required scale and can waste a huge compute to achieve required accuracy. In
              this work, we introduce Learning controllable Adaptive simulation for Multi-
              resolution Physics (LAMP) as the first full deep learning-based surrogate model
              that jointly learns the evolution model and optimizes appropriate spatial resolu-
              tions that devote more compute to the highly dynamic regions. LAMP consists of
              a Graph Neural Network (GNN) for learning the forward evolution, and a GNN-
              based actor-critic for learning the policy of spatial refinement and coarsening. We
              introduce learning techniques that optimizes LAMP with weighted sum of error
              and computational cost as objective, allowing LAMP to adapt to varying relative
              importance of error vs. computation tradeoff at inference time. We evaluate our
              method in a 1D benchmark of nonlinear PDEs and a challenging 2D mesh-based
              simulation. We demonstrate that our LAMP outperforms state-of-the-art deep
              learning surrogate models, and can adaptively trade-off computation to improve
              long-term prediction error: it achieves an average of 33.7% error reduction for
              1D nonlinear PDEs, and outperforms MeshGraphNets + classical Adaptive Mesh
              Refinement (AMR) in 2D mesh-based simulations. Project website with data and
              code can be found at: http://snap.stanford.edu/lamp.


1        I NTRODUCTION
Simulating the time evolution of a physical system is of vital importance in science and engineering
(Lynch, 2008; Carpanese, 2021; Sircombe et al., 2006; Courant et al., 1967; Lelievre & Stoltz, 2016).
Usually, the physical system has a multi-resolution nature: a small fraction of the system is highly
dynamic, and requires very fine-grained resolution to simulate accurately, while a majority of the
system is changing slowly. Examples include hazard prediction in weather forecasting (Majumdar
et al., 2021), disruptive instabilities in the plasma fluid in nuclear fusion (Kates-Harbeck et al.,
2019), air dynamics near the boundary for jet engine design (Athanasopoulos et al., 2009), and more
familiar examples such as wrinkles in a cloth (Pfaff et al., 2021) and fluid near the boundary for flow
through the cylinder (Vlachas et al., 2022). Due to the typical huge size of such systems, it is pivotal
that those systems are simulated not only accurately, but also with as small of a computational cost
as possible. A uniform spatial resolution that pays similar attention to regions with vastly different
dynamics, will waste significant compute on slow-changing regions while may be insufficient for
highly dynamic regions.
To accelerate physical simulations, deep learning (DL)-based surrogate models have recently
emerged as a promising alternative to complement (Um et al., 2020) or replace (Li et al., 2021)
classical solvers. They reduce computation and accelerate the simulation with larger spatial (Um
     ∗
         Equal contribution.


                                                      1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


        Forward Iteration
            𝑀                                                  𝑀                        𝑀

                        𝑓                       remesh                     𝑓
                                  {𝑒 } {𝑒 }


                            𝑀                      𝑀                           𝑀
                                     Forward                   Forward
      Full Rollout
                                                                                             …

     Rollout without                   𝑓                           𝑓
       Remeshing
                                                                                             …
                            𝑀                       𝑀                           𝑀
        Reward                                                                               …
Figure 1: LAMP schematic. The forward iteration (upper box) first uses the policy fφpolicy to decide
             re     co
the number K and K of edges as well as which edges among the full mesh to be refined or
coarsened, and then executes remeshing and interpolation. The evolution model fθevo is applied to
the updated mesh M̂ ′t to predict the state M̂ t+1 at the next time step. We use the reduction of both
Error and Computation (mesh size), compared to a multi-step rollout without remeshing, as reward
to learn the policy. For more details, see Section 3.2.
et al., 2020; Kochkov et al., 2021) or temporal resolution (Li et al., 2021), or via latent represen-
tations (Sanchez-Gonzalez et al., 2020; Wu et al., 2022). However, current deep learning-based
surrogate models typically assume a uniform or fixed spatial resolution, without learning how to
best assign computation to the most needed spatial region. Thus, they may be insufficient to address
the aforementioned multi-resolution challenge. Although adaptive methods, such as Adaptive Mesh
Refinement (AMR) (Soner et al., 2003; Cerveny et al., 2019) exist for classical solvers, they share
similar challenge (e.g., slow) as classical solvers. A deep learning-based surrogate models, that is
able to learn both the evolution and learn to assign computation to the needed region, is needed.
In this work, we introduce Learning controllable Adaptive simulation for Multi-resolution Physics
(LAMP) as the first fully DL-based surrogate model that jointly learns the evolution model and
optimizes appropriate spatial resolutions that devote more compute to the highly dynamic regions.
Our key insight is that by explicitly setting the error and computation as the combined objective
to optimize, the model can learn to adaptively decide the best local spatial resolution to evolve the
system. To achieve this goal, LAMP consists of a Graph Neural Network (GNN)-based evolution
model for learning the forward evolution, and a GNN-based actor-critic for learning the policy of
discrete actions of local refinement and coarsening of the spatial mesh, conditioned on the local state
and a coefficient β that weights the relative importance of error vs. computation. The policy (actor)
outputs both the number of refinement and coarsening actions, and which edges to refine or coarsen,
while the critic evaluates the expected reward of the current policy. The full system is trained with an
alternating fashion, iterating between training the evolution model with supervised loss, and training
the actor-critic via reinforcement learning (RL). Taken together, a single instance of evolution model
and actor-critic jointly optimizes reduction of error and computation for the physical simulation, and
can operate across the relative importance of the two metrics at inference time.
We evaluate our model on a 1D benchmark of nonlinear PDEs (which tests generalization across
PDEs of the same family), and a challenging 2D mesh-based simulation of paper folding. In 1D, we
show that our model outperforms state-of-the-art deep learning-based surrogate models in terms of
long-term evolution error by 33.7%, and can adaptively tradeoff computation to improve long-term
prediction error. On a 2D mesh-based simulation, our model outperforms state-of-the-art Mesh-
GraphNets + classical Adaptive Mesh Refinement (AMR) in 2D mesh-based simulations.

2   P ROBLEM S ETTING AND R ELATED W ORK
We consider the numerical simulation of a physical system, following the notation introduced in
(Pfaff et al., 2021). The system’s state at time t is discretized into the mesh-based state M t =


                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


(V t , E t ), t = 0, 1, 2, ..., where E t is the mesh edges and V t is the states at the nodes at time
t. Each node i ∈ V contains the mesh-space coordinate ui and dynamic features qi . Note that
this representation of the physical system is very general. It includes Eulerian systems (Wu et al.,
2022) where the mesh is fixed and the field qi on the nodes are changing, and Lagrangian systems
(Sanchez-Gonzalez et al., 2020; Pfaff et al., 2021) where the mesh coordinate in physical space
is also dynamically moving (for this case, an additional world coordinate xi is accompanying the
mesh coordinate ui ). During prediction, a simulator f (classical or learned) autoregressively predicts
system’s state M̂ t+1 at the next time step based on its previous prediction M̂ t at previous time step:

                                    M̂ t+1 = f (M̂ t ), t = 0, 1, 2, ...                             (1)

where M̂ 0 = M 0 is the initial state. During the prediction, both the dynamic features V t at the mesh
nodes, and the mesh topology E t can be changing. The error is typically computed by comparing
the prediction and ground-truth after long-term prediction: error := ℓ(M̂ t , M t ) for a metric ℓ (e.g.,
MSE, RMSE), and the computation cost (in terms of floating point operations, or FLOPs) typically
scales with the size of the mesh (e.g., the number of nodes). The task is to evolve the system long-
term into the future, with a low error and a constraint on the computational cost.
Most classical solvers use a fixed mesh E t whose topology does not vary with time. For example,
the mesh E t ≡ E 0 can be a 2D or 3D regular grid, or an irregular mesh that is pre-generated at
the beginning of the simulation (Geuzaine & Remacle, 2009). Classical Adaptive Mesh Refinement
(AMR) (Narain et al., 2012) addresses the multi-resolution challenge by adaptively refine or coarsen
the mesh resolution, with heuristics based on local state variation. Since they are based on classical
solvers, they may not benefit from the many advantages that deep learning brings (GPU acceleration,
less stringent spatial and temporal resolution requirement, explicit forward, etc.). In contrast, our
LAMP is a deep-learning based surrogate model, and can benefit from the many advantages (e.g.,
speedup) offered by the deep learning framework. Furthermore, since it directly optimize for a linear
combination of error and computation, it has the potential to directly optimize to a better error vs.
computation tradeoff, nearer to the true Pareto frontier.
Deep-learning based surrogate models, although having achieved speedup compared to classical
solvers, still typically operate on a fixed grid or mesh (Li et al., 2021; Sanchez et al., 2020; Wu
et al., 2022; Zhao et al., 2022; Han et al., 2022), and have yet to exploit the multi-resolution nature
typical in physical simulations. One important exception is MeshGraphNets (Pfaff et al., 2021),
which both learns how to evolve the state V t , and uses supervised learning to learn the spatial
adaptation that changes E t . However, since it uses supervised learning where the ground-truth
mesh is provided from the classical solver with AMR, it cannot exceed the performance of AMR
in terms of error vs. computation tradeoff, and has to interact with the classical solver in inference
time to perform the adaptive mesh refinement. In contrast, our LAMP directly optimizes for the
objective, which uses reinforcement learning for learning the policy of refinement and coarsening,
and has the potential to surpass classical AMR and achieve a better error vs. computation tradeoff.
Moreover, a single trained LAMP can adapt to the full range of relative importance β of error
vs. computation at inference time, thus can be more versatile than MeshGraphNets with a fixed
strategy. Another pioneering work by Yang et al. (2021) learns the adaptive remeshing using RL.
It has notable differences with our work. Firstly, their method is evaluated for the specific finite
element method (FEM), and cannot be directly applied for more general simulations, e.g., cloth
simulations as in our experiment. Furthermore, our method is the first method that jointly learns the
remeshing and evolution. Secondly, while the goal of Yang et al. (2021) is to reduce error, ours is to
learn a controllable tradeoff between reducing error and reducing computational cost. Thirdly, the
actions of Yang et al. (2021) are refinement on the faces of the rectangular meshes, while our actions
are refinement and coarsening on the edges of triangular meshes. Fourthly, LAMP does not require
the classical solver in the loop, thus significantly reducing the training time.


3   M ETHOD

In this section, we detail our LAMP method. We first introduce its architecture in Sec. 3.1. Then we
introduce its learning method (Sec. 3.2), including learning objective and training, and technique to
let it learn to adapt to varying importance of error and computation. The high-level schematic of our
LAMP is shown in Fig. 1.


                                                     3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


3.1   M ODEL ARCHITECTURE

The model architecture of LAMP consists of two components: an actor-critic which updates the
mesh topology, and an evolution model which evolves the states defined on the mesh. We will detail
them one by one.
Actor-critic. The actor-critic consists of a policy network fφpolicy (with parameter φ) which predicts
the probability of performing the spatial coarsening or refining actions, and a value network fφvalue
which evaluates the long-term expected reward of the policy network:
                        P (A = at |M = M t , β) = pφ (at |M t , β) = fφpolicy (M t , β)                            (2)
                                                     t
                                                v̂       = fφvalue (M t , β)                                       (3)
where at is the (refining and coarsening) action performed on the edges E t so that it will become
Ê t+1 . The policy network fφpolicy outputs the probability of performing such action and can sample
from this probability. v t estimates the “value” of the current policy starting from current state M t
(for more information, see Sec. 3.2 below). The explicit dependence on β (as the β in Eq. 8) allows
the policy and value network to condition on the varying importance of error and computation. Given
the predicted mesh Ê t+1 and the current node features V t on the current mesh E t , an interpolation
g interp is performed which obtains the node features on the new mesh (see Appendix B for details):
                                        V̂ ′t = g interp (V t , Ê t+1 , E t )                                     (4)
Now the new intermediate state M̂ ′t = (V̂ ′t , Ê t+1 ) is defined on the new mesh Ê t+1 .
Evolution model. The second component is an evolution model fθevo which takes as input the
intermediate state M ′t defined on Ê t+1 , and outputs the prediction of node features V̂ t+1 for time
t + 1:
                                          V̂ t+1 = fθevo (M ′t )                                     (5)
Note that in this stage, the mesh topology Ê t+1 is kept constant, and the evolution model fθevo (with
parameter θ) learns to predict the state based on the current mesh.
Taken together, Eqs. (2)(4)(5) evolve the system state from M t at time t to state M̂ t+1 =
(V̂ t+1 , Ê t+1 ) at t + 1. During inference, they are executed autoregressively following Eq. (1),
to predict the system’s future states M̂ t , t = 1, 2, 3, ..., given an initial state M 0 .
GNN architecture. One requirement for the evolution model fθevo , policy network fφpolicy and value
network fφvalue is that they can operate on changing mesh topology E t . Graph Neural Networks
(GNNs) are an ideal choice that meets this requirement. Since we represent the system’s state as
mesh, we adopt MeshGraphNets (Pfaff et al., 2021) as the base architecture for the above three
models. Specifically, we encode V t as node features for the graph, and encode the mesh topology
E t as edges and world edges as two types of edges, and the edge features depend on the relative
positions in the mesh coordinates and world coordinates. Based on the graph, a processor network
that consists of N layers of message passing are performed to locally exchange and aggregate the
information:
                                   (e)n+1         n      (v)           (v)n    (v)n
                                 Zij     = MLPθ (Eij , Zi , Zj )                                                   (6)
                                  (v)n+1      (v) (v)n
                                                         X (e)n+1
                                 Zi      = MLPθ (Zi ,      Zij    ).                                               (7)
                                                                        j

           (v)n                                                                   (e)n
where Zi          is the latent node vector on node i at layer n, and Zij                is the latent edge vectors on
                                                                            (v)0                   (v)N
      th
the n layer on the edge from node i to node j.                        = V̂i′t and Zi
                                                                   We have Zi           = V̂it+1 are
input and predicted node features at time t and t + 1, respectively, in Eq. (5). Figure 1 provides
an illustration of the architecture. We use an independent processor for the evolution model, and
share the processor for the policy and value networks. After the processor, the latent vectors are
concatenated with β to feed into downstream decoders. For the evolution model fθevo , a decoder is
operated on the latent state and outputs the prediction V̂ ′t+1 on the nodes. For the value network,
an value MLP is operated on all nodes, and a global pooling is performed to compute the overall
estimated value. For the policy network, we design the action decoder as follows.


                                                               4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Action representation. To predict the action for policy network and its probability, we first need
to design the action space. Note that compared to typical reinforcement learning problems, here the
action space is extremely high-dimensional and complicated: (1) each edge of the mesh may have the
option of choosing refinement or coarsening. If there are thousands of edges Nedge , then the possible
actions will be on the order of 2Nedge . (2) Not all actions are valid, and many combinations of actions
are invalid. For example, two edges on the same face of the mesh cannot be refined at the same time,
nor can they be both coarsened. To address this high-dimensionality action problem, we introduce
the following design of action space, where for both refinement and coarsening, the policy network
first samples integers K re , K co ∈ {0, 1, 2, ...K max }, and then independently samples K re edges to
perform refinement and K co edges to perform coarsening with proper filtering. The full sampled
action is at = (K re , ere   re      re            co co co       co             re
                        1 , e2 , ...eK refine , K , e1 , e2 , ...eK co ), where K , K
                                                                                      co
                                                                                         ∈ {0, 1, ...K max }, and
  re co      t                                                                     t
ek , ek ∈ E , k = 1, 2, ... The log-probability for the sampled action a is given by:
                                               XK re                                       K co
                                                                                           X
          t    t                re    t                       re   t             co    t                       t
log pφ (a |M ) = log pφ (K |M ) +                    log pφ (ek |M ) + log pφ (K |M ) +         log pφ (eco
                                                                                                         k |M )
                                            k=1                                                   k=1


3.2   L EARNING

The ultimate goal of the learning for LAMP is to optimize the objective Eq. (8) as follows:
                                  L = (1 − β) · Error + β · Computation                                      (8)
for a wide range of β. To achieve this, we first pre-train the evolution model without remeshing to
obtain a reasonable evolution model, then break down the above objective into an alternative learning
of two phases (Appendix B.1): learning the evolution model with objective Levo that minimizes long-
term evolution error, and learning the policy with objective Lpolicy that optimizes both the long-term
evolution error and computational cost.
Learning evolution. In this phase, the evolution model fθevo is optimized to reduce the multi-step
evolution error for the evolution model. As before, we denote M t+s , t = 0, 1, 2, ..., s = 0, 1, ...S
as the state of the system at time t + s simulated by the ground-truth solver with very fine-grained
mesh, and denote M̂ t+s , t = 0, 1, 2, ..., s = 0, 1, 2, ..S as the prediction by the current LAMP
following the current policy, up to a horizon of S steps into the future. We further denote M̂ ′′t+s , t =
0, 1, 2, ..., s = 0, 1, 2, ..S as the prediction by the current evolution model on the fine-grained mesh,
where its mesh is provided as ground-truth mesh E t+s at each time step. Then the loss is given by:
                                                                          ′′t
                      Levo = Levo policy
                              S [fφ      , fθevo ; M̂ t ] + Levo    evo
                                                             S [I, fθ ; M̂ ]                                 (9)
                               S
                               X                                     S
                                                                     X
                           =         αspolicy ℓ(M̂ l+s , M l+s ) +         αsI ℓ(M̂ ′′l+s , M l+s )         (10)
                               s=1                                   s=1

                                                                             policy
Essentially, we optimize two parts of the evolution loss: (1) Levo      s [fφ       , fθevo ; M̂ t ] which is the
                                                  policy                         evo
evolution loss by following policy network fφ            and evolution model fθ , starting at initial state
      t                    policy
of M̂ for S steps. (here αs       is the coefficient for the s-step loss with loss function ℓ). This makes
sure that evolution model fθevo adapts to the current policy fφpolicy that designates proper computation.
                                                     ′′t
(2) The second part of the loss, Levo        evo
                                      s [I, fθ ; M̂ ], is the evolution loss by using the ground-truth
mesh and evolved by the evolution model fθevo , starting at initial state of fine-grained mesh M̂ ′′t
and evolve for s steps. This encourages the evolution model to learn to utilize more computation to
achieve a better prediction error, if the mesh is provided by the ground-truth mesh.
Learning the policy. In this phase, the policy network fφpolicy learns to update the spatial resolution
(refinement or coarsening of mesh) at each location, to improve both the computation and the pre-
diction error. Since the spatial refinement and coarsening are both discrete action, and the metric
of computation is typically non-differentiable, we use Reinforcement Learning (RL) to learn the
policy. Specifically, we model it as a Markov Decision Process (MDP), where the environment state
is the system’s state M t , the actions are the local refinement or coarsening at each edge of E t , and
we design the reward as the improvement on both the error and computation, between following the
current policy’s action, and an counterfactual scenario where the agent follows an identity policy I


                                                          5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


that does not update the mesh topology, starting on the initial state M̂ t . Concretely, the reward is
                                 rt = (1 − β) · ∆Error + β · ∆Computation                           (11)
                                                     t
                              ∆Error = Levo    evo         evo policy
                                        S [I, fθ ; M̂ ] − LS [fφ      , fθevo ; M̂ t ]               (12)
                     ∆Computation = CS [I, fθevo ; M̂ t ] − CS [fφpolicy , fθevo ; M̂ t ]             (13)
Here CS [·] is a surrogate metric that quantifies “Computation” based on the predicted mesh topology
Ê t+1 , Ê t+2 , ...Ê t+S up to S steps into the future. In this paper we use the number of nodes as the
surrogate metric for measuring the computation, since typically for the GNNs, the computation (in
terms of FLOPs) scales linearly with the number of nodes (since each node has a bounded number of
edges on the mesh, the number of edges thus scales linearly with number of nodes, so will message
passing and node updates).
To optimize the reward rt , we employ the standard REINFORCE as used in (Sutton et al., 1999;
Hafner et al., 2021) to update the policy network fφpolicy , with the following objective:
           Lactor = Et −log pφ (at |M t , β)sg(rt − fφvalue (M t , β)) − η · H[pφ (at |M t , β)]

             β                                                                                        (14)
Here H[·] is the entropy, which encourages the action to have higher entropy to increase exploration,
where η here is a hyperparameter. The sg(·) is stop-gradient. Essentially, the first term in loss Lpolicy
encourages to increase the log-probability of actions that have a higher “advantage”, where the
advantage is defined as the difference between the current reward rt that follows the current action
at taken, and the expected reward (value) fφvalue (M t , β) that follows the current policy starting from
the current state M t . We can also think of it as an actor-critic where the critic tries to evaluate
accurately the expected reward of the current policy, and an actor (policy) is trying to exceed that
expectation. To train the value network, we use MSE loss:
                                 Lvalue = Et (fφvalue (M t , β) − rt )2

                                   β                                                                  (15)
Learning to adapt to varying β. In the overall objective (Eq. 8), the β stipulates the relative
importance between Error and Computation. β = 0 means we only focus on minimizing Error,
without constraint on Computation. β = 1 means we only focus on minimizing computation,
without considering the evolution error. In practice, we typically wish to improve both, with a
β ∈ (0, 1) that puts more emphasis on one metric but still considers the other metric. To allow
LAMP to be able to operate at varying β at inference time, during the learning of policy, we sample
β uniformly within a range B ⊆ [0, 1] (e.g., B can be [0, 1] or [0, 0.5]), for different examples within
a minibatch, and also train the policy and value network jointly, where the total loss Lpolicy is the
weighted sum of the two policy and value losses:
                               Lpolicy = Eβ∼B [Lactor
                                                 β    + αvalue · Lvalue
                                                                   β    ]                           (16)
where αvalue is a hyperparameter, which we set as 0.5. In this way, the policy can learn a generic way
of spatial coarsening and refinement, conditioned on β. For example, for smaller β that focuses more
on improving error, the policy network may learn to refine more on dynamic regions and coarsen
less, sacrificing computation to improve prediction error.

4    E XPERIMENTS
In the experiments, we set out to answer the following questions on our proposed LAMP:
       • Can LAMP learn to coarsen and refine the mesh, focusing more computation on the more
         dynamic regions to improve prediction accuracy?
       • Can LAMP improve the Pareto frontier of Error vs. Computation, compared to state-of-
         the-art deep learning surrogate models?
       • Can LAMP learn to condition on the β to change is behavior, and perform varying amount
         of refinement and coarsening depending on the β?
We evaluate our LAMP on two challenging datasets: (1) a 1D benchmark nonlinear PDEs , which
tests generalization of PDEs in the same family (Brandstetter et al., 2022); (2) a mesh-based pa-
per simulation generated by the ArcSim solver (Narain et al., 2012). Both datasets possess multi-
resolution characteristics where some parts of the system is highly dynamic, while other parts are
changing more slowly.


                                                        6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


4.1   1D NONLINEAR FAMILY OF PDE S


Figure 2: Example rollout result of our LAMP on 1D nonlinear PDEs. The rollout is performed
over 200 time steps, where different color denotes the system’s state at different time. On each state,
we also plot the corresponding mesh as black dots. The upper green and lower blue band shows
the added and removed nodes of the mesh, comparing the end mesh and initial mesh. We see that
with a smaller β (e.g., β = 0.1) that emphasizes more on “Error”, it refines more on highly-dynamic
regions (near shock front) and coarsens less. With a larger β (e.g., β = 0.7) that focuses more on
reducing computation, it almost doesn’t refine, and choose to coarsen on more static regions.

Data and Experiments. In this section, we test LAMP’s ability to balance error vs. computation
tested on unseen equations with different parameters in a given family. We use the 1D benchmark
in Brandstetter et al. (2022), whose PDEs are given by
                    ∂t u + ∂x (αu2 − β∂x u + γ∂xx u) (t, x) = δ(t, x)

                                                                                           (17)
                                                    J
                                                    X
                  u(0, x) = δ(0, x),    δ(t, x) =         Aj sin(ωj t + 2πℓj x/L + ϕj )           (18)
                                                    j=1

The parameter for the PDE is given by p = (α, β, γ). The term δ is a forcing term (Bar-Sinai et al.,
2019) with J = 5, L = 16 and coefficients Aj and ωj sampled uniformly from Aj ∼ U [−0.5, 0.5],
ωj ∼ U [−0.4, 0.4], ℓj ∈ {1, 2, 3}, ϕj ∼ U [0, 2π). We uniformly discretize the space to nx = 200
in [0, 16) and uniformly discretize time to nt = 250 points in [0, 4]. Space and time are further
downsampled to resolutions of (nt , nx ) ∈ {(250, 100), (250, 50), (250, 25)} as initial resolution.
We use the E2 scenario in the benchmark, which tests the model’s ability to generalize to novel
parameters of PDE with the same family. Specifically, we have that the parameter p = (1, η, 0)
where η ∼ U [0, 0.2].
As our LAMP autoregressively simulate the system, it can refine or coarsen the mesh at appropriate
locations by the policy network fφpolicy , before evolving to the next state with the evolution model
fθevo . We evaluate the models with the metric of Computation and long-term evolution Error. For
the computation, we use the average number of vertices throughout the full trajectory as a surrogate
metric, since the number of floating point operations typically scales linearly with the number of
vertices in the mesh. For long-term evolution error, we use the cumulative MSE over 200 steps of
rollout, starting with initial state from time steps 25 to 49. We compare LAMP with strong baselines
of deep learning-based surrogate models, including CNNs, Fourier Neural Operators (FNO) (Li
et al., 2021), and MP-PDE (Brandstetter et al., 2022) which is a state-of-the-art deep learning-based
surrogate models for this task. Our base neural architecture is based on MeshGraphNets (Pfaff et al.,
2021) which is a state-of-the-art GNN-based model for mesh-based simulations. We compare an
ablation of our model that does not perform remeshing (LAMP no remeshing), and a full version
of our model. For all models, we autoregressively roll out to predict the states for a full trajectory
length of 200, using the first 25 steps as initial steps. We perform three groups of experiments,
starting at initial number vertices of 25, 50 and 100 that is downsampled from the 100-vertice mesh,
respectively. The three baselines all do not perform remeshing, and our full model has the ability to
perform remeshing that coarsen or refine the edges at each time step. We record the accumulated
MSE as measure for error, and average number of vertices over the full rollout trajectory as metric
for computational cost. Note that for all models, the MSE is computed on the full ground-truth
mesh with 100 vertices, where the values of prediction are linearly interpolated onto the location of
the ground-truth. This prevents the model to “cheat” by reducing the number of vertices and only
predict well on those vertices. Additional details of the experiments are given in Appendix B.2.


                                                    7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Table 1: Result (error and computational cost) for 1D family of nonlinear PDEs, for a total rollout
trajectory of 200 time steps, providing the first 25 steps as input. LAMP significantly reduces the
long-term prediction error compared to baselines, especially for smaller number of initial vertices
(error reduction of 71.5% for 25 initial vertices, and 23.5% for 50 initial vertices), when evaluating
on ground-truth mesh that has 100 vertices. This shows that LAMP is able to improve prediction
error by selecting where to focus computation on, especially with more stringent computational
constraint. Note that we limit the maximum #vertices to be 100 for all models.

               Model               Initial # vertices   Average # vertices       Error (MSE)
         CNN                               25                 25.0                   4.75
         FNO                               25                 25.0                   4.85
         MP-PDE                            25                 25.0                   3.69
         LAMP (no remeshing)               25                 25.0                   6.39
         LAMP (ours)                       25                 37.6                   1.05
         CNN                               50                 50.0                   1.10
         FNO                               50                 50.0                   1.79
         MP-PDE                            50                 50.0                   0.98
         LAMP (no remeshing)               50                 50.0                   2.15
         LAMP (ours)                       50                 53.2                   0.75
         CNN                              100                100.0                   0.81
         FNO                              100                100.0                   1.39
         MP-PDE                           100                100.0                   0.88
         LAMP (no remeshing)              100                100.0                   0.75
         LAMP (ours)                      100                100.0                   0.76

Results. Table 1 shows the results. We see that our LAMP outperforms all baselines
by a large margin, achieving an error reduction of 71.5%, 23.5% and 6.2% (average of
33.7%) on initial #nodes of 25, 50 and 100, respectively, compared with the best perform-
ing baseline of CNN, FNO and MP-PDE. Importantly, we see that compared with an abla-
tion with no remeshing, our full LAMP is able to significantly reduce error (by 83.6% er-
ror reduction for 25 initial vertices scenario, and 65.1% for 50 vertices scenario), with only
modest increase of average number of vertices (by 50.4% and 6.4% increase, respectively).
This shows the ability of LAMP to adaptively trade compu-
tation to improve long-term prediction error.
To investigate whether LAMP is able to focus computation                             =0      =0.2
on the most dynamic region, we visualize example trajec-                6            =0.1    =0.3
                                                                                     =0.2    =0.8
tory of LAMP, as shown in Fig. 2 and Fig. 8 in Appendix                 5            =0.3   CNN
C.1. Starting with 50 vertices, we test our model on differ-                         =0.4   FNO
                                                                                     =0.8   MP-PDE
ent β, where smaller β focuses more on improving error.                 4            =0     LAMP
                                                                Error


                                                                                     =0.1   (no remeshing)
We see that with smaller β (e.g., β = 0.1), LAMP is able                3
to add more nodes (25 nodes) on the most dynamic region,
                                                                        2
and only coarsen few (removing 3 nodes in total). With a
larger β that focuses more on reducing computation, we see              1
that LAMP refines less and coarsen more, and only coarsen                   30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100
on the more slowly changing region. Additionally, we vi-                            # Vertices
sualize the error (y-axis) vs. number of vertices for varying
β for two different models over all test trajectories in Fig.   Figure 3: Error (MSE) vs. average
3. We see that with increasing β, LAMP is able to reduce        number of vertices with varying β, for
the vertices more, with only slight increase of error. Fur-     two LAMP models trained with initial
thermore, LAMP significantly improves the Pareto frontier.      number of vertices of 25 (marked by
In summary, the above results show that LAMP is able to         solid stars) and 50 (solid circles), and
focus computation on dynamic regions, and able to adapt to      baselines (hollow markers). We see
different β at inference time.                                  LAMP improves the Pareto frontier.

4.2   2D MESH - BASED SIMULATION

Here we evaluate our LAMP’s ability on a more challenging setting with paper folding simulation.
The paper in this simulation is square-shaped and its boundary edge length is 1. During the simula-


                                                   8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


 a)                   b)                c)                    d)                    e)            f)


                            LAMP        MeshGraphNets +       MeshGraphNets +            LAMP
      Initial state                                                                                    Ground truth
                       (no remeshing)    GT remeshing         heuristic remeshing        (ours)

Figure 4: Example result of 2D mesh-based paper simulation. We observed that LAMP is adding
more resolution to the high-curvature region to resolve the details and coarsen the middle flat region.
Figure a) is at t = 0, and figure b), c), d), e), f) are LAMP (no remeshing), MeshGraphNets with
ground-truth mesh, MeshGraphNets with heuristic remeshing, LAMP (ours), and the ground-truth
results at t = 20. Additional visualization could be found in Figure 9.

Table 2: Computation vs. Error for 2D mesh-based paper simulation for different methods. With the
proposed learned remeshing framework, LAMP are able to achieve better roll-out error with slight
increase of average number of vertices. Reported number is the MSE over 20 learned-simulator-
steps roll-out, starting at initial states at steps 10, 30, and 50, averaged over 50 test trajectories.

             Model                              Initial # vertices         Average # vertices     Error (MSE)
MeshGraphNets + GT remeshing                          102.9                     115.9             5.91e-4
MeshGraphNets + heuristics remeshing                  102.9                     191.9             6.38e-4
LAMP (no remeshing)                                   102.9                     102.9             6.13e-4
LAMP (ours)                                           102.9                     123.1             5.80e-4


tion, 4 corners of the paper will receive different magnitude of force. When generating ground-truth
trajectories by the ArcSim solver (Narain et al., 2012), we set the minimum and maximal length of
edges to be 0.01 and 0.2. We evaluate the models with the metric of Computation and long-term
evolution error. Similar to the Section 4.1, we use the average number of nodes throughout the
full trajectory as a surrogate metric for complexity. We also compare with two baselines. The first
baseline is MeshGraphNets with ground-truth (GT) remeshing, where the remeshing is provided by
the ArcSim’s Adaptive Anisotropic Remeshing component. This is used in (Pfaff et al., 2021) and
provides lower error than learned remeshing. The second baseline is MeshGraphNets + heuristics
remeshing, where the heuristics refines the edge based on the local curvature (Appendix B.4).
As shown in Table 2, our model is able to add more resolution to the high curvature region, and
achieve better roll-out accuracy than the ablation without remeshing and baselines. we see that
our LAMP outperforms both baselines and the no-remeshing ablation. Specifically, LAMP outper-
forms the strong baseline of “MeshGraphNets + GT remeshing”. This shows that LAMP can fur-
ther improve upon MeshGraphNets with ground-truth remeshing to learn a better remeshing policy,
allowing the evolution model to evolve the system in a more faithful way. Furthermore, the “Mesh-
GraphNets + heuristic remeshing” baseline has a larger error, showing that this intuitive baseline is
suboptimal. Finally, LAMP outperforms its ablation without remeshing, showing the necessity of
remeshing which can significantly reduce the prediction error. Additional details of the experiments
are given in Appendix B.3. In Fig. 4 and Fig. 9 in Appendix C.2, we see that our LAMP learns
to add more mesh onto the more dynamic regions near to the folding part (with high curvature),
showing LAMP’s ability to assign computation to the most needed region.

5     C ONCLUSION

In this work, we have introduced LAMP, the first fully deep learning-based surrogate model that
jointly learns the evolution of physical system and optimizes assigning the computation to the most
dynamic regions. In 1D and 2D datasets, we show that our method is able to adaptively perform
refinement or coarsening actions, which improves long-term prediction error than strong baselines
of deep learning-based surrogate models. We hope our method provides a useful tool for more
efficient and accurate simulation of physical systems.


                                                          9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


6   ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
We thank Ian Fischer and Xiang Fu for discussions and for providing feedback on our manuscript.
We also gratefully acknowledge the support of DARPA under Nos. HR00112190039 (TAMI),
N660011924033 (MCS); ARO under Nos. W911NF-16-1-0342 (MURI), W911NF-16-1-0171
(DURIP); NSF under Nos. OAC-1835598 (CINES), OAC-1934578 (HDR), CCF-1918940 (Ex-
peditions), NIH under No. 3U54HG010426-04S1 (HuBMAP), Stanford Data Science Initiative,
Wu Tsai Neurosciences Institute, Amazon, Docomo, GSK, Hitachi, Intel, JPMorgan Chase, Juniper
Networks, KDDI, NEC, and Toshiba.
The content is solely the responsibility of the authors and does not necessarily represent the official
views of the funding entities.

R EFERENCES
Michael Athanasopoulos, Hassan Ugail, and Gabriela González Castro. Parametric design of aircraft
 geometry using partial differential equations. Advances in Engineering Software, 40(7):479–486,
 2009.
Yohai Bar-Sinai, Stephan Hoyer, Jason Hickey, and Michael P Brenner. Learning data-driven dis-
  cretizations for partial differential equations. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
  116(31):15344–15349, 2019.
Jean-Paul Berrut and Lloyd N. Trefethen. Barycentric lagrange interpolation. SIAM Rev., 46:501–
  517, 2004.
Johannes Brandstetter, Daniel E. Worrall, and Max Welling. Message passing neural PDE solvers. In
  International Conference on Learning Representations, 2022. URL https://openreview.
  net/forum?id=vSix3HPYKSU.
Francesco Carpanese. Development of free-boundary equilibrium and transport solvers for simula-
  tion and real-time interpretation of tokamak experiments. Technical report, EPFL, 2021.
Jakub Cerveny, Veselin Dobrev, and Tzanio Kolev. Nonconforming mesh refinement for high-order
  finite elements. SIAM Journal on Scientific Computing, 41(4):C367–C392, 2019.
Richard Courant, Kurt Friedrichs, and Hans Lewy. On the partial difference equations of mathemat-
  ical physics. IBM journal of Research and Development, 11(2):215–234, 1967.
Stefan Elfwing, Eiji Uchibe, and Kenji Doya. Sigmoid-weighted linear units for neural network
  function approximation in reinforcement learning. Neural Networks, 107:3–11, 2018.
Christophe Geuzaine and Jean-François Remacle. Gmsh: A 3-d finite element mesh generator
  with built-in pre- and post-processing facilities. International Journal for Numerical Methods in
  Engineering, 79(11):1309–1331, 2009.
Danijar Hafner, Timothy P Lillicrap, Mohammad Norouzi, and Jimmy Ba. Mastering atari with
  discrete world models. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2021. URL
  https://openreview.net/forum?id=0oabwyZbOu.
Xu Han, Han Gao, Tobias Pfaff, Jian-Xun Wang, and Liping Liu. Predicting physics in mesh-
  reduced space with temporal attention. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2022. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=XctLdNfCmP.
Julian Kates-Harbeck, Alexey Svyatkovskiy, and William Tang. Predicting disruptive instabilities
  in controlled fusion plasmas through deep learning. Nature, 568(7753):526–531, 2019.
Dmitrii Kochkov, Jamie A Smith, Ayya Alieva, Qing Wang, Michael P Brenner, and Stephan
 Hoyer. Machine learning–accelerated computational fluid dynamics. Proceedings of the National
 Academy of Sciences, 118(21), 2021.
Tony Lelievre and Gabriel Stoltz. Partial differential equations and stochastic methods in molecular
  dynamics. Acta Numerica, 25:681–880, 2016.


                                                  10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Zongyi Li, Nikola Borislavov Kovachki, Kamyar Azizzadenesheli, Burigede liu, Kaushik Bhat-
  tacharya, Andrew Stuart, and Anima Anandkumar. Fourier neural operator for parametric partial
  differential equations. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2021. URL
  https://openreview.net/forum?id=c8P9NQVtmnO.
Peter Lynch. The origins of computer weather prediction and climate modeling. Journal of compu-
  tational physics, 227(7):3431–3444, 2008.
Sharanya J Majumdar, Juanzhen Sun, Brian Golding, Paul Joe, Jimy Dudhia, Olivier Caumont,
  Krushna Chandra Gouda, Peter Steinle, Béatrice Vincendon, Jianjie Wang, et al. Multiscale
  forecasting of high-impact weather: current status and future challenges. Bulletin of the American
  Meteorological Society, 102(3):E635–E659, 2021.
Rahul Narain, Armin Samii, and James F O’brien. Adaptive anisotropic remeshing for cloth simu-
  lation. ACM transactions on graphics (TOG), 31(6):1–10, 2012.
Tobias Pfaff, Meire Fortunato, Alvaro Sanchez-Gonzalez, and Peter W. Battaglia. Learning mesh-
  based simulation with graph networks. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2021.
Alvaro Sanchez, Dmitrii Kochkov, Jamie Alexander Smith, Michael Brenner, Peter Battaglia, and
  Tobias Joachim Pfaff. Learning latent field dynamics of PDEs. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 2020.
Alvaro Sanchez-Gonzalez, Jonathan Godwin, Tobias Pfaff, Rex Ying, Jure Leskovec, and Peter
  Battaglia. Learning to simulate complex physics with graph networks. In International Confer-
  ence on Machine Learning, pp. 8459–8468. PMLR, 2020.
NJ Sircombe, TD Arber, and RO Dendy. Kinetic effects in laser-plasma coupling: Vlasov theory
  and computations. In Journal de Physique IV (Proceedings), volume 133, pp. 277–281. EDP
  sciences, 2006.
Halil Mete Soner, Wolfgang Bangerth, Rolf Rannacher, Hans Foellmer, and LCG Rogers. Adaptive
  finite element methods for differential equations. Springer Science & Business Media, 2003.
Richard S Sutton, David McAllester, Satinder Singh, and Yishay Mansour. Policy gradient meth-
  ods for reinforcement learning with function approximation. Advances in neural information
  processing systems, 12, 1999.
Kiwon Um, Robert Brand, Yun Raymond Fei, Philipp Holl, and Nils Thuerey. Solver-in-the-loop:
  Learning from differentiable physics to interact with iterative pde-solvers. Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 33:6111–6122, 2020.
Pantelis R Vlachas, Georgios Arampatzis, Caroline Uhler, and Petros Koumoutsakos. Multiscale
  simulations of complex systems by learning their effective dynamics. Nature Machine Intelli-
  gence, 4(4):359–366, 2022.
Tailin Wu, Takashi Maruyama, and Jure Leskovec. Learning to accelerate partial differential equa-
  tions via latent global evolution. Advances in neural information processing systems, 36, 2022.
Jiachen Yang, Tarik Dzanic, Brenden Petersen, Jun Kudo, Ketan Mittal, Vladimir Tomov, Jean-
   Sylvain Camier, Tuo Zhao, Hongyuan Zha, Tzanio Kolev, et al. Reinforcement learning for
   adaptive mesh refinement. arXiv preprint arXiv:2103.01342, 2021.
Qingqing Zhao, David B. Lindell, and Gordon Wetzstein. Learning to solve pde-constrained inverse
  problems with graph networks. International Conference on Machine Learning, 2022.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                          Appendix
A     M ODEL A RCHITECTURE

Here we detail the architecture of LAMP, complementary to Sec. 3.1. This architecture is used
throughout all experiment, with just a few hyperparameter (e.g., latent dimension, message passing
steps) depending on the dimension (1D, 2D) of the problem.

A.1     A RCHITECTURE

In this subsection, we first detail the base architecture that is common among the evolution model
fθevo , the policy network fφpolicy , and value network fφvalue . Then describe their respective aspects, and
explain the benefits of our action representation.
Base architecture. We use MeshGraphNets Pfaff et al. (2021) as our base architecture, for the
evolution model fθevo , the policy network fφpolicy , and value network fφvalue . All three models have an
encoder and a processor. For the encoder, we encode both node features and edge features, uplift to
                                     e
latent dimension using MLPs, to Zij    , Ziv . For the processor, it consists of N message passing layers.
For each message-passing layer, we first update the edge features using current edge features, and
                             (e)n+1             (v)   n    (v)n   (v)n
connected node features, Zij         = MLPθ (Eij        , Zi , Zj ), then we update the node features
                                                                 (v)n+1           (v)   (v)n P    (e)n+1
using current node feature and connected edge features, Zi               = MLPθ (Zi , j Zij              ).
Depending on the models and their intended functions, different models have different modules for
predicting the output, described as follows.
Evolution model. For the evolution model, the output is at each node, and uses the last latent vector
                                                                   (v)N
on the node, feeds into a decoder, to predict the output V̂it+1 = Zi    (See Eq. 6) at the next time
step t + 1.
Policy network and value network. Both fφpolicy and fφvalue shares the same processor fφprocessor ,
which has N message-passing layers. The final node feature is appended with β for the controllabil-
ity. The fφpolicy takes the encoded graph as input and consist of two parts - a global mean pooling is
used to obtain the global latent representation of the whole graph, which is then feed into a MLP(k)
followed by a action specific linear layer to predict the probability distribution for different number
of actions should be performed; an action specific MLP(a) is applied on each edge to predict the
probability of a certain action (i.e., split, coarse) to be applied on this edge. The fφvalue takes the
same encoded graph as input, and perform a global mean pooling to obtain the global latent features
for the graph, which is then feed through a linear layer to predict the accuracy reward, and another
linear layer to predict the computation reward, the final predicted value is, v = loss + β · compute.

A.2     A RCHITECTURAL HYPERPARAMETERS USED IN 1D AND 2D EXPERIMENTS

Here we detail the architectures used in the 1D and 2D experiment. A summary of the hyperparam-
eters is also provided in Table 3.

A.2.1    1D NONLINEAR PDE S
For 1D experiment, our evolution model fθevo has N = 3 message-passing layers in the processor
and latent dimension of 64. It uses the SiLU activation (Elfwing et al., 2018). The shared processor
for fφpolicy and fφvalue has N = 3 message-passing layers and latent dimension of 64.

A.2.2    2D MESH - BASED SIMULATION
For fθevo , we set message passing layers for MeshGraphNets (Pfaff et al., 2021) to be 8. We
also model our message passing function with MLP having 56 units followed by SiLU activation
(Elfwing et al., 2018). Here, we share the same message passing function across all the 8 layers be-
cause we found in our experiments that sharing the same message passing function achieved better


                                                     12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


performance than having independent MLP for each of the layers. The shared processor for fφpolicy
and fφvalue has N = 3 message-passing layers and latent dimension of 64.


B     E XPERIMENT D ETAILS

In this section, we provide experiment details for 1D and 2D datasets. Firstly, we explain the rea-
soning behind several design choices of LAMP and their benefits. Then we provide the training
procedure summary and hyperparameter table in Appendix B.1, followed by specific training details
for 1D (Appendix B.2) and 2D (Appendix B.3). Finally, we detail the baselines in Appendix B.4.
Use of rt as value target. Different from typical RL learning scenario (computer games or robotics)
where the episode always has an end and the reward is bounded, here in physical simulations, there
are two distinct characteristics as follows. (1) The rollout can be performed infinite time steps into
the future, (2) as the rollout continues, at some point the error between predicted state and ground-
truth state will diverge, so the error is not bounded. Based on these two characteristics, a value target
based on the error for infinite horizon (e.g., the one used in Dreamer v2 (Hafner et al., 2021)) does
not make sense, since the error will not be bounded. In our experiment, we also observe similar
phenomena, in which both the value target and value prediction continue to increase indefinitely.
Thus, we use the average reward in the S step rollout as the value target, which measures the error
and computation improvement within the rollout window we care about and proves to be much more
stable.
Benefit of our action space definition. we have provided the description of action representation
in Section our definition of action space in Section 3.1. Compared to an independent sampling on
each edge, the above design of action space has the following benefits:
                                                             max
       • The action space reduces from 2Nedge to Nedge K , where Nedge is the number of edges.
         In the case of Nedge ∼ 1000 and K max ∼ 10 ≪ Nedge , the difference in action space
         dimensionality is significant, e.g., 21000 = 10300 vs. 100010 = 1030 . Therefore, it is easier
         to credit assign the reward to appropriate action, with a smaller space of action.
       • Compared with each edge performing action independently, now only K ≤ K max actions
         of refinement or coarsening can be performed. Therefore, it will need to focus on a few
         actions that can best improve the objective.
       • The sampling of K will also make the policy more “controllable”, since now the K is
         explicitly dependent on the β, and learning how many refinement or coarsening action to
         take depending on β is much easier than figuring out which concrete independent actions
         to take.

B.1   T RAINING PROCEDURE SUMMARY

Here we provide the training procedure for learning the evolution model and the policy. There are
two stages of training. The first stage is pre-training the evolution model alone without remeshing,
and the second stage is alternatively learning the policy with RL and finetuning the evolution model.
The detailed hyperparameter table for 1D and 2D experiments is provided in Table 3. We train all
our models on an NVIDIA A100 80GB GPU.
Pre-training. In the pre-training stage, the evolution model is trained without remeshing, and the
loss is computed by rolling out the evolution model for S steps, and the loss is given by loss =
(1-step loss) × 1 + (2-step loss) × 0.1 + ... + (S-step loss) × 0.1 (the number S is provided in Table
3). We use a smaller weight for later steps, so that the training is more stable (since at the beginning
of training, the evolution model can have large error, having too much weight on later steps could
result in large error and make the training less stable). The pre-training lasts for certain number of
epochs (see Table 3), before proceeding to the next stage.
Joint training of policy and evolution model. In this stage, the actor-critic and the evolution model
are trained in an alternative fashion. Specifically, in the policy-learning phase, the evolution model
is frozen, and the actor-critic is learned via reinforcement learning (see “learning the policy” part
of Sec. 3.2) for J policy steps, and in the evolution-learning phase, the actor-critic is frozen, and the


                                                   13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


evolution model is learned according to the “learning evolution” part of Sec. 3.2, for J evo steps.
These two phases proceed alternatively.
The reasoning behind using alternating training strategy for actor-critic and evolution is as follows.
When learning the actor-critic, the return for the RL is the expected reward based on the current pol-
icy and evolution model. If at the same time the evolution model is also optimized together, then the
reward function will always be changing, which will likely make learning the policy harder. There-
fore, we adopt the alternating training strategy, which is also widely used in many other applications,
such as in GAN training.
In the following two subsections, we detail the action space and specific settings for 1D and 2D.



                Table 3: Hyperparameters used for model architecture and training.

Hyperparameter name                                                         1D dataset    2D dataset
Hyperparameters for model architecture:
Temporal bundling steps                                                     25            1
fθevo : Latent size                                                         64            56
fθevo : Activation function                                                 SiLU          SiLU
fθevo : Encoder MLP number of layers                                        3             4
fθevo : Processor number of message-passing layers                          3             8
fφpolicy : Latent size                                                      64            56
fφpolicy : Activation function                                              ELU           ELU
fφpolicy : Encoder MLP number of layers                                     2             2
fφpolicy : Processor number of message-passing layers                       3             3
fφpolicy : MLP(k) : MLP number of layers                                    2             2
fφpolicy : MLP(k) : Activation function                                     ELU           ELU
fφpolicy : MLP(a) : MLP number of layers                                    3             3
fφpolicy : MLP(a) : Activation function                                     ELU           ELU
Hyperparameters for training:
β sampling range B                                                          [0, 0.5]      {0}
Loss function                                                               MSE           L2
αspolicy , for s = 1, 2, ... (Eq. 10)                                       {1,1,1,...}   {1,1,1,...}
αsI , for s = 1, 2, ... (Eq. 10)                                            {1,1,1,...}   {1,1,1,...}
Number of epochs for pre-training evolution model                           50            100
Number of rollout steps S to for multi-step loss during pre-training        4             1
Number of epochs for joint training of actor-critic and evolution model     30            30
J policy : # of steps for updating the actor-critic during joint training   200           200
J evo : # of steps for updating the evolution model during joint training   100           100
Batch size                                                                  128           64
Evolution model learning rate for pre-training                              10−3          10−3
Evolution model learning rate during policy learning                        10−4          10−4
Value network learning rate                                                 10−4          10−4
Policy network learning rate                                                5 × 10−4      5 × 10−4
Optimizer                                                                   Adam          Adam
Coefficient for value loss                                                  0.5           0.5
K max : Maximum number of actions for coarsen or refine                     20            20
Maximum gradient norm                                                       2             20
Optimizer scheduler                                                         cosine        cosine
Input noise amplitude                                                       0             10−2
S: Horizon                                                                  4             6
Weight decay                                                                0             0
η: Entropy coefficient                                                      10−2          2 × 10−2


                                                  14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


B.2     1D NONLINEAR PDE S

The action space for 1D problem is composed of split and coarsen actions. The coarse action is
initially defined on all edges, which is then sampled based on the predicted number of coarsening
actions, and probability of each edge to be coarsened. Among those sampled edges, if two edges
share a common vertex, only the rightmost one will be coarsened.
During pre-training, to let the evolution model adapt to the varying size of the mesh, we perform
random vertex dropout, where we randomly sample 10% of the minibatch to perform dropout, and
if a minibatch is selected for node dropout, for each example, randomly drop 0-30% of the nodes in
the mesh.
Here the interpolation g interp (in Eq. 4) uses barycentric interpolation (Berrut & Trefethen, 2004),
where during refinement, the value of the node feature for the newly added node is a linear combi-
nation of its two neighbors’ node features, depending on the coordinates of the newly-added node
and the neighboring nodes.

B.3     2D MESH - BASED SIMULATION

In this subsection, we provide details on definition of remeshing actions, invalid remeshing action,
how to generate 2d mesh data based on Narain et al. (2012) as well as how to pre-train the evolution
model on the generated data, and the interpolation method to remedy inconsistency between vertex
configurations of different meshes.
Action space. There are three kinds of remeshing operations defined in the 2D mesh simulation:
split, flip, and coarsen. The action space for RL is defined as the product of sets of splitting and
coarsening operations (the flipping is automatically performed). Elements of each set indicate edges
in a mesh and the policy function chooses up to K max of the elements as edges to split or coarsen.
The reason why the flip action is not an action of RL is because we flip all edges satisfying some
condition (will be explained in the following). The rest of this paragraph provides details on respec-
tive remeshing actions. Split action in 2D case can be performed on any edges that are shared with
two triangular faces in a mesh and also on the boundary edges of the mesh. The split action results
in 4 triangles (Fig. 5a). Flip operation is also performed on edges shared with two faces, but it also
requires some additional condition, that is when sum of angles at vertices located at opposite side of
edges is greater than π: see also Fig 5b. In our remeshing function, all edges satisfying the condition
are flipped, which is the reason why flip operation is not a component of the action space for RL.
Finally, coarsening action has relatively strong conditions. One condition is that one of the source
or target nodes of a coarsened edge needs to be of degree 4 and another condition is that all the faces
connected to the node of degree 4 needs to have acute angles except angles around the node. See
also Fig. 5c. We filter the sampled actions from fφpolicy based on aforementioned conditions to get
sets of valid edges to split and coarse.

                                  a                                            a h
                                                                           b         g
                                                                           c         f

                                      b                                         d e ∠𝑎, ∠𝑏, ∠𝑐, ∠𝑑,
                                            ‫ ס‬൅ ‫ ܾס‬൐ ߨ                             ∠𝑒, ∠𝑓, ∠𝑔, ∠ℎ

      (a) Split action.                   (b) Flip action.                       (c) Coarsen action.

      Figure 5: Illustration of split, flip and coarsen actions. The actions are performed on edges.

Invalid remeshing. As described in Section 3.1, two edges on the same face of a mesh cannot be
refined at the same time, nor can they be both coarsened. This is because by doing so we may have
an invalid mesh with some non-triangular faces such as quadrilaterals. We can give such an example
as follows; see also Fig. 6 for reference. Suppose that we have a triangular face ABC and we split
edges AB and AC. When we denote the midpoints of AB and AC by D and E, we have new edges DC
and EB. If we denote the intersection of DC and EB by F, we will have a quadrilateral ADFE, which
violates the requirement that all faces must be triangles. In order to avoid this situation, remeshing
and coarsening action can only be performed on up to one edge of every face.


                                                    15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                              A                                 A

                                                            D           E
                                                                    F
                       B                   C            B                    C
Figure 6: Invalid split action on edges. Splitting two edges in a same triangular face at the same
time gives a quadrilateral.

              T=0              T=10              T=20               T=30             T=40


Figure 7: Part of trajectories generated with different configurations. As the time goes, finer trian-
gular faces are added to high-curvature regions in meshes.

Generating data. To generate ground-truth data, we use a 2D triangular mesh-based AMR simula-
tor Narain et al. (2012). This simulator adopts adaptive anisotropic kernel method to automatically
conform to the geometric and dynamic detail of the simulated cloth: see also Fig. 7. In our ex-
periment, each trajectory consists of 325 meshes (excluding initial mesh.) Each mesh consists of
vertices and faces and every vertex is equipped with its 2D coordinates as well as 3D world coordi-
nates. Time frame between two consecutive meshes are set to be 0.04. The edge length was set to
range between 0.01 and 0.2. Note that decision on respective remeshing actions is made based on
the 2D coordinates.
For training and test dataset, we generate 1050 configurations specifying direction and magnitude
of forces applied to 4 corners of meshes, and generate 1000 trajectories for training data and use 50
trajectories as test data based on the generated configurations. When training our evolution model,
we downsample data by half of the original data; we use every other meshes starting from an initial
mesh in each trajectory. The reason of downsampling is that we observed that cumulative RMSE
over rollout with model trained with full trajectories blew up after iteration exceeded 160 steps.
Noted that all dataset are pre-generated and will be loaded during the training, so that no ground-
truth solver is needed during the training of LAMP.
Pre-training of evolution model. We model our evolution function fθevo with MeshGraphNets (Pfaff
et al., 2021). The input of the model adopts a graph representation where a vertex is equipped with
3D velocity computed from mesh information at both current and past time steps, and feature for an
edge consists of relative distance and its magnitude of boundary vertices of the edge. Since mesh
topology varies during the forward iteration, we perform barycentric interpolation on the mesh at
past time step to get interpolated vertex coordinates corresponding to vertices at current time step.
When evaluating our model, we use rollout RMSE, taking the mean for all spatial coordinates, all
mesh nodes, all steps in each trajectory, and all 50 trajectories in the test dataset. The rollout RMSE
achieved 4.45×10−2 with our best parameter setting. We found that adding noise helped to improve
its performance; we added the noise with scale 0.01 to vertex coordinates.
Interpolation. Since we may have different mesh topology at each time step in a trajectory, it is not
possible to simply compare node features at one time step with those at another time steps or even
at the same time step if the mesh to compare is in a different trajectory. When we compare node
features on different meshes, we perform barycentric interpolation (Berrut & Trefethen, 2004). For
velocity in 2D simulation used as the input of the evolution model, we interpolate mesh at time step


                                                  16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


t − 1 into mesh at t and take the difference between them. To compute the rollout error metrics,
we always interpolate the predicted mesh to the ground-truth mesh at each step, and compute the
metrics in the ground-truth mesh.

B.4   BASELINES

Here we provide additional details on the baselines used in 2D mesh-based simulation. All the
baselines use pre-trained evolution function fθevo as part of the respective forward models. In the
following, we mainly give details on functions responsible for choosing edges to split and coarsen
which correspond to the policy function fφpolicy in LAMP’s forward model.
MeshGraphNets + heuristic remeshing. At each step, instead of having fφpolicy to infer probability
on edges to split and coarsen, we compute local curvature on edges of the mesh and use the curvature
to filter out edges to split. Here, the local curvature on an edge is defined as the angle made by two
unweighted normal vectors on boundary nodes of the edge (the normal vector on nodes is defined as
the mean of normal vectors on faces surrounding the nodes). When we filter out edges in the mesh,
we first choose edges with curvature exceeding pre-defined threshold, which is set to be 0.1 in the
experiment. We next check that after splitting, the edges are not shorter than a pre-defined minimum
length, which is set to be 0.04, to avoid having exceedingly small faces. Edges violating either of
these criteria are not chosen as edges to split.
MeshGraphNets + GT remeshing. In this baseline, we use the mesh configuration of ground-truth
meshes provided by the classical solver as the mesh configuration of predicted meshes. Specifically,
after having fθevo predict a mesh at the next time step, we interpolate the predicted mesh into the
ground-truth mesh. We generate all the ground-truth meshes with the same initial condition as
LAMP’s rollout experiment.
LAMP (no remeshing). This baseline does not involve any functions responsible for remeshing
and we just recursively apply fθevo to evolve meshes. Therefore, mesh topology of all meshes in a
trajectory is isomorphic.

C     A DDITIONAL RESULT VISUALIZATION
C.1   1D NONLINEAR PDE S

In this section, we provide additional randomly sampled results for the 1D nonlinear PDE experi-
ment, as shown in Fig. 8. We see that similar to Fig. 2, our LAMP is able to add more vertices to the
locations with more dynamicity, while remove more vertices at more static regions. Moreover, with
increasing β that emphasizes more on reducing computational cost, LAMP splits less and coarsens
more.

C.2   2D MESH - BASED SIMULATION

In this section, we provide additional randomly sampled results for the 2D mesh-based simulation,
as shown in Fig. 9. We see that our LAMP (fifth column) learns to add more edges to locations with
higher curvature, resulting in better rollout performance than with no remeshing.


                                                 17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 8: Additional example rollout results with different β of our LAMP on 1D nonlinear PDEs
with initial state on 50 vertices which is uniformly downsampled from the 100 vertices. The rollout
is performed over 200 time steps, where different color denotes the system’s state at different time.
The upper red dots and lower blue dots shows the added and removed nodes of the mesh, comparing
the end and the initial mesh.


                                                 18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                          LAMP        MeshGraphNets +    MeshGraphNets +       LAMP
     Initial state                                                                      Ground truth
                     (no remeshing)    GT remeshing      heuristic remeshing   (ours)


Figure 9: Additional example rollout results for 2D paper folding, at t = 20. We see that our LAMP
(fifth column) learns to add more edges to locations with higher curvature, and learns to coarsen on
the flat region (third and fourth row of “LAMP (ours)”, where we see coarsening in the middle of
our meshes), resulting in better rollout performance than with no remeshing and other baselines.


                                                    19
