Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


D IFFUSION M ODELS ALREADY HAVE
A S EMANTIC L ATENT S PACE

 Mingi Kwon, Jaeseok Jeong, Youngjung Uh∗
 Department of Artificial Intelligence
 Yonsei University
 Seoul, Republic of Korea
 {kwonmingi,jete jeong,yj.uh}@yonsei.ac.kr



                                               A BSTRACT

             Diffusion models achieve outstanding generative performance in various domains.
             Despite their great success, they lack semantic latent space which is essen-
             tial for controlling the generative process. To address the problem, we propose
             asymmetric reverse process (Asyrp) which discovers the semantic latent space
             in frozen pretrained diffusion models. Our semantic latent space, named h-space,
             has nice properties to accommodate semantic image manipulation: homogeneity,
             linearity, robustness, and consistency across timesteps. In addition, we introduce a
             principled design of the generative process for versatile editing and quality boost-
             ing by quantifiable measures: editing strength of an interval and quality deficiency
             at a timestep. Our method is applicable to various architectures (DDPM++, iD-
             DPM, and ADM) and datasets (CelebA-HQ, AFHQ-dog, LSUN-church, LSUN-
             bedroom, and M ET FACES). Project page: https://kwonminki.github.io/Asyrp/


1       I NTRODUCTION

In image synthesis, diffusion models have advanced to achieve state-of-the-art performance regard-
ing quality and mode coverage since the introduction of denoising diffusion probabilistic models
(Ho et al., 2020). They disrupt images by adding noise through multiple steps of forward process
and generate samples by progressive denoising through multiple steps of reverse (i.e., generative)
process. Since their deterministic version provides nearly perfect reconstruction of original images
(Song et al., 2020a), they are suitable for image editing, which renders target attributes on the real
images. However, simply editing the latent variables (i.e., intermediate noisy images) causes de-
graded results (Kim & Ye, 2021). Instead, they require complicated procedures: providing guidance
in the reverse process or finetuning models for an attribute.
Figure 1(a-c) briefly illustrates the existing approaches. Image guidance mixes the latent variables
of the guiding image with unconditional latent variables (Choi et al., 2021; Lugmayr et al., 2022;
Meng et al., 2021). Though it provides some control, it is ambiguous to specify which attribute to
reflect among the ones in the guide and the unconditional result, and it lacks intuitive control for the
magnitude of change. Classifier guidance manipulates images by imposing gradients of a classifier
on the latent variables in the reverse process to match the target class (Dhariwal & Nichol, 2021;
Avrahami et al., 2022; Liu et al., 2021). It requires training an extra classifier for the latent variables,
i.e., noisy images. Furthermore, computing gradients through the classifier during sampling is costly.
Finetuning the whole model can steer the resulting images to the target attribute without the above
problems (Kim & Ye, 2021). Still, it requires multiple models to reflect multiple descriptions.
On the other hand, generative adversarial networks (Goodfellow et al., 2020) inherently provide
straightforward image editing in their latent space. Given a latent vector for an original image, we
can find the direction in the latent space that maximizes the similarity of the resulting image with
a target description in CLIP embedding (Patashnik et al., 2021). The latent direction found on one
    ∗
        corresponding author


                                                      1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                            Image
                           manifold
                                                                                    Happy

                                        Happy                    Happy
                   ?



                                                                                                       Original


      (a) Image guidance              (b) Classifier guidance   (c) DiffusionCLIP           (d) Ours


Figure 1: Manipulation approaches for diffusion models. (a) Image guidance suffers ambiguity
while controlling the generative process. (b) Classifier guidance requires an extra classifier, is hardly
editable, degrades quality, or alters the content. (c) DiffusionCLIP requires fine-tuning the whole
model. (d) Our method discovers a semantic latent space of a frozen diffusion model.

image leads to the same manipulation of other images. However, given a real image, finding its exact
latent vector is often challenging and produces unexpected appearance changes.
It would allow admirable image editing if the diffusion models with the nearly perfect inversion
property have such a semantic latent space. Preechakul et al. (2022) introduces an additional input to
the reverse diffusion process: a latent vector from an original image embedded by an extra encoder.
This latent vector contains the semantics to condition the process. However, it requires training from
scratch and does not match with pretrained diffusion models.
In this paper, we propose an asymmetric reverse process (Asyrp) which discovers the semantic latent
space of a frozen diffusion model such that modifications in the space edits attributes of the original
images. Our semantic latent space, named h-space, has the properties necessary for editing applica-
tions as follows. The same shift in this space results in the same attribute change in all images. Linear
changes in this space lead to linear changes in attributes. The changes do not degrade the quality of
the resulting images. The changes throughout the timesteps are almost identical to each other for a
desired attribute change. Figure 1(d) illustrates some of these properties and § 5.3 provides detailed
analyses. To the best of our knowledge, it is the first attempt to discover the semantic latent space in
the frozen pretrained diffusion models. Spoiler alert: our semantic latent space is different from the
intermediate latent variables in the diffusion process. Moreover, we introduce a principled design
of the generative process for versatile editing and quality boosting by quantifiable measures: edit-
ing strength of an interval and quality deficiency at a timestep. Extensive experiments demonstrate
that our method is generally applicable to various architectures (DDPM++, iDDPM, and ADM) and
datasets (CelebA-HQ, AFHQ-dog, LSUN-church, LSUN-bedroom, and M ET FACES).

2     BACKGROUND
We briefly describe essential backgrounds. The rest of the related work is deferred to Appendix A.

2.1    D ENOISING D IFFUSION P ROBABILITY M ODEL (DDPM)

DDPM is a latent variable model that learns a data distribution by denoising noisy images (Ho et al.,
2020). The forward process diffuses the data samples through Gaussian transitions parameterized
with a Markov process:                                      r
                              p                                  αt                  αt
       q (xt | xt−1 ) = N xt ; 1 − βt xt−1 , βt I = N                xt−1 , 1 −           I ,     (1)
                                                                αt−1               αt−1
                                                   Qt
where {βt }Tt=1 is the variance schedule and αt = s=1 (1 − βs ). Then the reverse process becomes
                      QT
pθ (x0:T ) := p (xT ) t=1 pθ (xt−1 | xt ), starting from xT ∼ N (0, I) with noise predictor ϵθt :

                                     1                βt     θ
                         xt−1 = √            xt − √         ϵ (xt ) + σt zt ,                     (2)
                                   1 − βt            1 − αt t
where zt ∼ N (0, I) and σt2 is a variance of the reverse process which is set to σt2 = βt by DDPM.


                                                                 2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


2.2   D ENOISING D IFFUSION I MPLICIT M ODEL (DDIM)
                                                                                          √
                                                   √              p                   x − α x
DDIM redefines Eq. (1) as qσ (xt−1 |xt , x0 ) = N ( αt−1 x0 + 1 − αt−1 − σt2 · t√1−αt 0 , σt2 I)
                                                                                               t
which is a non-Markovian process (Song et al., 2020a). Accordingly, the reverse process becomes
                              √
                        xt − 1 − αt ϵθt (xt )
                                                  q
               √
       xt−1 = αt−1               √                + 1 − αt−1 − σt2 · ϵθt (xt ) + σt zt ,         (3)
                                    αt              |              {z             }    |{z}
                     |            {z            }                                   random noise
                                                       ”direction pointing to x ”
                                                                              t
                                 ”predicted x0 ”
              p                     p
where σt = η (1 − αt−1 ) / (1 − αt ) 1 − αt /αt−1 . When η = 1 for all t, it becomes DDPM. As
η = 0, the process becomes deterministic and guarantees nearly perfect inversion.

2.3   I MAGE MANIPULATION WITH CLIP

CLIP learns multimodal embeddings with an image encoder EI and a text encoder ET whose sim-
ilarity indicates semantic similarity between images and texts (Radford et al., 2021). Compared to
directly minimizing the cosine distance between the edited image and the target description (Patash-
nik et al., 2021), directional loss with cosine distance achieves homogeneous editing without mode
collapse (Gal et al., 2021):
                                                                              ∆I · ∆T
                     Ldirection xedit , y target ; xsource , y source := 1 −

                                                                                       ,                (4)
                                                                             ∥∆I∥∥∆T ∥

where ∆T = ET (y target ) − ET (y source ) and ∆I = EI xedit − EI (xsource ) for edited image
xedit , target description y target , original image xsource , and source description y source . We use the
prompts ‘smiling face’ and ‘face’ as the target and source descriptions for facial attribute smiling.

3     D ISCOVERING SEMANTIC LATENT SPACE IN DIFFUSION MODELS
This section explains why naive approaches do not work and proposes a new controllable reverse
process. Then we describe the techniques for controlling the generative process. Throughout this
paper, we use an abbreviated version of Eq. (3):
                                √
                       xt−1 = αt−1 Pt (ϵθt (xt )) + Dt (ϵθt (xt )) + σt zt ,                 (5)
where Pt (ϵθt (xt )) denotes the predicted x0 and Dt (ϵθt (xt )) denotes the direction pointing to xt . We
omit σt zt for brevity, except when η ̸= 0. We further abbreviate Pt (ϵθt (xt )) as Pt and Dt (ϵθt (xt ))
as Dt when the context clearly specifies the arguments.

3.1   P ROBLEM

We aim to allow semantic latent manipulation of images x0 generated from xT given a pretrained
and frozen diffusion model. The easiest idea to manipulate x0 is simply updating xT to optimize
the directional CLIP loss given text prompts with Eq. (4). However, it leads to distorted images or
incorrect manipulation (Kim & Ye, 2021).
An alternative approach is to shift the noise ϵθt predicted by the network at each sampling step.
However, it does not achieve manipulating x0 because the intermediate changes in Pt and Dt cancel
out each other resulting in the same pθ (x0:T ), similarly to destructive interference.
Theorem 1. Let ϵθt be a predicted noise during the original reverse process                         θ
                                                                                      √ at t and θϵ̃t be its
shifted counterpart. Then, ∆xt = x̃t−1 − xt−1 is negligible where x̃t−1 = αt−1 Pt (ϵ̃t (xt )) +
Dt (ϵ̃θt (xt )). I.e., the shifted terms of ϵ̃θt in Pt and Dt destruct each other in the reverse process.

Appendix C proves above theorem. Figure 13(a-b) shows that x̃0 is almost identical to x0 .

3.2   A SYMMETRIC REVERSE PROCESS

In order to break the interference, we propose a new controllable reverse process with asymmetry:
                                     √
                              xt−1 = αt−1 Pt (ϵ̃θt (xt )) + Dt (ϵθt (xt )),                    (6)


                                                     3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


      DDIM reverse process                                                           …
                                                                    …
                                                                                                     Real image
                                                                             DDIM
                                                                             Asyrp


                                                                                                      Smiling


                                                                                                 …
                                                                                         …
                                                                                             …
      Asymmetric reverse process



Figure 2: Generative process of Asyrp. The green box on the left illustrates Asyrp which only
alters Pt while preserving Dt shared by DDIM. The right describes that Asyrp modifies the original
reverse process toward the target attribute reflecting the change in h-space.


i.e., we modify only Pt by shifting ϵθt to ϵ̃θt while preserving Dt . Intuitively, it modifies the original
reverse process according to ∆ϵt = ϵ̃θt − ϵθt while it does not alter the direction toward xt so that
xt−1 follows the original flow Dt at each sampling step. Figure 2 illustrates the above intuition.
As in Avrahami et al. (2022), we use the modified Pedit   t     and the original Psource
                                                                                  t      as visual inputs for
the directional CLIP loss in Eq. (4), and regularize the difference between the modified Pedit       t   and
                source                                   (t)
the original Pt        . We find ∆ϵ = arg min∆ϵ Et L where
           L = λCLIP Ldirection Pedit
             (t)
                                         , y ref ; Psource , y source + λrecon Pedit  − Psource

                                     t              t                             t        t              (7)

Although ∆ϵ indeed renders the attribute in the xedit
                                                   0 , ϵ-space lacks the necessary properties of the
semantic latent space in diffusion models that will be described in the following.

3.3     h-space

Note that ϵθt is implemented as U-Net in all state-of-the-art diffusion models. We choose its bottle-
neck, the deepest feature maps ht , to control ϵθt . By design, ht has smaller spatial resolutions and
high-level semantics than ϵθt . Accordingly, the sampling equation becomes

                                      √
                             xt−1 =       αt−1 Pt (ϵθt (xt |∆ht )) + Dt (ϵθt (xt )) + σt zt ,                   (8)
where ϵθt (xt |∆ht ) adds ∆ht to the original feature maps ht . The ∆ht minimizing the same loss in
Eq. (7) with Pt (ϵθt (xt |∆ht )) instead of Pt (ϵ̃θt (xt )) successfully manipulates the attributes.
We observe that h-space in Asyrp has the following properties that others do not have.

         • The same ∆h leads to the same effect on different samples.
         • Linearly scaling ∆h controls the magnitude of attribute change, even with negative scales.
         • Adding multiple ∆h manipulates the corresponding multiple attributes simultaneously.
         • ∆h preserves the quality of the resulting images without degradation.
         • ∆ht is roughly consistent across different timesteps t.

The above properties are demonstrated thoroughly in § 5.3. Appendix D.3 provides details of h-space
and suboptimal results from alternative choices.

3.4     I MPLICIT NEURAL DIRECTIONS

Although ∆h succeeds in manipulating images, directly optimizing ∆ht on multiple timesteps re-
quires many iterations of training with a carefully chosen learning rate and its scheduling. Instead,
we define an implicit function ft (ht ) which produces ∆ht for given ht and t. ft is implemented as
a small neural network with two 1 × 1 convolutions concatenating timestep t. See Appendix E for
the details. Accordingly, we optimize the same loss in Eq. (7) with Pedit
                                                                      t   = Pt (ϵθt (xt |ft )).
Learning ft is more robust to learning rate settings and converges faster than learning every ∆ht . In
addition, as ft learns an implicit function for given timesteps and bottleneck features, it generalizes


                                                            4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


      1.6
                            quality
            editing         deficiency
      1.4   strength
      1.2

      1.0

      0.8

      0.6

      0.4          AFHQ
                   AFHQ
      0.2          CelebA
                   CelebA
      0.0
            1000                 800              600           400           200              0
                                                            t


Figure 3: Intuition for choosing the intervals for editing and quality boosting. We choose the
intervals by quantifying two measures (top left inset). The editing strength of an interval [T, t] mea-
sures its perceptual difference from T until t. We set [T, t] to the interval with the smallest editing
strength that synthesizes Pt close to x, i.e., LPIPS(x, Pt ) = 0.33. Editing flexibility of an interval
[t, 0] measures the potential amount of changes after t. Quality deficiency at t measures the amount
of noise in xt . We set [t, 0] to handle large quality deficiency (i.e., LPIPS(x, xt ) = 1.2) with small
editing flexibility.


to unseen timesteps and bottleneck features. The generalization allows us to borrow the accelerated
training scheme of DDIM defined on a subsequence {xτi }∀i∈[1,S] where {τi } is a subsequence of
[1, ..., T ] and S < T . Then, we can use the generative process with a custom subsequence {τ̃i }
                                                                                            P
with length S̃ < T through normalization: ∆h̃τ̃ = fτ̃ (hτ̃ )S/S̃. It preserves the amount of ∆ht ,
∆h̃τ̃ S̃ = ∆ht S. Therefore, we can use ft trained on any subsequence for any length of the genera-
tive process. See Appendix F for details. We use ft to get ∆ht for all experiments except Figure 6.

4     G ENERATIVE PROCESS DESIGN
This section describes the entire editing process, which consists of three phases: editing with Asyrp,
traditional denoising, and quality boosting. We design formulas to determine the length of each
phase with quantifiable measures.

4.1   E DITING PROCESS WITH A SYRP

Diffusion models generate the high-level context in the early stage and imperceptible fine details in
the later stage (Choi et al., 2022). Likewise, we modify the generative process in the early stage to
achieve semantic changes. We refer to the early stage as the editing interval [T, tedit ].
LPIPS(x, PT ) and LPIPS(x, Pt ) calculate the perceptual distance between the original image and
the predicted image at time steps T and t, respectively. Intuitively, the high-level content is already
determined by the predicted terms at the respective timesteps and LPIPS measures the remaining
component to be edited through the remaining reverse process. Consequently, we define editing
strength of an interval [T, t]:
                                       ξt = LPIPS(x, PT ) − LPIPS(x, Pt )
indicating the perceptual change from timestep T to t in the original generative process. Figure 3
illustrates LPIPS(x, ·) for Pt and xt with examples and the inset depicts editing strength. The
shorter editing interval has the lower ξt , and the longer editing interval brings more changes to
the resulting images. We seek the shortest editing interval which will bring enough distinguishable
changes in the images in general. We empirically find that tedit with LPIPS(x, Ptedit ) = 0.33 builds
the shortest editing interval with enough editing strength as Ptedit has nearly all visual attributes in
x.
However, some attributes require more visual changes than others, e.g., pixar > smile. For
such attributes, we increase the editing strength ξt by δ = 0.33d(ET (ysource ), ET (ytarget )) where


                                                        5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


ET (·) produces CLIP text embedding, y(·) denotes the descriptions, and d(·, ·) computes the cosine
distance between the arguments. Choosing tedit with LPIPS(x, Ptedit ) = 0.33 − δ expands the
editing interval to a suitable length. It consistently produces good results in various settings. The
supporting experiments are shown in Appendix G.

4.2   Q UALITY BOOSTING WITH STOCHASTIC NOISE INJECTION

Although DDIM achieves nearly perfect inversion by removing stochasticity (η = 0), Karras et al.
(2022) demonstrate that stochasticity improves image quality. Likewise, we inject stochastic noise
in the boosting interval [tboost , 0].
Though the longer boosting interval would achieve higher quality, boosting over excessively long
intervals would modify the content. Hence, we want to determine the shortest interval that shows
enough quality boosting to guarantee minimal change in the content. We consider the noise in the
image as the capacity for the quality boosting and define quality deficiency at t: γt = LPIPS(x, xt )
indicating the amount of noise in xt compared to the original image. We use xt instead of Pt because
we consider the actual image rather than the semantics. Figure 3 inset depicts editing flexibility and
quality deficiency. We empirically find that tboost with γtboost = 1.2 achieves quality boosting
with minimal content change. We confirmed that the editing strength of the intervals [tboost , 0] is
guaranteed to be less than 0.25. In Figure 3, after tboost , LPIPS(x, xt ) sharply drops in the original
generative process while LPIPS(x, Pt ) changes little. Note that most of the quality degradation of
the resulting images is caused by DDIM reverse process, not by Asyrp. We use this quality boosting
for all experiments except ablation in Appendix H.

4.3   OVERALL PROCESS OF IMAGE EDITING

Using tedit and tboost determined by the above formulas, we modify the generative process of DDIM
with
                            √
                              αt−1 Pt (ϵθt (xt |ft )) + Dt , σt2 I , η = 0 if T ≥ t ≥ tedit
                       
                       N
   (t)                      √
  pθ (xt−1 | xt ) = N         αt−1 Pt (ϵθt (xt )) + Dt , σt2 I , η = 0     if tedit > t ≥ tboost (9)
                            √            θ                 2

                         N
                       
                              αt−1 Pt (ϵt (xt )) + Dt , σt I , η = 1       if tboost > t

The visual overview and comprehensive algorithms of the entire process are in Appendix I.

5     E XPERIMENTS
In this section, we show the effectiveness of semantic latent editing in h-space with Asyrp on various
attributes, datasets and architectures in § 5.1. Moreover, we provide quantitative results including
user study in § 5.2. Lastly, we provide detailed analyses for the properties of the semantic latent
space on h-space and alternatives in § 5.3.

Implementation details. We implement our method on various settings: CelebA-HQ (Karras
et al., 2018) and LSUN-bedroom/-church (Yu et al., 2015) on DDPM++ (Song et al., 2020b) (Meng
et al., 2021); AFHQ-dog (Choi et al., 2020) on iDDPM (Nichol & Dhariwal, 2021); and M ET-
FACES (Karras et al., 2020) on ADM with P2-weighting (Dhariwal & Nichol, 2021) (Choi et al.,
2022). Please note that all models are official pretrained checkpoints and are kept frozen. De-
tailed settings including the coefficients for λCLIP and λrecon , and source/target descriptions can
be found in Appendix J.1. We train ft with S = 40 for 1 epoch using 1000 samples. The real
samples are randomly chosen from each dataset for in-domain-like attributes. For out-of-domain-
like attributes, we randomly draw 1,000 latent variables xT ∼ N (0, I). Details are described in
Appendix J.2. Training takes about 20 minutes with three RTX 3090 GPUs. All the images in
the figures are not used for training. We set S̃ = 1, 000 for inference. The code is available at
https://github.com/kwonminki/Asyrp official

5.1   V ERSATILITY OF h-space WITH A SYRP

Figure 4 shows the effectiveness of our method on various datasets and any existing U-Net based
architectures. Our method can synthesize the attributes that are not even included in the training


                                                   6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


      Real image       Recon.          Smiling            Sad               Angry       Man↔Woman         Young      Curly hair


      Real image       Recon.       Department       Factory                Gothic       Red bricks       Temple     Wooden


     Real image    Smiling      Disgusted   Real image           Sleepy         Happy        Real image      Hotel    Princess


Figure 4: Editing results of Asyrp on various datasets. We conduct experiments on CelebA-HQ,
LSUN-church, M ET FACES, AFHQ-dog, and LSUN-bedroom.
                   Real image      Nicolas Cage          Pixar            Modigliani    Neanderthal        Frida


         Figure 5: Editing results of Asyrp for unseen domains in CelebA-HQ dataset.


dataset, such as church →
                        − {department, factory, and temple}. Even for dogs, our method
synthesizes smiling Poodle and Yorkshire, the species that barely smile in the dataset. Figure 5
provides results for changing human faces to different identities, painting styles, and ancient pri-
mates. More result can be found in Appendix N. Versatility of our method is surprising because
we do not alter the models but only shift the bottleneck feature maps in h-space with Asyrp during
inference.


                                                                   7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                       CelebA-HQ in-domain      CelebA-HQ unseen-domain                          LSUN-church
                   quality attribute overall   quality attribute overall           quality    attribute diversity   overall
  Asyrp (ours)     98.36% 88.13% 94.92%        71.56% 59.84% 63.13%                73.19%     71.81%    87.50%      76.81%
 DiffusionCLIP      1.64%    11.88%    5.08%   28.44% 40.16% 36.88%                26.81%     28.19%    12.50%      23.19%

                Table 1: User study with 80 participants. The details are described in § K.1

   Real image                             Real image                                Real image


        (a) Result of optimization                             (b) Result of adaptation to other images


Figure 6: Optimization for smiling on h-space and ϵ-space. (a) Optimizing ∆ht for a sample
with smiling results in natural editing while the change due to optimizing ∆ϵt is relatively small.
(b) Applying ∆ht from (a) to other samples yields the same attribute change while ∆ϵt distorts the
images. The result of ∆ϵt is the best sample we could find.


                                                       Real image
                  - Smiling (untrained)                                                 + Smiling (trained)


Figure 7: Linearity of h-space. Linear interpolation and extrapolation on h-space lead to grad-
ual changes even to the unseen intensity and directions. Right side shows the interpolation results
by positive scaling of ∆hsmiling
                            t       . Left side shows the extrapolation results by negative scaling of
    smiling
∆ht         . Note that we did not train ft for the negative direction.


5.2   Q UANTITATIVE COMPARISON

Considering that our method can be combined with various diffusion models without finetuning,
we do not find such a versatile competitor. Nonetheless, we compare Asyrp against DiffusionCLIP
using the official code that edits the real images by finetuning the whole model. We asked 80 partic-
ipants to choose the images with better quality, natural attribute change, and overall preference for
given total of 40 sets of original images, ours, and DiffusionCLIP. Table 1 shows that Asyrp outper-
forms DiffusionCLIP in the all perspectives including the attributes unseen in the training dataset.
We list the settings for fair comparison including the questions and example images in Appendix
K.1. See § K.2 for more evaluation metrics: segmentation consistency (SC) and directional CLIP
similarity(Sdir ).

5.3   A NALYSIS ON h-space

We provide detailed analyses to validate the properties of semantic latent space for diffusion models:
homogeneity, linearity, robustness, and consistency across timesteps.

Homogeneity. Figure 6 illustrates homogeneity of h-space compared to ϵ-space. One ∆ht opti-
mized for an image results in the same attribute change to other input images. On the other hand,
oneP∆ϵt optimized for an image distorts other input images. In Figure 10, applying ∆hmean t    =
 1       i
N    ∆h  t produces almost identical results where i indicates indices of N = 20 random samples.

Linearity. In Figure 7, we observe that linearly scaling a ∆h reflects the amount of change in
the visual attributes. Surprisingly, it generalizes to negative scales that are not seen during train-
ing. Moreover, Figure 8 shows that combinations of different ∆h’s yield their combined semantic
changes in the resulting images. Appendix N.2 provides mixed interpolation between multiple at-
tributes.


                                                           8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


      Real image   Young         Sad    Neanderthal          N+S       N+Y            Y+S   Y+S+N


    Figure 8: Linear combination. Combining multiple ∆hs leads to combined attribute changes.


    Real image             (a)                    (b)                           (c)
Figure 9: Ramdom manipulation on h-space and ϵ-space. (a) Adding random noise with mag-
nitude of ∆hsmiling
              t        and random direction in h-space leads to realistic images with small changes.
(b) Adding random noise with magnitude of ∆ϵsmiling
                                                  t       and random direction in ϵ-space leads to
severely distorted images. (c) Adding random noises with tripled magnitude produce diverse visual
changes in realistic images.
     Real image                                           Real image


                       Young                                                 Pixar
Figure 10: Consistency on h-space. Results of ∆ht , ∆hmean
                                                      t    and ∆hglobal are almost identical for
in-domain samples. However, we choose ∆ht over others to prevent unexpected small difference in
the unseen domain. We provide more results in § L.1.

Robustness. Figure 9 compares the effect of adding random noise in h-space and ϵ-space. The
random noises are chosen to be the vectors with random directions and magnitude of the example
∆ht and ∆ϵt in Figure 6 on each space. Perturbation in h-space leads to realistic images with a
minimal difference or some semantic changes. On the contrary, perturbation in ϵ-space severely
distorts the resulting images. See Appendix D.2 for more analyses.

Consistency across timesteps. Recall that ∆ht for all samples are homogeneous and replacing
them by their mean ∆hmean
                       t    yieldsPsimilar results. Interestingly, in Figure 10, we observe that adding
a time-invariant ∆hglobal = T1e t ∆hmean  t     instead of ∆ht also yields similar results where Te
denotes the length of the editing interval [T, tedit ]. Though we use ∆ht to deliver the best quality
and manipulation, using ∆hmean
                             t     or even ∆hglobal with some compromise would be worth trying
for simplicity. We report more detail about mean and global direction in Appendix L.1.


6     C ONCLUSION

We proposed a new generative process, Asyrp, which facilitates image editing in a semantic latent
space h-space for pretrained diffusion models. h-space has nice properties as in the latent space
of GANs: homogeneity, linearity, robustness, and consistency across timesteps. The full editing
process is designed to achieve versatile editing and high quality by measuring editing strength and
quality deficiency at timesteps. We hope that our approach and detailed analyses help cultivate a new
paradigm of image editing in the semantic latent space of diffusion models. Combining previous
finetuning or guidance techniques would be an interesting research direction.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported by the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) grant funded by the
Korea government (Ministry of Science and ICT) (No. 2021-0-00155)


                                                      9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


R EFERENCES
Omri Avrahami, Dani Lischinski, and Ohad Fried. Blended diffusion for text-driven editing of
 natural images. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
 Recognition, pp. 18208–18218, 2022.
Hila Chefer, Sagie Benaim, Roni Paiss, and Lior Wolf. Image-based clip-guided essence transfer.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.12427, 2021.
Jooyoung Choi, Sungwon Kim, Yonghyun Jeong, Youngjune Gwon, and Sungroh Yoon. Ilvr: Con-
  ditioning method for denoising diffusion probabilistic models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.02938,
  2021.
Jooyoung Choi, Jungbeom Lee, Chaehun Shin, Sungwon Kim, Hyunwoo Kim, and Sungroh Yoon.
  Perception prioritized training of diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference
  on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 11472–11481, 2022.
Yunjey Choi, Youngjung Uh, Jaejun Yoo, and Jung-Woo Ha. Stargan v2: Diverse image synthesis for
  multiple domains. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern
  recognition, pp. 8188–8197, 2020.
Ning Dai, Jianze Liang, Xipeng Qiu, and Xuanjing Huang. Style transformer: Unpaired text style
  transfer without disentangled latent representation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1905.05621, 2019.
Prafulla Dhariwal and Alexander Nichol. Diffusion models beat gans on image synthesis. Advances
  in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:8780–8794, 2021.
Rinon Gal, Or Patashnik, Haggai Maron, Gal Chechik, and Daniel Cohen-Or. Stylegan-nada: Clip-
  guided domain adaptation of image generators. arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.00946, 2021.
Ian Goodfellow, Jean Pouget-Abadie, Mehdi Mirza, Bing Xu, David Warde-Farley, Sherjil Ozair,
  Aaron Courville, and Yoshua Bengio. Generative adversarial networks. Communications of the
  ACM, 63(11):139–144, 2020.
Erik Härkönen, Aaron Hertzmann, Jaakko Lehtinen, and Sylvain Paris. Ganspace: Discovering
  interpretable gan controls. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:9841–9850,
  2020.
Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. Denoising diffusion probabilistic models. Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:6840–6851, 2020.
Tero Karras, Timo Aila, Samuli Laine, and Jaakko Lehtinen. Progressive growing of gans for im-
  proved quality, stability, and variation. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2018.
Tero Karras, Miika Aittala, Janne Hellsten, Samuli Laine, Jaakko Lehtinen, and Timo Aila. Training
  generative adversarial networks with limited data. Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 33:12104–12114, 2020.
Tero Karras, Miika Aittala, Timo Aila, and Samuli Laine. Elucidating the design space of diffusion-
  based generative models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.00364, 2022.
Gwanghyun Kim and Jong Chul Ye. Diffusionclip: Text-guided image manipulation using diffusion
 models. 2021.
Diederik P Kingma and Max Welling.            Auto-encoding variational bayes.      arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1312.6114, 2013.
Cheng-Han Lee, Ziwei Liu, Lingyun Wu, and Ping Luo. Maskgan: Towards diverse and interactive
  facial image manipulation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
  Pattern Recognition, pp. 5549–5558, 2020.
Huan Ling, Karsten Kreis, Daiqing Li, Seung Wook Kim, Antonio Torralba, and Sanja Fidler. Edit-
  gan: High-precision semantic image editing. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  34:16331–16345, 2021.


                                                10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Xihui Liu, Dong Huk Park, Samaneh Azadi, Gong Zhang, Arman Chopikyan, Yuxiao Hu, Humphrey
  Shi, Anna Rohrbach, and Trevor Darrell. More control for free! image synthesis with semantic
  diffusion guidance. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.05744, 2021.
Ziwei Liu, Ping Luo, Xiaogang Wang, and Xiaoou Tang. Deep learning face attributes in the wild.
  In Proceedings of International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), December 2015.
Andreas Lugmayr, Martin Danelljan, Andres Romero, Fisher Yu, Radu Timofte, and Luc Van Gool.
  Repaint: Inpainting using denoising diffusion probabilistic models. In Proceedings of the
  IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 11461–11471, 2022.
Chenlin Meng, Yang Song, Jiaming Song, Jiajun Wu, Jun-Yan Zhu, and Stefano Ermon. Sdedit: Im-
  age synthesis and editing with stochastic differential equations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.01073,
  2021.
Alex Nichol, Prafulla Dhariwal, Aditya Ramesh, Pranav Shyam, Pamela Mishkin, Bob McGrew,
  Ilya Sutskever, and Mark Chen. Glide: Towards photorealistic image generation and editing with
  text-guided diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.10741, 2021.
Alexander Quinn Nichol and Prafulla Dhariwal. Improved denoising diffusion probabilistic models.
  In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 8162–8171. PMLR, 2021.
Or Patashnik, Zongze Wu, Eli Shechtman, Daniel Cohen-Or, and Dani Lischinski. Styleclip: Text-
  driven manipulation of stylegan imagery. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Confer-
  ence on Computer Vision, pp. 2085–2094, 2021.
Konpat Preechakul, Nattanat Chatthee, Suttisak Wizadwongsa, and Supasorn Suwajanakorn. Dif-
  fusion autoencoders: Toward a meaningful and decodable representation. In Proceedings of the
  IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 10619–10629, 2022.
Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal,
  Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al. Learning transferable visual
  models from natural language supervision. In International Conference on Machine Learning,
  pp. 8748–8763. PMLR, 2021.
Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and Björn Ommer. High-
  resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Con-
  ference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 10684–10695, 2022.
David E Rumelhart, Geoffrey E Hinton, and Ronald J Williams. Learning internal representations
  by error propagation. Technical report, California Univ San Diego La Jolla Inst for Cognitive
  Science, 1985.
Vikash Sehwag, Caner Hazirbas, Albert Gordo, Firat Ozgenel, and Cristian Canton. Generating high
  fidelity data from low-density regions using diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
  Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 11492–11501, 2022.
Yujun Shen, Ceyuan Yang, Xiaoou Tang, and Bolei Zhou. Interfacegan: Interpreting the disentan-
  gled face representation learned by gans. IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and machine
  intelligence, 2020.
Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, Eric Weiss, Niru Maheswaranathan, and Surya Ganguli. Deep unsupervised
  learning using nonequilibrium thermodynamics. In International Conference on Machine Learn-
  ing, pp. 2256–2265. PMLR, 2015.
Jiaming Song, Chenlin Meng, and Stefano Ermon. Denoising diffusion implicit models. arXiv
   preprint arXiv:2010.02502, 2020a.
Yang Song, Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, Diederik P Kingma, Abhishek Kumar, Stefano Ermon, and Ben
  Poole. Score-based generative modeling through stochastic differential equations. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2011.13456, 2020b.
Arash Vahdat, Karsten Kreis, and Jan Kautz. Score-based generative modeling in latent space.
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:11287–11302, 2021.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Daniel Watson, William Chan, Jonathan Ho, and Mohammad Norouzi. Learning fast samplers for
  diffusion models by differentiating through sample quality. In International Conference on Learn-
  ing Representations, 2022. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=VFBjuF8HEp.
Zipeng Xu, Tianwei Lin, Hao Tang, Fu Li, Dongliang He, Nicu Sebe, Radu Timofte, Luc Van Gool,
  and Errui Ding. Predict, prevent, and evaluate: Disentangled text-driven image manipulation
  empowered by pre-trained vision-language model. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference
  on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 18229–18238, 2022.
Changqian Yu, Jingbo Wang, Chao Peng, Changxin Gao, Gang Yu, and Nong Sang. Bisenet: Bilat-
  eral segmentation network for real-time semantic segmentation. In Proceedings of the European
  conference on computer vision (ECCV), pp. 325–341, 2018.
Fisher Yu, Ari Seff, Yinda Zhang, Shuran Song, Thomas Funkhouser, and Jianxiong Xiao. Lsun:
  Construction of a large-scale image dataset using deep learning with humans in the loop. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1506.03365, 2015.
Oğuz Kaan Yüksel, Enis Simsar, Ezgi Gülperi Er, and Pinar Yanardag. Latentclr: A contrastive
  learning approach for unsupervised discovery of interpretable directions. In Proceedings of the
  IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 14263–14272, 2021.
Bolei Zhou, Hang Zhao, Xavier Puig, Sanja Fidler, Adela Barriuso, and Antonio Torralba. Scene
  parsing through ade20k dataset. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and
  pattern recognition, pp. 633–641, 2017.
Bolei Zhou, Hang Zhao, Xavier Puig, Tete Xiao, Sanja Fidler, Adela Barriuso, and Antonio Torralba.
  Semantic understanding of scenes through the ade20k dataset. International Journal of Computer
  Vision, 127(3):302–321, 2019.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Appendix
Table of Contents
     A Related work                                                                                  14

     B More discussion                                                                               15

     C Proof of Theorem 1                                                                            15

     D Additional supports for h-space with Asyrp                                                    17
       D.1 Random perturbation on ϵ-space without Asyrp . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          17
       D.2 Robustness and semantics in h-space and ϵ-space with Asyrp . . . . . . . . . .            17
       D.3 Choice of h-space in U-Net . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        17

     E Implicit neural directions                                                                    17

     F Quality improvements by non-accelerated sampling with scaled ∆ht                              18

     G Editing strength and editing flexibility                                                      18
       G.1 Editing strength and tedit . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      18
       G.2 Editing flexibility and tboost . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    18

     H Quality boosting                                                                              19

     I   Algorithm                                                                                   23

     J   Training details                                                                            23
         J.1 Loss coefficients . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   23
         J.2 Training with random sampling instead of the training datasets . . . . . . . . . .      24

     K Evaluation                                                                                    24
       K.1 User study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      24
       K.2 Segmentation consistency and directional CLIP similarity . . . . . . . . . . . .          25

     L Directions                                                                                    26
       L.1 Global direction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      26
       L.2 Compare three methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         29

     M Random sampling                                                                               30

     N More samples                                                                                  32
       N.1 ImageNet . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        32
       N.2 Multi-interpolation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       32
       N.3 More results on all datasets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      32


                                                     13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Real images
Smiling


Figure 11: Editing dog to smile. We provide high-resolution results of editing real images in the
teaser and more.


A             R ELATED WORK
After Sohl-Dickstein et al. (2015), denoising diffusion probabilistic models (DDPMs) provide a uni-
versal approach for generative modeling (Ho et al., 2020). On the other hand, Song et al. (2020b)
suggests score-based model and unifies SDEs incorporating diffusion models with score-based mod-
els. Subsequent works renovate diffusion models by focusing on architectures, scheduling, weight-
ing, and fast sampling (Nichol & Dhariwal (2021), Karras et al. (2022), Choi et al. (2022), Song
et al. (2020a), Watson et al. (2022)). They mainly consider random generation rather than controlled
generation.
In the meantime, Dhariwal & Nichol (2021) introduces classifier guidance not only improving the
quality of images but also retrieving specific class of images. Since it can apply any guidance, its
variants have emerged (Sehwag et al. (2022), Avrahami et al. (2022), Liu et al. (2021), Nichol et al.
(2021)). However it requires a noise-dependent classifier (or any off-the-shelf models) and additional
cost to compute gradients for the guidance during its sampling process. The other works try to
control the generative process using image-space guidance (Choi et al. (2021), Meng et al. (2021),
Lugmayr et al. (2022), Avrahami et al. (2022)). They manipulate resulting images by matching noisy
images with target images during the reverse process. Still, it is hard to expect delicate control of the
reverse process from the image guidance. Furthermore, Preechakul et al. (2022) introduces an extra
encoder which encodes the semantic features of a real image in order to condition the generative
process. Although the semantics allow one to control diffusion models, it requires additional training
from scratch with the encoder and inherently can not use the other pretrained diffusion models.
For controllability, Rombach et al. (2022) and Vahdat et al. (2021) apply another approach which
adapts VAE (Kingma & Welling, 2013) and autoencoder (Rumelhart et al., 1985) to diffusion mod-
els. In spite of their great success in editing, their diffusion models learn the distribution of the
learned embeddings in VAE or autoencoder, not the images. Kim & Ye (2021) proposes another
strategy: fine-tuning a whole diffusion model for image editing. It shows valid performance but it
requires each fine-tuned model corresponding each attribute.
In comparison, Asyrp enables outstanding manipulation without high computation, specifically de-
signed architectures, or fine-tuning whole models.
Meanwhile, generative adversarial network Goodfellow et al. (2020) address their latent space for
image editing (Ling et al. (2021), Härkönen et al. (2020), Chefer et al. (2021), Shen et al. (2020),


                                                   14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Yüksel et al. (2021), Patashnik et al. (2021), Gal et al. (2021), Dai et al. (2019), Xu et al. (2022)).
However they have to conduct ‘inversion’ to their latent space for real image editing and ‘GAN
inversion’ is often challenging and produces unexpected appearance changes.
On the contrary, Asyrp enables to use latent space of real images by nearly perfect easy inversion of
DDIM.


B    M ORE DISCUSSION

In this section, we discuss the pros and cons of diffusion-model-based and GAN-based methods.
And we provide guidelines for further improvements.
GAN-based latent manipulation methods Patashnik et al. (2021); Gal et al. (2021)require careful
inversion from real images to latent codes for real image editing. On the contrary, our proposed
method based on diffusion models has a powerful advantage; the sophisticated inversion method is
not necessary. This means that we can obtain the latent code of an arbitrary real image even if the
image is not in the trained domain. On the other hand, several inversion methods have been proposed
for GANs to obtain the latent of the real image, and the corresponding latent manipulation method
should be considered for each inversion method. For example, it is difficult to apply the method of
editing in w space to the method of inversion using w+ space.
However, GANs have the advantage of fast sampling. In addition, diffusion models have a relatively
slow sampling time. Additionally, we have to be aware of the time steps of diffusion models, which
is still less well known.
The advantage of being free from Inversion provides the following milestones. The manipulation in
the latent of the diffusion models is the same as the editing in real images. It can be expanded to
segmentation, clustering, classification, etc. in h-space for real-world images.
It would be an interesting research direction to employ previous techniques. Our method can be used
in conjunction with gradient guidance methods. Although we do not focus on random sampling, ours
works effectively for sampling with stochastic. (See § M.) It may bring more diverse methods to steer
diffusion models.
h-space in the latent diffusion models such as stable diffusion, is another interesting research di-
rection. The main contribution of our paper is only modifying Pt while preserving Dt , and can be
adapted with latent diffusion models. However, since the latent meaning may be different due to
structural differences, research on this is needed.
Furthermore, all of the properties of h-space according to the time step has not been fully discussed
so far. Research on them can be expected to expand further.


Limitations. Editing with Asyrp seldom yields changes in overall style or peripheral objects but
edits attributes of the main object. Style transfer using frozen diffusion models is our future work.


Societal impact / Ethics statement. Techniques for high-quality image manipulation such as
Asyrp should be accompanied by social and/or technical solutions to prevent abuse. We acknowledge
the potential ethical implications that may arise from the use of our image manipulation technique,
Asyrp. We advocate for the development and implementation of social and technical solutions to
prevent potential abuses such as spreading disinformation or propaganda. We are committed to en-
suring fairness and non-discrimination, legal compliance, and research integrity in our work.


C    P ROOF OF T HEOREM 1

Proof of Theorem 1. Let ϵθt be a predicted noise during the original reverse process
                                                                             √       at t and ϵ̃θt be
its shifted counterpart. Then, ∆xt = x̃t−1 −xt−1 is negligible where x̃t−1 = αt−1 Pt (ϵ̃θt (xt ))+
Dt (ϵ̃θt (xt )).


                                                  15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 12: Illustration of Theorem 1. Upper blue line describes applying noise ϵ̃t = ϵt + ∆ϵt
to produce Pt (ϵ̃t ) = the shifted predicted x0 . However, the shift due to ∆ϵt is canceled out by the
shift in Dt (ϵ̃t ) due to ∆ϵt . As a results, applying ∆ϵt both on Pt and Dt brings identical outputs to
the original.


                                                                                         Qt
Define ϵ̃θt (xt ) = ϵθt (xt ) + ∆ϵt , {βt }Tt=1 = {β1 = βmin , ..., βT = βmax }, and αt = s=1 (1 −
βs ). Note that βmax is defined as a small value (e.g., βmax = 0.001) and {βt }Tt=1 are defined by a
decreasing schedule from βT = βmax to β1 = βmin ≈ 0 (e.g., βmin = 0.00001). Then,

                                            √
                                 x̃t−1 =        αt−1 Pt (ϵ̃θt (xt )) + Dt (ϵ̃θt (xt ))                        (10)


                                 √                               !
               √          xt −       1 − αt ϵθt (xt ) + ∆ϵt              p
                                                                                         (θ)

          =        αt−1                   √                          +       1 − αt−1 · ϵt (xt ) + ∆ϵt        (11)
                                            αt

                                                         √       √
          √                                                  αt−1 1 − αt
              αt−1 Pt (ϵθt (xt )) + Dt (ϵθt (xt )) −
                                                                                p
      =                                                         √        · ∆ϵt + 1 − αt−1 · ∆ϵt               (12)
                                                                  αt

                                         √
                                           1 − αt p
                               = xt−1 + − √        + 1 − αt−1 · ∆ϵt                                           (13)
                                            1 − βt

                                 √
                                                     q   Qt−1          √       
                                   1 − αt              1 − s=1 (1 − βs ) 1 − βt
                     = xt−1 + − √        +                  √                   · ∆ϵt                       (14)
                                   1 − βt                      1 − βt

                               √                   √                                     t
                                     1 − αt − βt − 1 − αt                                Y
                   = xt−1 +                √                · ∆ϵt               ∵ αt =         (1 − βs )      (15)
                                             1 − βt                                      s=1


                                      √                 √
                                          1 − αt − βt − 1 − αt
   ∴ ∆xt = x̃t−1 − xt−1 =                       √                · ∆ϵt is negligible                ∵ βt < βmax
                                                  1 − βt
                                                                                                              (16)


                                                           16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


D     A DDITIONAL SUPPORTS FOR h-space WITH A SYRP
D.1    R ANDOM PERTURBATION ON ϵ-space WITHOUT A SYRP

In § 3.1, we argue that if both Pt and Dt are shifted, we can not manipulate x0 . In Figure 13, we do
not observe the noticeable difference between (a) and (b) which are the result of the original reverse
process of DDIM and the one with shifting both terms, respectively.

D.2    ROBUSTNESS AND SEMANTICS IN h-space AND ϵ-space WITH A SYRP

In § 3.2, we also argue that h-space is more robust than ϵ-space with Asyrp. In Figure 13, we
observe that small random noise z ∼ N (0, I) in ϵ-space degrades the resulting image without
semantic changes (c) and much larger random noise in h-space yields random semantic changes
without severe artifacts (d).
Note that diffusion models are designed as latent variable models with learned Gaussian transitions
and the reverse process should also be close to Gaussian. Based on the assumption, we manage ϵθt
to follow the original Gaussian distribution as follows. Adding z ∼ N (0, σI) to ϵθt expands the
distribution of the predicted
                          √ noise and may produce distorted images. To preserve the distribution,
we scale ϵ̃θt = (ϵθt + z)/ 12 + σ 2 . Still, the resulting images are almost identical compared to the
original images where ϵ̃θt = ϵθt + z as shown in Figure 13. It is no wonder that the scaling does not
improve the distorted results since the additive random noise disturbs the denoising operation of the
predicted random noise.


Figure 13: (a) The reconstructed image by the original DDIM inversion process which is almost
indistinguishable to the real image. (b) The result from adding random noise z both on Pt and Dt .
(a) looks identical to (b). The insets of (b, c) depict the full SSIM image from (a). It shows that
simply shifting ϵθt without Asyrp does not affect the result. (c) Adding z ∼ N to ϵ-space with Asyrp
easily degrades image with little semantic change. (d) Adding z ∼ N to h-space with Asyrp yields
random semantic change without image degradation. (e) Correlation between image degradation and
noise strength in the two spaces.


D.3    C HOICE OF h-space IN U-N ET

As shown in Figure 14, there are many other candidates for h-space in the architecture. Among the
layers, we choose the 8th layer, the bridge of the U-Net based architecture. The layer is not influ-
enced by any skip connection, has the smallest spatial dimension with compressed information, and
is located just before the upsampling blocks. Thus, we assume that it could possibly be considered as
the most suitable latent embedding. To confirm the assumption, we train ft on the other layers. The
results are shown in Figure 15. We carefully tuned the training hyperparameters (λCLIP and λrecon )
for fair comparison. The 1st to the 6th layers hardly bring visible changes. The 7th and 9th layers
bring not only the desired changes but also difficulty in finding optimal hyperparameters. After the
9th layer, the results bear severe artifacts.

E     I MPLICIT NEURAL DIRECTIONS
Figure 16 illustrates the neural implicit function ft . It has only two 1x1 convolution layers with 512
channels. Note that we haven’t explored the network architecture much.


                                                  17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                      1   2                                                                                                                    14    15



                                 3                                                                                                     13
                                          4                                                                                   12
                                                   5                                                               11
                                                              6                              9          10
                                                                        7         8
     𝑥!                                                                                                                                                    𝜖" (𝑥! , 𝑡)
    256! ×3                                                16! ×512   8! ×512   8! ×512    8! ×512    16! ×512                                                256! ×3
                                                32! ×256                                                         32! ×256
                                     64! ×256                                                                               64! ×256

                              128! ×128                                                                                            128! ×128


                  256! ×128                                                                                                                    256! ×128


     𝑡
         Sinusoidal
                                                       Res block                                     Concatenation
         encoding
                                                       Res block + Att block                         Positional embedding
                                                       Conv3x3


Figure 14: Location of h-space. The U-Net architecture of diffusion models outputs 256 × 256
images. Each layer is indexed with a number along the operating sequence of the model. The 8th
layer is our h-space which is not directly influenced by a skip connection.


F        Q UALITY IMPROVEMENTS BY NON - ACCELERATED SAMPLING WITH
         SCALED ∆ht

Figure 17 shows the quality improvements by non-accelerated sampling with scaled ∆ht described
in § 3.4. Even with different number of inference steps, we observe similar changes of an attribute
if we preserve the sum of ∆ht . This scaling technique allows non-accelerated sampling with 1000
steps for the models trained by accelerated training with 40 steps. Using non-accelerated sampling
with scaled ∆ht leads to the same magnitude of manipulation and higher-quality images. In our
experiments, it takes about 1.5 seconds to sample for 40 steps and 40 seconds for 1000 steps.


G        E DITING STRENGTH AND EDITING FLEXIBILITY

G.1           E DITING STRENGTH AND tedit

Figure 18 shows the results according to tedit . If tedit is too high, the length of the editing process
becomes too short resulting in insufficient changes. On the contrary, too low tedit causes excessively
unnecessary manipulation from the long editing process.
We observe that tedit is one of the important hyperparameters. We argue that the formula for choos-
ing tedit using editing strength is reasonable because it applies to all five different datasets despite its
sensitivity, even though the choice of LPIPS = 0.33 is empirical. We provide ablation of thresholds
in Figure 22.
Additionally, these results imply why we need to use sufficiently low tedit in the unseen domains.
Editing interval with insufficient editing strength struggles to escape from the training domain.

G.2           E DITING FLEXIBILITY AND tboost

Table 2 shows the prompts, tedit , and tboost . Intuitively, the attributes with larger visual changes
have smaller cosine similarity and require longer editing interval. Figure 19 shows the average
LPIPS(x, Pt ) and LPIPS(x, xt ) of 100 samples on all datasets. Note that tedit and tboost dif-


                                                                                      18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                        Original



                                                                        Layer 1~6


                                                                        Layer 7


                                                                        Layer 8 (h-space)


                                                                        Layer 9


                                                                        Layer 10


                                                                        Layer 11


                                                                        Layer 12


                                                                        Layer 13


                                                                        Layer 14


                                                                        Layer 15


                                                                        Layer 16



Figure 15: Exhaustive enumeration over the choices for semantic latent space. We show the
result of the training data. We observe that the eighth layer (h-space) of the U-net suits the best for
the semantic latent space.



                                      1x1             group           1x1
                                                              swish
                                      conv            norm            conv



                                             linear


         Figure 16: Illustration of ft . We use group norm and swish following DDPM.



fer across datasets and attributes, and they are chosen by the formulas in § 4. We provide ablation of
tboost in Figure 23.


H    Q UALITY BOOSTING

We validate the effectiveness of our quality boosting (§ 4.2) in the original DDIM process and in
Asyrp.


                                                      19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                          Smiling with
              Real image                      40 steps                      1000 steps


Figure 17: Quality improvements by non-accelerated sampling with scaled ∆ht . We observe
quality improvements by non-accelerated (1000-step) sampling with scaled ∆ht from accelerated
(40-step) training described in § 3.4. Please zoom in for detailed comparison.


Figure 18: Importance of choosing proper tedit . We explore various tedit with smiling. Too
short editing interval struggles to manipulate attributes. Excessive editing strength results in de-
graded images.


                                                20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


     Dataset             src txt                      trg txt              CLIP similarity   tedit   tboost
                         Person                  Young person                  0.905         515      167
                          Face                    Smiling face                 0.899         513      167
                          Face                      Sad face                   0.894         513      167
                          Face                     Angry face                  0.892         512      167
                          Face                     Tanned face                 0.886         512      167
                          Face                   Disgusted face                0.880         511      167
                         Person               Person with makeup               0.875         509      167
                        Human                        Zombie                    0.868         506      167
                         Person              Person with bald head             0.861         505      167
                         Person              Person with curly hair            0.835         499      167
   CelebA-HQ
                        Human                      Neanderthal                 0.802         490      167
                         Person                 Mark Zuckerberg                0.797         489      167
                         Person                   Nicolas Cage                 0.710         461      167
                        Human             Painting in the style of Pixar       0.667         446      167
                         Photo            Painting in Modigliani style         0.565         403      167
                         Photo            Self-portrait by Frida Kahlo         0.443         321      167
                        Church                   Gothic Church                 0.912         371      293
                        Church                       Temple                    0.898         367      293
                        Church                  Department store               0.841         349      293
                        Church                   Wooden House                  0.793         333      293
  LSUN-church
                        Church           Ancient traditional Asian tower       0.784         330      293
                        Church               Red brick wall Church             0.774         326      293
                        Church                       Factory                   0.702         301      293
                       Bedroom                 Princess Bedroom                0.912         370      221
 LSUN-bedroom
                       Bedroom                   Hotel Bedroom                 0.917         371      221
                          Dog                      Happy Dog                   0.883         430      167
                          Dog                      Sleepy Dog                  0.866         422      167
                          Dog                      Angry Dog                   0.860         419      167
     AFHQ
                          Dog                          Wolf                    0.850         412      167
                          Dog                   Yorkshire Terrier              0.690         302      167
                  Painting of a person      Painting of a Sad person           0.921         330      180
                  Painting of a person    Painting of a Smiling person         0.908         320      180
   M ET FACES
                  Painting of a person   Painting of a Disgusted person        0.879         291      180

     Table 2: Prompts, CLIP similarity, tedit , and tboost for all attributes in the experiments.


     Figure 19: Average LPIPS(x, Pt ) and LPIPS(x, xt ) of 100 samples on all datasets.



Figure 20 shows the effect of quality boosting with the original DDIM reverse process. Although
the reverse process of DDIM has a nearly-perfect inversion property, we observe some noise by
zooming in. Our quality boosting improves the quality of a sample and concurrently keeps nearly


                                                   21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


               Real image               w/o Quality boosting             w/ Quality boosting

Figure 20: Ablation study of quality boosting on the original DDIM process without Asyrp. Our
quality boosting enhances fine details and prevents images from being noisy in the original DDIM
process. Please zoom in for detailed comparison.
                                                               Smiling


               Real image               w/o Quality boosting             w/ Quality boosting

Figure 21: Ablation study of quality boosting with Asyrp. Our quality boosting enhances fine
details and prevents images from being noisy. Note that the source of degradation is DDIM process,
not Asyrp, confirmed in Figure 20. Please zoom in for detailed comparison.


                                                22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                Real image    0.1    0.2        0.3       0.33       0.36      0.4        0.5


       Pixar


      Young


      Smiling


Figure 22: Analyzing the effect of the hyperparameters The figure shows that the calculated
parameter works effectively as the maximum boundary of editing while maintaining the quality of
the image.



                 Real image   0.5     0.8       1.0       1.2        1.3       1.35       1.38


      Pixar


      Young


      Smiling


Figure 23: Analyzing the effect of the hyperparameters We observe that the quality of results has
robustness to γtboost , except for too large γtboost .



perfect inversion property. We observe that tboost is not sensitive, but the larger interval brings the
less preservation.
Figure 21 shows quality improvements by our quality boosting in Asyrp.


I     A LGORITHM

Figure 24 illustrates generative process. Algorithm 1 and 2 describe training algorithm and inference
algorithm of Asyrp, respectively.


J     T RAINING DETAILS

J.1   L OSS COEFFICIENTS

Table 3 reports loss coefficients for each attribute. λCLIP s near 0.8 are suitable for most in-domain
attributes. For unseen domains, higher coefficient leads to more noticeable changes. Note that we
use λrecon = CLIP similarity ∗ 3 which reduces L1 loss when an attribute needs a lot of change.


                                                  23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Real image


                                                                                            …
                                                            …
                             …
      Smiling



      Frozen U-Net

      Semantic encoder

      Adding
                          (a) Editing                  (b) Denoising              (c) Quality boosting


                         Figure 24: Overview of our generative process.



J.2     T RAINING WITH RANDOM SAMPLING INSTEAD OF THE TRAINING DATASETS

Apparently, for training, inverting real-images can be replaced by random sampling. It refers to using
                                            QT
xT ∼ N (0, I) instead of xT = q(x0 ) · t=1 q (xt | xt−1 ) where x0 ∼ pdata (x). It allows us to
train Asyrp only with the pretrained network and without extra dataset. Using random samples has
tradeoff between preservation of contents and possible amount in editing. It take advantages when
a target attribute requires large amount changes. We assume that the inversion of real-image is in
the long tail of a Gaussian distribution because of realistic background or detailed clothes. On the
other hand, random noise is considered to be closer to the mean of the normal, so it is easier to
find directions. It can easily bring larger changes but also easily alter the contents. On the contrary,
training with inversion shows the opposite property.
We train ft with random sampling for attributes whose identity preservation is not important to take
advantage of these properties. The rightmost column in Table 3 shows the choices.


K       E VALUATION

K.1       U SER STUDY

We conduct user study to compare the performance of Asyrp and DiffusionCLIP (Kim & Ye, 2021)
on Celeba-HQ (Liu et al., 2015) and LSUN-church (Yu et al., 2015). We use official checkpoints
provided by DiffusionCLIP except for some facial attributes whose checkpoint do not exist. We
tried our best to tune their hyperparameters following the manual for fair comparison. Example
images are shown in Figure 25-27.
We use smiling and sad for in-domain CelebA-HQ attributes, Pixar and Neanderthal for
unseen-domain CelebA-HQ attributes, and department store, ancient, and wooden for
LSUN-church.
In unseen domain and Lsun-church, we use official checkpoints provided by DiffusionCLIP. We
also randomly select 8 images for each CelebA-HQ attribute and 12 images for each LSUN-church
attribute.
We observe that DiffusionCLIP works better in changing the holistic style of images. At the same
time, it is short of the ability to bring semantic changes and suffers noisy results and a lack of
diversity. The problems would be caused by fine-tuning the whole diffusion model.
We use the following questions for the survey. 1) Quality: Which image quality do you think is
better? (clear and less noisy) 2) Attribute: Which image do you think is “Attribute(e.g., Smiling)
naturally”? 3) Overall: Which image do you think is better considering the above evaluation criteria?


                                                  24
     Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


     Algorithm 1: Editing(Inference)
     Input: x0 (Input image), {fti }M                                                        M
                                    i=1 (M Neural implicit functions for M attributes), {ci }i=1 (user
            defined M scaling coefficients for M attributes), ϵθ (frozen pretrained model), Sf or (# of
            inversion steps), Sgen (# of inference steps), tedit (computed from § 4.1), tboost
            (computed from § 4.2)
1    Function Editor(x0 , ϵθ , {ci }M
                                    i=1 , Sf or , Sgen ,∗):
        // step 1: Semantic encoding
                    Sf or
2       Define {τs }s=1    s.t τ1 = 0, τSf or = T
3       for s = 1, 2, ..., Sf or − 1 do
 4          ϵ←− ϵθ (xτs , τs )
                     √              √
 5          xτs+1 = ατs xτs + 1 − ατs ϵ
        // step 2: Manipulation
                         Sgen
6       Define {τ̃ s }s=1      s.t τ̃ 1 = 0, τ̃ Sedit = tedit , τ̃ Snoise = tboost and τ̃ Sgen = T
7       x̃τ̃Sgen = xτ̃Sf or
8       for s = Sgen , Sgen − 1, ..., 2 do
             // phase 1: editing
 9           if s ≥ Sedit then
10                 Extract feature map hτ̃ s from ϵθ (x̃τ̃ s )
                               Sf or PM
11                 ∆hτ̃ s = Sgen      ( i=1 ci fτ̃i s (hτ̃ s ))
12                 ϵ̃ = ϵθ (x̃τ̃ s |∆hτ̃ s )
13                 ϵ = ϵθ (x̃τ̃ s )
14                 στ̃ s = 0
             // phase 2: denoising
15           else if s ≥ Snoise then
16                 ϵ̃ = ϵ = ϵθ (x̃τ̃ s )
17                 στ̃ s = 0
             // phase 3: quality boosting
18           else
19                 ϵ̃ = ϵ = ϵθ (x̃τ̃ s )
                           p                                    p
20                 στ̃ s = (1 − ατ̃ s −1 ) / (1 − ατ̃ s ) 1 − ατ̃ s /ατ̃ s −1
21           z ∼ N (0, 1)
                                              √
                          √             x̃τ̃ − 1−ατ̃ ϵ̃
                                                                q
22           x̃τ̃ s−1 = ατ̃ s−1 ( s √ατ̃ s ) + 1 − ατ̃ s−1 − στ̃2s ϵ + στ̃ s z
                                             s

23      return x̃0 (manipulated image)



     As for LSUN-church, we provide a set of four images at once and add a question: 3) Diversity:
     Which group do you think has a more diverse style? 4) Overall: Which image do you think is better
     considering the above evaluation criteria?

     K.2   S EGMENTATION CONSISTENCY AND DIRECTIONAL CLIP SIMILARITY

     We compare Asyrp and DiffusionCLIP using directional CLIP similarity (Sdir ) and segmentation-
     consistency (SC) following the protocols in DiffusionCLIP in Table 4 and Table 5. A pretrained
     CLIP (Radford et al., 2021) and segmentation models (Yu et al. (2018); Zhou et al. (2019; 2017); Lee
     et al. (2020)) are used to compute Sdir and SC, respectively. We choose three attributes (smiling,
     sad, tanned) for CelebA-HQ-in-domain, two attributes (Pixar,Neaderthal) for CelebA-HQ-
     unseen-domain and three attributes (department store, ancient, red brick) for LSUN-
     church.
     For a fair comparison, we use official checkpoints of DiffusionCLIP and provide scores of the at-
     tributes (tanned, red brick) following Kim & Ye (2021). Regarding attributes without the
     official checkpoints (smiling,sad), we train DiffusionCLIP by ourselves with the official code.


                                                             25
     Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


     Algorithm 2: Training Neural implicit function ft
                                            (i)
     Input: ϵθ (pretrained model), {x0 }N  i=1 (images to precompute), ft (Neural implicit function of
            an attribute), ysrc (source text), ytar (target text), Sf or (# of inversion steps), K(# of
            training epochs), tedit (computed from § 4.1), tboost (computed from § 4.2)
  // step 1: Precompute latents
                Sf or
1 Define {τs }s=1     s.t τ1 = 0,τSf or = T
2 for i = 1, 2, ..., N do
3     for s = 1, 2, ..., Sf or − 1 do
                      (i)
4         ϵ← − ϵθ (xτs , τs )
            (i)       √       (i)  √
5         xτs+1 = ατs xτs + 1 − ατs ϵ
                            (i)
6          Save the latent xτSf or

7  τSedit = tedit
   // step 2: Update ft
 8 for epoch= 1, 2, ..., K do
 9     for i = 1, 2, ..., N do
                                (i)           (i)
10         Clone the latent x̃τSf or = xτSf or
11         for s = Sf or , Sf or − 1, ..., Sedit do
                                                          (i)
12             Extract feature map hτ s from ϵθ (x̃τ s )
13             ∆hτs = fτs (hτs )
                             √                                        √
                      x̃(i)
                        τs −   1−ατs ϵθ (x̃(i)
                                           τs |∆hτs )          x(i)
                                                                 τs −   1−ατs ϵθ (x(i)
                                                                                   τs )
14             P =                √
                                    ατs               ; Psrc =          √
                                                                          ατs
                 (i)        √              p                  (i)
15             x̃τs−1 = ατs−1 P + 1 − ατs−1 ϵθ (x̃τs )
                 (i)        √                  p                  (i)
16             xτs−1 = ατs−1 Psrc + 1 − ατs−1 ϵθ (xτs )
17                 Ltotal ←
                          − λCLIP Ldirection (P, ytar , Psrc , ysrc ) + λrecon |P − Psrc |
18                 Take a gradient step on Ltotal and update ft


     We use 100 samples per attribute. Asyrp outperforms DiffusionCLIP on Sdir for all attributes. On
     SC, DiffusionCLIP achieves better or competitive scores. Because DiffusionCLIP manipulates im-
     ages mostly by focusing on texture or color while preserving structure and shape, it takes advantage
     of getting higher SC scores. However, in Figure 28, results of smiling show that it is not proper to
     edit attributes which require structural manipulation. Note that better SC scores do not guarantee bet-
     ter qualitative performance. Results of Pixar also show the similar tendency of each method. We
     allow more structural changes than DiffusionCLIP while editing. Lower SC of our method comes
     from desirable structural changes as shown in Figure 28.


                                                                             ⟨∆I, ∆T ⟩
                                     Sdir (xgen , ytar ; xref , yref ) :=              ,                  (17)
                                                                            ∥∆I∥∥∆T ∥


     L      D IRECTIONS

     L.1     G LOBAL DIRECTION

     Figure 29 and Figure 30 show that the effects of mean direction and global direction are quite
     similar with ∆ht by ft in various attributes. We compute mean direction and global direction from
     20 different images.
     We argue that h-space is roughly homogeneous across samples and timesteps. However, we ob-
     serve that h-space is not completely independent to the conditions especially on unseen-domain


                                                                  26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


    Dataset             src txt                      trg txt              λCLIP    λrecon   from random noise
                        Person                  Young person               0.8    0.905*3           X
                         Face                    Smiling face              0.8    0.899*3           X
                         Face                      Sad face                0.8    0.894*3           X
                         Face                     Angry face               0.8    0.892*3           X
                         Face                     Tanned face              0.8    0.886*3           X
                         Face                   Disgusted face             0.8    0.880*3           X
                        Person               Person with makeup            0.8    0.875*3           X
  CelebA-HQ             Person              Person with curly hair         0.8    0.835*3           X
                        Photo            Self-portrait by Frida Kahlo      0.5     0.4433           O
                       Human                        Zombie                 0.6    0.868*3           O
                        Person                   Nicolas Cage              0.8    0.710*3           O
                       Human             Painting in the style of Pixar    0.8    0.667*3           O
                        Photo            Painting in Modigliani style      0.8    0.565*3           O
                       Human                      Neanderthal              1.2    0.802*3           O
                       Church                   Gothic church              0.8    0.912*3           O
                       Church                       Temple                 0.8    0.898*3           O
                       Church                  Department store            0.8    0.841*3           O
                       Church                   Wooden house               0.8    0.793*3           O
  LSUN-church
                       Church           Ancient traditional Asian tower    0.8    0.784*3           O
                       Church               Red brick wall Church          0.8    0.774*3           O
                       Church                       Factory                0.8    0.702*3           O
                      Bedroom                 Princess bedroom             1.5    0.912*3           O
 LSUN-bedroom
                      Bedroom                   Hotel bedroom              1.5    0.917*3           O
                         Dog                      Happy dog                1.5    0.883*3           O
                         Dog                      Sleepy dog               1.5    0.866*3           O
   AFHQ-dog
                         Dog                          Wolf                 1.7    0.850*3           O
                         Dog                   Yorkshire terrier            2     0.690*3           O
                 Painting of a person      Painting of a Sad person        1.5    0.921*3           X
                 Painting of a person    Painting of a Smiling person      1.5    0.908*3           X
   M ET FACES
                 Painting of a person   Painting of a Disgusted person     1.5    0.879*3           X

Table 3: The coefficients range from 0.5 to 0.8 for in-domain attributes. Unseen domains need
slightly stronger λCLIP s. We also report which attributes we train with random noise sampling.
The criterion is which attributes require relatively less maintenance of identity. We use λrecon =
CLIP similarity ∗ 3 which reduces L1 loss when an attribute needs a lot of change.


                               CelebA-HQ-in-domain                             CelebA-HQ-unseen-domain
                      Smiling          Sad             Tanned                    Pixar       Neanderthal
                  Sdir      SC    Sdir     SC      Sdir     SC              Sdir       SC   Sdir     SC
  Asyrp (ours)   0.921 89.02% 0.964 88.90% 0.991 85.71%                    0.956 76.51% 0.805      79.03
 DiffusionCLIP   0.813 91.41% 0.760 89.93% 0.888 92.85%                    0.811 89.91% 0.661 81.23%

                         Table 4: Quantitative evaluation on CelebA-HQ.


                                                      27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


          Real image   Asyrp (ours)   DiffusionCLIP                      Real image   Asyrp (ours)   DiffusionCLIP

Smiling


                                                           Sad
Figure 25: Asyrp vs. DiffusionCLIP on CelebA-HQ in-domain attributes. We observe that Dif-
fusionCLIP struggles to change semantic facial attributes. Their official checkpoints do not exist and
we ran careful hyperparameter tuning for training.
          Real image   Asyrp (ours)   DiffusionCLIP                      Real image   Asyrp (ours)   DiffusionCLIP
                                                           Neanderthal
 Pixar


Figure 26: Asyrp vs. DiffusionCLIP on CelebA-HQ unseen-domain attributes. We use the offi-
cial checkpoint provided by DiffusionCLIP. Asyrp works well even for the unseen-domains.


                                                        LSUN church
                                  Department store           ancient                      red brick
                                   Sdir    SC           Sdir       SC                  Sdir       SC
                 Asyrp (ours)     0.778 57.62%         0.943 62.65%                   0.989 65.83%
                DIffusionCLIP     0.661 54.50%         0.907 64.82%                   0.964 65.02%

                          Table 5: Quantitative evaluation on LSUN-church.


(See Figure 29). Note that unseen-domains require a longer editing interval with small tedit . There-
fore, we conjecture that the consistency of h-space decreases at the end of the generative process. It
is supported by additional experiments that L2 distance between ∆ht and global direction gradually
increases along with timesteps. We leave a more detailed analysis on h-space at different timesteps
as a future work.


                                                      28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                   Real image   Asyrp (ours)   DiffusionCLIP                    Real image   Asyrp (ours)   DiffusionCLIP


Department store


                                                                    Wooden
                   Real image   Asyrp (ours)   DiffusionCLIP                    Real image   Asyrp (ours)   DiffusionCLIP


                                                                    Red brick
 Ancient


Figure 27: Asyrp vs. DiffusionCLIP on LSUN-church. Note that we use the official checkpoint
provided by DiffusionCLIP. We observe DiffusionCLIP produces narrow range of styles while Asyrp
produces diverse styles.


L.2                C OMPARE THREE METHODS

In this section, we compare three methods: implicit neural direction ft , optimized ∆ht , and opti-
mized ∆hglobal .

Training time ft ≈ ∆hglobal < ∆ht
We have to optimize each ∆ht for each time step t. Additionally, it needs specific hyperparameters
for each ∆ht , e.g., higher learning rates for larger t. On the contrary, time-consuming for ft is
similar to optimizing ∆hglobal .

Quality ft ≈ ∆ht > ∆hglobal
ft and ∆ht , where directions can be obtained for each timestep, have the best quality. As can be
shown in Figure 10, ∆hglobal is sometimes accompanied by slight differences in hair, etc.

Extensibility ft > ∆ht > ∆hglobal


                                                               29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


             CelebA-HQ
              Smiling


             CelebA-HQ
                Pixar


           LSUN-church
          Department store


                                  Original     Asyrp (Ours)   DiffusionCLIP


      Figure 28: Example segmentations for computing segmentation-consistency (SC).


∆ht can be obtained from ft , and ∆hglobal can be obtained by aggregating ∆ht .
We opt to use ft for above three advantages.


M    R ANDOM SAMPLING


We conduct extra experiments: generating images with target attributes using Asyrp not from inver-
sion but from random Gaussian noises. As a consequence, the generative process can be used for
conditional random sampling. We provide the results in Figure 31. However, it is beyond the scope
of this paper.


                                               30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


              Real image                              Real image


  Smiling


   Pixar


  Angry


 Modigliani


Neanderthal


Figure 29: We compute mean direction and global direction from 20 other images on CelebA-
HQ. The effect of mean direction and global direction are quite similar with ∆ht by ft at diverse
attributes.

              Real image                              Real image

Department
  store



  Gothic


  Temple


Figure 30: We obtain mean direction and global direction from 20 other images on LSUN-church.
The effect of mean direction and global direction are quite similar with ∆ht by ft at diverse at-
tributes.

            Young                      Pixar              Smiling                      Frida


                    (a) DDIM process                                (b) DDPM process


Figure 31: Uncurated random sampling. We generate images from random noise with Asyrp.
Although we do not focus on these results, Asyrp can be used for conditional sampling.


                                               31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


N     M ORE SAMPLES
N.1   I MAGE N ET

We conduct extra experiments: editing images with target class using Asyrp with ImageNet pre-
trained model. We verified that models trained on large datasets, such as ImageNet, can be edited
using Asyrp. However, we also observed that in this case the latent space is not partitioned by classes.
For an orange, we have different latents for a single orange, for many oranges, for a cross-section of
cut orange, and for a single piece of orange. Therefore, we learned the implicit function by collecting
similar images to find the direction.

                Real image    Apple       Burger        Real image   School bus   House


Figure 32: Result of Asyrp in ImageNet. The result shows that Asyrp works even in ImageNet
dataset.


N.2   M ULTI - INTERPOLATION

Figure 33 provides mixed interpolation between multiple attributes. We observe that any interpola-
tion with any attribute is possible.

N.3   M ORE RESULTS ON ALL DATASETS

We provide more results on CelebA-HQ (Figure 34), LSUN-church (Figure 35), AFHQ, LSUN-
bedroom, M ET FACES (Figure 36).


                                                   32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


              -smiling (untrained)
              +smiling (trained)


                                     -young (untrained)        +young (trained)
             -smiling (untrained)
             +smiling (trained)


                                     -young (untrained)        +young (trained)

Figure 33: Combination of multiple attributes. The result shows that Asyrp works for combined
∆h of smiling and young.



                                                          33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                   Man↔
Real image Smiling   Sad   Angry           Young    Curly hair Nicolas   Pixar   Modigliani Neanderthal Frida
                                   Woman


                                   Man↔
Real image Smiling   Sad   Angry           Young    Curly hair Nicolas   Pixar   Modigliani Neanderthal Frida
                                   Woman


                     Figure 34: We provide more results on CelebA-HQ dataset.


                                                   34
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Real image Department   Factory    Gothic   Red brick   Temple   Wooden    Real image Department   Factory   Gothic   Red brick   Temple   Wooden


                             Figure 35: We provide more results on LSUN-church dataset.


  Real image Sleepy               Happy     Wolf        Yorkshire   Real image     Hotel      Princess       Real image Smiling Disgusted


Figure 36: We provide more results on AFHQ, LSUN-bedroom and M ET FACES datasets respec-
tively.


                                                                          35
