Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


M ESSAGE N ET: M ESSAGE C LASSIFICATION USING
NATURAL L ANGUAGE P ROCESSING AND M ETA - DATA
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT

         In this paper we propose a new Deep Learning (DL) approach for message classi-
         fication. Our method is based on the state-of-the-art Natural Language Processing
         (NLP) building blocks, combined with a novel technique for infusing the meta-
         data input that is typically available in messages such as the sender information,
         timestamps, attached image, audio, affiliations, and more. As we demonstrate
         throughout the paper, going beyond the mere text by leveraging all available chan-
         nels in the message, could yield an improved representation and higher classifica-
         tion accuracy. To achieve message representation, each type of input is processed
         in a dedicated block in the neural network architecture that is suitable for the data
         type. Such an implementation enables training all blocks together simultaneously,
         and forming cross channels features in the network. We show in the Experiments
         Section that in some cases, message’s meta-data holds an additional information
         that cannot be extracted just from the text, and when using this information we
         achieve better performance. Furthermore, we demonstrate that our multi-modality
         block approach outperforms other approaches for injecting the meta data to the the
         text classifier.


1   I NTRODUCTION
Many real world applications require message classification and regression, such as handling spam
emails Karim et al. (2020), ticket routing Han et al. (2020), article sentiment review Medhat et al.
(2014) and more. Accurate message classification could improve critical scenarios such as in call
centers (routing tickets based on topic) Han et al. (2020), alert systems (flagging highly important
alert messages) Gupta et al. (2012), and categorizing incoming messages (automatically unclutter
emails) Karim et al. (2020); Klimt & Yang (2004). The main distinction between text and message
classification is the availability of additional attributes, such as the sender information, timestamps,
attached image, audio, affiliations, and more. New message classification contests often appear in
the prominent platforms (i.e., Kaggle Kaggle), showing how this topic is sought after. There are
already many data-sets to explore in this field, but no clear winner algorithm that fits all scenarios
with high accuracy, efficiency and simplicity (in terms of implementation and interpretation).
A notable advancement in the field of NLP is the attention based transformers architecture Vaswani
et al. (2017). This family of methods excels in finding local connections between words, and better
understanding the meaning of a sentence. A leading example is the Bidirectional Encoder Represen-
tations from Transformers (BERT) Devlin et al. (2018) as well as its variations Liu et al. (2019); Lan
et al. (2019); Sanh et al. (2019), winning certain benchmarks Rajpurkar et al. (2018); Wang et al.
(2019). Several packages, such as Huggingface Transformers Wolf et al. (2019), make such models
accessible and easy to use as well as provide pre-trained versions. In addition, one can use transfer
learning Pan & Yang (2009) to further train BERT on their on data, creating a tailored model for the
specific task at hand.
BERT, and often other transformer based models, are designed to handle text. They operate on the
words of a given text by encoding them into tokens, and by the connections between the tokens they
learn the context of sentences. This approach is limited, since sometimes more information can be
extracted and used, not necessarily textual. Throughout this paper we refer to this information as
meta-data to distinguish it from the main stream of textual content (though one may recognize it
as the core data, depending on the application). For example, a meta-data could be the time stamp


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


of when the text was written, sent, published, etc. Another example is the writer of the text, when
dealing with a small list of writers of a corpus. There have been some attempts to incorporate these
into BERT models, for example by assigning artificial tokens for writers or for temporal segments
(token per month for example) Zhang et al. (2021). This approach is limited since not all meta-
data entries are suitable for encoding by tokenization. In the example of temporal segments, more
segments introduce more tokens, leading to large computational resources consumption, and less
segments cause loss of information. Another approach is to concatenate the embeddings, created
by the transformer module, with the outputs of an embedding module for the meta-data. In this
approach, a transformer for the text is trained (using direct or transfer learning) on the text, and
other separate modules (time series embedding, senders embeddings, etc.) are used to embed the
meta-data. All the embeddings are then concatenated and used as inputs to a classification network.
A drawback of this approach is that the internal network features are not trained from a combination
of diffident input streams, and therefore avoid cross dependent features (e.g. the importance of an
email is not only determined by its content, but also by who sent it, when, to whom else, attachments,
etc.).
To bridge these gaps, we implement a transformer based model that is able to train with both the text
(transformer architecture) and meta-data. We create a new architecture of a blocks based network.
Each block handles different kind of inputs. Splitting to blocks enables the flexibility to handle dif-
ferent kind of inputs. We present results of the method with a main block based on a transformer that
handles the text, and an additional block that handles the pre-processed meta-data inputs individu-
ally. This method can be extended to support more complex blocks, such as an advanced DL model
for images Wang et al. (2017), a temporal analysis block to extract information from temporal meta-
data Ienco & Interdonato (2020), additional transformer blocks for multiple text inputs (for example,
subject and body of an email), categorical data, and more. To demonstrate the performance of the
method we run multiple experiments on publicly available data-sets to show the advantages of using
the block architecture, and compare them to the transformer benchmark (BERT), Random Forest
(RF) classifier, and Multi-Layer Perceptron (MLP) networks. We achieve competitive results, and
in most cases lead those benchmarks, showcasing that there is much to extract from the meta-data
compared to just using text for classification tasks.


2   R ELATED WORK

Natural language processing tasks. The publication of BERT Devlin et al. (2018) has been a
turning point in the text classification domain. The authors demonstrated high accuracy on com-
plicated tasks such as question and answer, named entity recognition, and textual entailment Wang
et al. (2019). Since then, many authors investigated improved architectures and variations such as
RoBERTa Liu et al. (2019), ALBERT Lan et al. (2019), DistilBERT Sanh et al. (2019), and more.
Some focus on better performance on the benchmark tasks, and some create lighter versions of
the model that reduce the computational demands while preserving competitive accuracy. Other
propositions, like XLNet Yang et al. (2019) and GPT-3 Brown et al. (2020), introduce competing
architectures to BERT (also using transformers). The benchmarks for these models are commonly
GLUE, SuperGLUE Wang et al. (2019), SQuAD 2.0 Rajpurkar et al. (2018), and more. Text clas-
sification is a less common benchmark, but the models can be used for this task as shown in this
paper.
Accessibility of transformers. Another contributing factor to the growing popularity of transform-
ers is the variety of open-source code bases that make it easy for data-scientist to experiment with
different architectures and then use it in their applications. The Huggingface transformers package
Wolf et al. (2020) is a Python library that can be used to train and fine-tune models, with a large
variety of base models to choose from, and straightforward implementation. The GPT-3 Brown
et al. (2020) has been published as open source and, similar to several other implementations, offers
a convenient application programming interface (API). We mention that many libraries that do not
use machine-learning for text classification exist such as NLTK Bird et al. (2009), spaCy Honni-
bal & Montani (2017), and more. These are also easily accessible and offer advanced NLP feature
extraction and other text analysis tools.
Text classification. There are many tasks in text classification, and each may be considered as a
field of study. A popular one is sentiment analysis, aiming to classify texts as positive or negative.


                                                  2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


The survey in Medhat et al. (2014) presents the challenges in this domain and the latest innovations.
Another example is the Spam or Ham task, where one tries to differentiate a relevant email from
irrelevant ones (like advertisements, phishing attempts, etc.) Karim et al. (2020). In this work we
investigate multi-label classification of messages. For example, classifying the category of a product
based on purchase review, the category of a thread based on the posts, the culinary specialty of a
restaurant from customer reviews, the type of product from purchase feedback, the category of an
incoming email, and so on. For each of these tasks, publicly available data-sets exist and are used in
this work to quantify the success of the proposed method. In addition, there are many competitions
in Kaggle Kaggle and other machine-learning research benchmark websites, using these data-sets.
Message classification with meta-data. There are two commonly used method to incorporate
meta-data with textual information for message categorization when using transformers. The first is
concatenating the embeddings, computed by the transformer, with the outputs of other embedding
systems that are built specifically for the meta-data. In Rahman et al. (2021), the authors use this
approach for visual and audio meta-data. In Ostendorff et al. (2019) the authors use properties of
the text as meta-data and show that this approach can also work for the German language. In Xu
et al. (2020) the meta-data is the layout information of scanned documents, and the authors propose
an innovative architecture to extract information from both text and layout information. There are
many other studies exploring this approach. While it is simple to implement, this strategy has
several drawbacks. The training is usually done independently for the text and the meta-data, and
the decisions are made as a ”voting between classifiers” approach. This may lead to conflicts, since
the response of the text to the label may be different from the response of the meta-data and the
label, resulting in very low confidence predictions. We compare the performance of the proposed
method to this one in the results section. The second popular approach is to assign tokens to the
meta-data, and add this to the tokenized input of the transformer. In Zhang et al. (2021), in addition
to a hierarchy of labels, the authors introduce a method to inject multiple meta-data inputs with
varying types (web, references, etc.) as tokens to the embedding vector. Due to the simplicity of
embedding the information using tokens, in terms of algorithm and implementation, developers use
this approach in their codes and it appears in many online notebooks and blogs (open source codes)
as well. The main drawback of these methods are the robustness to the input data. For example,
representing an image as a series of tokens is either done by encoding the image which usually
faces loss of information, or by utilizing a large number of tokens that exponentially highers the
computational cost. In the numerical experiments presented here, we do not compare to this method
since the feature extraction we are using has a varying and potentially high number of features,
which lead to computational resource exhaustion when using this method. In this work, we propose
a method that can address the issues of the two popular methods, as described in the next section.


3     A PPROACH

We propose a method based on blocks to train a linguistic model with meta-data for a specific text
classification task. By splitting each type of meta-data input into different blocks, one can use state-
of-the-art deep-learning architectures to handle each meta-data type uniquely and more efficiently.
In addition, the training is done using all block and in a unified training loop, adjusting all the
weights of all blocks in every optimizer step, so all information from the text and meta-data sources
contributes to the learning process.

3.1   B LOCKS ARCHITECTURE

The transformer models, including BERT, can be used for text classification with the input text and
corresponding output labels. However, we claim that a lot of information can be found in the meta-
data of the text. as can be seen in Figure 1, we use the transformer model as a single block of a
neural network. Then, we can add additional blocks for dealing with the meta-data inputs.
With the recent developments in deep-learning, there are many advanced method of extracting in-
formation from input signals for classification. For example, in Ang et al. (2020) the authors discuss
ways to use deep-learning for analysing time series data. Messages typically have a temporal ele-
ment, such as the time of arrival of an email, the time when a review has been posted, a paper has
been published, etc. We propose to utilize these advancements together for better model training.


                                                   3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


In Figure 1, an overall schematic view of the proposed approach is presented. In the first row,
a standard transformer architecture is illustrated Wolf et al. (2020). The inputs are the tokenized
messages, followed by the transformer layers that are initially pre-trained. These layers are further
trained (using transfer learning) to produce the embeddings, and a classification layer is used to
predict the categories of the messages. The transformer layers in this illustration are presented using
dashed lines to express the transfer learning process. The second row presents a meta-data extractor
using a deep-neural network. The green layers express layers trained for classification (for example,
fully-connected network architecture). The third row presents another transfer learning architecture.
Each row expresses a different block of a neural-network that handles different meta-data inputs.


Figure 1: A sketch diagram of the block method. The first row illustrates a transformer architecture
to handle textual input, while the second and third rows illustrate neural networks for handling a
specific meta-data input. All the modules are then combines to create a unified prediction. Blue tiles
are static and green tiles are trainable layers. The dashed green tiles illustrate the transfer learning
layers



3.1.1   R EPRESENTATION

Using the propose approach, the expected representation of the data is much different than the one
achieved by the prominent approaches mentioned in section 2. Since the blocks are trained simul-
taneously, information from the meta-data may impact the training of the core textual block (the
transformer block), and vice-versa. Therefore, a new and different representation is achieved. As
a toy illustrative example, let us say that a single sample has text suggesting a specific class but
meta-data suggesting another, the textual block would train differently (and the textual representa-
tion would be different, taking this in account), and the weights of the textual block would be able to
capture this difference. We illustrate the different in Figure 2. In Figure 2a we illustrate using tokens
to inject the meta-data into the transformer layers, producing an embedding (e1-eM1). In Figure2b
we demonstrate concatenation of the embedding produced by the transformer layers (e1-eM2) with a
vector representation (v) of the meta-data. In Figure 2c the proposed blocks approach is illustrated.
The trainable blocks are wrapped in green to emphasize that training is done together, creating a
unified representation of the message, compared to 2b where the transformer layers and the dense
layers are trained independently, and the output representations are concatenated. We emphasize
that the blocks may have different architectures and may produce different vector representations, to
produce a better representation.


                                                   4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                             (a) Illustration of injecting meta-data as tokens


                              (b) Illustration of concatenation of meta-data


                                  (c) Illustration of the blocks approach

Figure 2: Overview of the two common methods (a, b) and the proposed approach (c), emphasizing
that the blocks are trained together, so information from one block may affect the training of the other
blocks (as opposed to (b) for example, where the blocks are trained separately and concatenated)


3.1.2    C OMBINE
After the blocks, we propose to take a combination of the layers (e.g. averaging the outputs, sum-
ming the outputs, concatenating the outputs, etc.). This combination may also be trained as part of
the training loop. From the experimental tests we find that the best performance was achieved by
having the combine step as a weighted concatenation of the outputs, producing an output sized as
the number of classes times the number of blocks. We then use a few dense layers to produce an
output sized as the number of classes, and apply softmax activation for the classification.

3.2     T RANSFER LEARNING

The text classification blocks often use transformer models. These models have complex architec-
tures that achieve high performance on the available benchmark data-sets. To utilize the strength of
these models, one may train a network with the same architecture but with their specific data-set.
However, this tends to have high computational costs, and require large volume of data which is
not so often available. Therefore, many of the state-of-the-art transformer models, including BERT,
have an open source pre-trained versions available online, where one can download the pre-trained
version and use a small data-set to train the model for only a few more iterations on that data. Since
the pre-trained model already trained for a long time to understand textual embeddings, this transfer
learning method adapts the model to the new data-set with lighter training (relative to pre-training).
Transfer learning is applicable for image data-sets, audio data-sets, time series analysis, and many
more Pan & Yang (2009). The core block in the proposed method is operating on text, and the current
stat-of-the-art methods for text classification are transfer learning, usually with transformers. That
said, one may choose to implement other blocks using transfer learning as well. Using the proposed
approach, the transfer learning can be done on all blocks simultaneously.

4     E XPERIMENTS
For the numerical experiments we train the network of the proposed approach with two blocks: a) the
transformer block operating on the main text, and b) the meta-data block which is a fully-connected
block operating on a one dimensional meta-data vector. We emphasize that more advanced blocks


                                                    5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


can be used, but even this simple architecture provided results that demonstrated the value from the
meta-data and the blocks approach. In addition, it is simple to distinguish between the transformer
only architecture, and the transformer and meta-data architecture in this way, giving us better ex-
plainability of the contribution of the meta-data.

4.1   DATA - SETS

Amazon reviews. The Amazon product reviews data-set He & McAuley (2016) contains a large
number of product reviews, varying by product category (label). The main text is the description of
the review. We extract meta-data from the Amazon data-set comes from the reviewer field (sender),
the review creation date and time (timestamp), and the overall satisfaction (enumerated). This data-
set has in total 82.83 million product reviews. We sub-sample a subset of the reviews, by choosing
the first 100,000 reviews of each category and then selecting the ones with the longest texts. We
eventually save 4,687 reviews for training, 521 for validation, and 2,064 for testing (eliminating
text-less messages). The final data-set is close to balanced (roughly the same number of reviews per
category).
Yelp Open Data-set. The Yelp restaurant reviews data-set Yelp (2014) contains restaurant reviews,
varying by culinary class (label). The main text is the restaurant review. We extract meta-data
from the reviewer field (sender), the review creation date and time (timestamp), is the review use-
ful/funny/cool (enumerated), and the number of stars (enumerated). We clean the data-set similar
to the Amazon one, and save 4,612 reviews for training, 513 for validation, and 2,050 for testing,
roughly balanced as well.
Reddit. The Reddit data-set Baumgartner et al. (2020) contains a large volume of Reddit posts, each
belongs to a specific sub-Reddit (label). Specifically, we use the data-set of version 2 from 2010.
The main text is the post content. We extract meta-data from the post uploader field (sender), the
post upload date and time (timestamp), whether the post has comments (enumerated), and whether
it has attachments (enumerated). We clean the data-set as well and save 4,950 posts for training, 550
for validation, and 2,200 for testing. We focus on 12 sub-Reddits (12 unique labels) and the data-set
is roughly balanced.
Enron Email Data-set. The Enron email data-set Klimt & Yang (2004) contains a corpus of emails.
Although this data-set is publicly available, we had access to a limited internal version that has been
tagged based on email category (label). The main text is the email body. We extract meta-data from
the email sender field (sender), and the email reception date and time (timestamp). We save 4,500
emails for training, 500 for validation, and 2,000 for testing. This data-set is not balanced.

4.2   F EATURE EXTRACTOR

To conduct the numerical experiments we first discuss a genuine feature extractor we use to extract
the meta-data information from the available fields of the data-set. For each type of meta-data
we extract corresponding features. Since different data-sets have different fields, we use generic
modules to extract information from different fields of the same purpose, such as sender field (in
emails data-set) or reviewer field (in restaurant reviews data-set). An overview of the meta-data
features we extract from the data-set is given in Table 1. Note, that the different data-sets have
different fields. Some of them do not have an enumerated field, and some have more than one.

4.3   R ESULTS

To demonstrate the success of the proposed framework, we use a simple 2-blocks network. The first
block is a transformer based block, specifically a pre-trained BERT model, and 2 fully-connected
layers. That way we can examine the contribution of the meta-data carefully. We emphasize that
with more advanced handling of the meta-data and introduction of more blocks, higher accuracy
is expected. The transformer models are implemented using the Huggingface Transformers pack-
age Wolf et al. (2019). In addition, we used the ktrain package, specifically the text classification
modules, and re-wrote them to have a message classification class.
We use the data-sets mentioned in Section 4.1. We compare multiple methods in terms of accuracy:
      1. Pre-trained BERT with an additional fully-connected layer.


                                                  6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


     Field type         Features         Number of slots                  Description
                                                                        One hot vector,
                                                              each slot represents if the sender
                      Top senders              120           is one of the 100 to senders or not
     Sender          Top affiliations          120            Same with sender top affiliations
                                                                  Compute the frequency of
                    Sender frequency             1           messages received from this sender
                                                                   One hot vector, each slot
                                                              represents if the message arrived
                           Day                   7                         at that day
     Timestamp                                                     Indicating if the message
                                                                arrived within working hours
                     Working hours               1                            or not
                                                               Creating a histogram of 50 bins
                                                                 and a corresponding 50 slots
                                                               one hot vector where each slot
                                                              represents if the message arrived
                       Rush hour                50              in the corresponding bin time
                                                                     One hot vector with 1
                                                                    in the slot representing
    Enumerated      Enumerated value         #Options             the option and 0 otherwise
     Numeric         Numeric value              1                     The numeric value

                     Table 1: Review of meta-data features extraction per field


     2. Pre-trained BERT with a random forest classifier.
     3. Pre-trained BERT with concatenated meta-data and an additional fully-connected layer.
     4. Pre-trained BERT with concatenated meta-data and a random forest classifier.
     5. Transfer learning BERT with an additional fully-connected layer.
     6. Transfer learning BERT with a random forest classifier.
     7. Transfer learning BERT with concatenated meta-data and an additional fully-connected
        layer.
     8. Transfer learning BERT with concatenated meta-data and a random forest classifier.
     9. The proposed method (BERT and meta-data) with output averaging.
    10. The proposed method (BERT and meta-data) with output weighting.

Methods 1-4 use embeddings from a pre-trained BERT model (without transfer learning), and train
either an extra fully-connected layer or a random forest classifier Breiman (2001) for the classifica-
tion. We do this either without (1-2) or with (3-4) concatenation of the meta-data to the embeddings,
following the common methods in the literature. Methods 5-8 are similar, but the BERT transform-
ers layers are further trained on the specific task data. Methods 3,4,7,8 are the reference methods
of concatenating the BERT model embedding with a meta-data embedding. Methods 9-10 are the
proposed ones, exploring the effect of combining the transformer output with the meta-data block
output, once with averaging the block outputs and once with a fully-connected layer to learn the
weights after concatenating the output representations of each block. The latter involves training to
learn this weight, which is implemented so that it happens in the same training process as all other
weights in the network. The results are given in Table 2. By observing the results, we see that the
proposed method is competitive with all other methods and even outperforms most of them.
An interesting result is observed for the Enron emails data-set. We notice that the pre-trained meth-
ods performed better than the transfer-learning based methods. This can be explained by the mis-
matches between the textual information and the meta-data information. While the text suggests one
class, the meta-data may suggest a different one. Methods 1-8, in this case, act as voting between
classifiers. However, as mentioned in section 3.1.1, the proposed method is influenced by both
text and meta-data and learns a better representation that can take into account these differences,
performing better than all other methods.


                                                  7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


          Method#      Amazon reviews      Yelp Open Data-set     Reddit    Enron Emails
             1             0.66                  0.29              0.56         0.49
             2             0.61                  0.22              0.52         0.49
             3             0.65                  0.24              0.46         0.48
             4             0.61                  0.22               0.5          0.5
             5             0.74                  0.39              0.61         0.47
             6             0.73                  0.38               0.6         0.47
             7             0.71                  0.38              0.62         0.47
             8             0.73                  0.39               0.6         0.47
             9              0.7                   0.3              0.62         0.47
            10             0.77                   0.4              0.62         0.53

                                       Table 2: Results table


5   C ONCLUSION
In this paper we proposed a new framework for training classification models. The proposition relies
on the availability of additional, not necessarily textual, data channels such as attached images,
audio, sender and timestamp, etc. We proposed an architecture with which one can utilize the
aforementioned additional information using different blocks, along with the text, and train a neural
network to perform message classification more accurately. We demonstrate the strength of this
method using a set examples, varying by data-set and classification algorithm, and show that the
proposed method outperforms the reference related works.

R EFERENCES
John-Syin Ang, Kok-Why Ng, and Fang-Fang Chua. Modeling time series data with deep learning:
  A review, analysis, evaluation and future trend. In 2020 8th International Conference on Infor-
  mation Technology and Multimedia (ICIMU), pp. 32–37, 2020. doi: 10.1109/ICIMU49871.2020.
  9243546.
Jason Baumgartner, Savvas Zannettou, Brian Keegan, Megan Squire, and Jeremy Blackburn. The
  pushshift reddit dataset, 2020. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2001.08435.
Steven Bird, Ewan Klein, and Edward Loper. Natural language processing with Python: analyzing
  text with the natural language toolkit. ” O’Reilly Media, Inc.”, 2009.
Leo Breiman. Random forests. Machine learning, 45(1):5–32, 2001.
Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhari-
  wal, Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Sandhini Agar-
  wal, Ariel Herbert-Voss, Gretchen Krueger, Tom Henighan, Rewon Child, Aditya Ramesh,
  Daniel Ziegler, Jeffrey Wu, Clemens Winter, Chris Hesse, Mark Chen, Eric Sigler, Ma-
  teusz Litwin, Scott Gray, Benjamin Chess, Jack Clark, Christopher Berner, Sam McCan-
  dlish, Alec Radford, Ilya Sutskever, and Dario Amodei. Language models are few-shot
  learners. In H. Larochelle, M. Ranzato, R. Hadsell, M.F. Balcan, and H. Lin (eds.), Ad-
  vances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 33, pp. 1877–1901. Curran Asso-
  ciates, Inc., 2020. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2020/file/
  1457c0d6bfcb4967418bfb8ac142f64a-Paper.pdf.
Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. Bert: Pre-training of deep
  bidirectional transformers for language understanding, 2018. URL https://arxiv.org/
  abs/1810.04805.
Dheeraj Gupta, P.S. Joshi, A.K. Bhattacharjee, and R.S. Mundada. Ids alerts classification using
  knowledge-based evaluation. In 2012 Fourth International Conference on Communication Sys-
  tems and Networks (COMSNETS 2012), pp. 1–8, 2012.
Jianglei Han, Jing Li, and Aixin Sun. Uftr: A unified framework for ticket routing, 2020. URL
   https://arxiv.org/abs/2003.00703.


                                                 8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Ruining He and Julian McAuley. Ups and downs: Modeling the visual evolution of fashion trends
  with one-class collaborative filtering. In proceedings of the 25th international conference on
  world wide web, pp. 507–517, 2016.

Matthew Honnibal and Ines Montani. spaCy 2: Natural language understanding with Bloom em-
 beddings, convolutional neural networks and incremental parsing. To appear, 2017.

Dino Ienco and Roberto Interdonato. Deep multivariate time series embedding clustering via
  attentive-gated autoencoder. In Pacific-Asia Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Min-
  ing, pp. 318–329. Springer, 2020.

Kaggle. https://www.kaggle.com/.

Asif Karim, Sami Azam, Bharanidharan Shanmugam, and Krishnan Kannoorpatti. Efficient clus-
  tering of emails into spam and ham: The foundational study of a comprehensive unsupervised
  framework. IEEE Access, 8:154759–154788, 2020.

Bryan Klimt and Yiming Yang. The enron corpus: A new dataset for email classification research. In
  Jean-François Boulicaut, Floriana Esposito, Fosca Giannotti, and Dino Pedreschi (eds.), Machine
  Learning: ECML 2004, pp. 217–226, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2004. Springer Berlin Heidelberg.

Zhenzhong Lan, Mingda Chen, Sebastian Goodman, Kevin Gimpel, Piyush Sharma, and Radu Sori-
  cut. Albert: A lite bert for self-supervised learning of language representations, 2019. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/1909.11942.

Yinhan Liu, Myle Ott, Naman Goyal, Jingfei Du, Mandar Joshi, Danqi Chen, Omer Levy, Mike
  Lewis, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Veselin Stoyanov. Roberta: A robustly optimized bert pretraining
  approach, 2019. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1907.11692.

Walaa Medhat, Ahmed Hassan, and Hoda Korashy. Sentiment analysis algorithms and applications:
 A survey. Ain Shams engineering journal, 5(4):1093–1113, 2014.

Malte Ostendorff, Peter Bourgonje, Maria Berger, Julian Moreno-Schneider, Georg Rehm, and Bela
 Gipp. Enriching bert with knowledge graph embeddings for document classification. arXiv
 preprint arXiv:1909.08402, 2019.

Sinno Jialin Pan and Qiang Yang. A survey on transfer learning. IEEE Transactions on knowledge
  and data engineering, 22(10):1345–1359, 2009.

Tanzila Rahman, Mengyu Yang, and Leonid Sigal. Tribert: Full-body human-centric audio-visual
  representation learning for visual sound separation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.13412, 2021.

Pranav Rajpurkar, Robin Jia, and Percy Liang. Know what you don’t know: Unanswerable questions
  for squad, 2018. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1806.03822.

Victor Sanh, Lysandre Debut, Julien Chaumond, and Thomas Wolf. Distilbert, a distilled version
  of bert: smaller, faster, cheaper and lighter, 2019. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1910.
  01108.

Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez,
  Łukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. Advances in neural informa-
  tion processing systems, 30, 2017.

Alex Wang, Amanpreet Singh, Julian Michael, Felix Hill, Omer Levy, and Samuel R. Bowman.
  GLUE: A multi-task benchmark and analysis platform for natural language understanding. In In
  the Proceedings of ICLR., 2019.

Fei Wang, Mengqing Jiang, Chen Qian, Shuo Yang, Cheng Li, Honggang Zhang, Xiaogang Wang,
  and Xiaoou Tang. Residual attention network for image classification. In Proceedings of the IEEE
  conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 3156–3164, 2017.


                                                9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Thomas Wolf, Lysandre Debut, Victor Sanh, Julien Chaumond, Clement Delangue, Anthony Moi,
  Pierric Cistac, Tim Rault, Rémi Louf, Morgan Funtowicz, Joe Davison, Sam Shleifer, Patrick
  von Platen, Clara Ma, Yacine Jernite, Julien Plu, Canwen Xu, Teven Le Scao, Sylvain Gugger,
  Mariama Drame, Quentin Lhoest, and Alexander M. Rush. Huggingface’s transformers: State-of-
  the-art natural language processing, 2019. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1910.03771.
Thomas Wolf, Lysandre Debut, Victor Sanh, Julien Chaumond, Clement Delangue, Anthony Moi,
  Pierric Cistac, Tim Rault, Rémi Louf, Morgan Funtowicz, Joe Davison, Sam Shleifer, Patrick
  von Platen, Clara Ma, Yacine Jernite, Julien Plu, Canwen Xu, Teven Le Scao, Sylvain Gug-
  ger, Mariama Drame, Quentin Lhoest, and Alexander M. Rush. Transformers: State-of-the-art
  natural language processing. In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in
  Natural Language Processing: System Demonstrations, pp. 38–45, Online, October 2020. As-
  sociation for Computational Linguistics. URL https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/
  2020.emnlp-demos.6.
Yiheng Xu, Minghao Li, Lei Cui, Shaohan Huang, Furu Wei, and Ming Zhou. Layoutlm: Pre-
  training of text and layout for document image understanding. In Proceedings of the 26th ACM
  SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery & Data Mining, pp. 1192–1200,
  2020.
Zhilin Yang, Zihang Dai, Yiming Yang, Jaime Carbonell, Russ R Salakhutdinov, and
  Quoc V Le. Xlnet: Generalized autoregressive pretraining for language understanding.
  In H. Wallach, H. Larochelle, A. Beygelzimer, F. d'Alché-Buc, E. Fox, and R. Gar-
  nett (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 32. Curran Asso-
  ciates, Inc., 2019. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2019/file/
  dc6a7e655d7e5840e66733e9ee67cc69-Paper.pdf.
Yelp. Yelp open dataset, https://www.yelp.com/dataset, 2014.
Yu Zhang, Zhihong Shen, Yuxiao Dong, Kuansan Wang, and Jiawei Han. Match: Metadata-aware
  text classification in a large hierarchy. In Proceedings of the Web Conference 2021, pp. 3246–
  3257, 2021.


                                               10
