Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


T RAINING -F REE S TRUCTURED D IFFUSION G UIDANCE
FOR C OMPOSITIONAL T EXT- TO -I MAGE S YNTHESIS

 Weixi Feng1 , Xuehai He2 , Tsu-jui Fu1 , Varun Jampani3 , Arjun Akula3 ,
 Pradyumna Narayana3 , Sugato Basu3 , Xin Eric Wang2 , William Yang Wang1
 1
   University of California, Santa Barbara, 2 University of California, Santa Cruz, 3 Google



                                             A BSTRACT

         Large-scale diffusion models have achieved state-of-the-art results on text-to-image
         synthesis (T2I) tasks. Despite their ability to generate high-quality yet creative
         images, we observe that attribution-binding and compositional capabilities are
         still considered major challenging issues, especially when involving multiple
         objects. Attribute-binding requires the model to associate objects with the correct
         attribute descriptions, and compositional skills require the model to combine and
         generate multiple concepts into a single image. In this work, we improve these
         two aspects of T2I models to achieve more accurate image compositions. To
         do this, we incorporate linguistic structures with the diffusion guidance process
         based on the controllable properties of manipulating cross-attention layers in
         diffusion-based T2I models. We observe that keys and values in cross-attention
         layers have strong semantic meanings associated with object layouts and content.
         Therefore, by manipulating the cross-attention representations based on linguistic
         insights, we can better preserve the compositional semantics in the generated image.
         Built upon Stable Diffusion, a SOTA T2I model, our structured cross-attention
         design is efficient that requires no additional training samples. We achieve better
         compositional skills in qualitative and quantitative results, leading to a significant
         5-8% advantage in head-to-head user comparison studies. Lastly, we conduct an
         in-depth analysis to reveal potential causes of incorrect image compositions and
         justify the properties of cross-attention layers in the generation process.


1    I NTRODUCTION
Text-to-Image Synthesis (T2I) is to generate natural and faithful images given a text prompt as input.
Recently, there has been a significant advancement in the quality of generated images by extremely
large-scale vision-language models, such as DALL-E 2 (Ramesh et al., 2022), Imagen (Saharia
et al., 2022), and Parti (Yu et al., 2022). In particular, Stable Diffusion (Rombach et al., 2022) is the
state-of-the-art open-source implementation showing superior evaluation metric gains after training
over billions of text-image pairs.
In addition to generating high-fidelity images, the ability to compose multiple objects into a coherent
scene is also essential. Given a text prompt from the user end, T2I models need to generate an image
that contains all necessary visual concepts as mentioned in the text. Achieving such ability requires
the model to understand both the full prompt and individual linguistic concepts from the prompt.
As a result, the model should be able to combine multiple concepts and generate novel objects that
have never been included in the training data. In this work, we mainly focus on improving the
compositionality of the generation process, as it is essential to achieve controllable and generalized
text-to-image synthesis with multiple objects in a complex scene.
Attribute binding is a critical compositionality challenge (Ramesh et al., 2022; Saharia et al., 2022) to
existing large-scale diffusion-based models. Despite the improvements in generating multiple objects
in the same scene, existing models still fail when given a prompt such as “a brown bench in front of a
white building” (see Fig. 1). The output images contains “a white bench” and “a brown building”
instead, potentially due to strong training set bias or imprecise language understanding. From a
practical perspective, explaining and solving such a two-object binding challenge is a primary step to
understanding more complex prompts with multiple objects. Therefore, how to bind the attributes


                                                   1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


      Stable
     Diffusion


        Ours



               A red car and a white sheep.   A brown bench sits in front of   A blue backpack and a brown
                                                  an old white building                  elephant
                  Attribute leakage           Interchanged attributes              Missing objects

Figure 1: Three challenging phenomena in the compositional generation. Attribute leakage:
The attribute of one object is (partially) observable in another object. Interchanged attributes: the
attributes of two or more objects are interchanged. Missing objects: one or more objects are missing.
With slight abuse of attribute binding definitions, we aim to address all three problems in this work.


to the correct objects is a fundamental problem for a more complicated and reliable compositional
generation. While previous work has addressed compositional T2I (Park et al., 2021), our work
tackles open-domain foreground objects with counterfactual attributes, such as color and materials.
Even though state-of-the-art (SOTA) T2I models are trained on large-scale text-image datasets, they
can still suffer from inaccurate results for simple prompts similar to the example above. Hence,
we are motivated to seek an alternative, data-efficient method to improve the compositionality. We
observe that the attribute-object relation pairs can be obtained as text spans for free from the parsing
tree of the sentence. Therefore, we propose to combine the structured representations of prompts,
such as a constituency tree or a scene graph, with the diffusion guidance process. Text spans only
depict limited regions of the whole image. Conventionally, we need spatial information such as
coordinates (Yang et al., 2022) as input to map their semantics into corresponding images. However,
coordinate inputs cannot be interpreted by T2I models. Instead, we make use of the observations that
attention maps provide free token-region associations in trained T2I models (Hertz et al., 2022). By
modifying the key-value pairs in cross-attention layers, we manage to map the encoding of each text
span into attended regions in 2D image space.
In this work, we discover similar observations in Stable Diffusion (Rombach et al., 2022) and utilize
the property to build structured cross-attention guidance. Specifically, we use language parsers to
obtain hierarchical structures from the prompts. We extract text spans across all levels, including
visual concepts or entities, and encode them separately to disentangle the attribute-object pairs from
each other. Compared to using a single sequence of text embedding for guidance, we improve the
compositionality by multiple sequences where each emphasizes an entity or a union of entities from
multiple hierarchies in the structured language representations. We refer to our method as Structured
Diffusion Guidance (StructureDiffusion). Our contributions can be summarized as three-fold:

       • We propose an intuitive and effective method to improve compositional text-to-image
         synthesis by utilizing structured representations of language inputs. Our method is efficient
         and training-free that requires no additional training samples.
       • Experimental results show that our method achieves more accurate attribute binding and
         compositionality in the generated images. We also propose a benchmark named Attribute
         Binding Contrast set (ABC-6K) to measure the compositional skills of T2I models.
       • We conduct extensive experiments and analysis to identify the causes of incorrect attribute
         binding, which points out future directions in improving the faithfulness and compositional-
         ity of text-to-image synthesis.


                                                      2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                       unflatten                                    token-region associations
             𝑙
                                             A             black          cat        sitting...      red        car

                                𝑑
                                                                                        …
 ℎ×𝑤
                     ×   𝑙
                                            ×               ×              ×                     ×              ×
                             Value 𝑉
                                                                                  Value from
      Attention map 𝑀𝑡                                                            token “cat”



                                       Value from token “cat” (“car”) contributes most (least)
                                       to spatial location corresponds to “cat”
                             𝑀𝑡 𝑉 𝑇

Figure 2: An illustration of cross-attention operations and the token-region associations from attention
maps. We omit some tokens for simplicity.


2     D IFFUSION M ODELS & S TRUCTURED G UIDANCE

In this section, we propose a simple yet effective approach incorporating structured language repre-
sentations into the cross-attention layers. We briefly introduce the Stable Diffusion model and its
critical components in Sec. 2.1. Then, we present our method in detail in Sec. 2.2.

2.1    BACKGROUND

Stable Diffusion We implement our approach and experiments on the state-of-the-art T2I model,
Stable Diffusion (Rombach et al., 2022). It is a two-stage method that consists of an autoencoder
and a diffusion model. The pre-trained autoencoder encodes images as lower-resolution latent maps
for diffusion training. During inference, it decodes generated outputs from the diffusion model into
images. The diffusion model generates lower-resolution latent maps based on a random Gaussian
noise input z T . Given z T , it outputs a noise estimation ϵ at each step t and subtracts it from z t .
The final noise-free latent map prediction z 0 is fed into the autoencoder to generate images. Stable
Diffusion adopts a modified UNet (Ronneberger et al., 2015) for noise estimation and a frozen CLIP
text encoder (Radford et al., 2021) to encode text inputs as embedding sequences. The interactions
between the image space and the textual embeddings are achieved through multiple cross-attention
layers in both downsampling and upsampling blocks.

CLIP Text Encoder Given an input prompt P, the CLIP encoder encodes it as a sequence of
embeddings Wp = CLIPtext (P) where cp is the embedding dimension and l is the sequence length.
Our key observation is that the contextualization of CLIP embeddings is a potential cause of incorrect
attribute binding. Due to the causal attention masks, tokens in the later part of a sequence are blended
with the token semantics before them. For example, When the user indicates some rare color for the
second object (e.g. “a yellow apple and red bananas”), Stable Diffusion tends to generate “banana” in
“yellow”, as the embeddings of “yellow” is attended by token “banana”.

Cross Attention Layers The cross-attention layers take the embedding sequences from the CLIP
text encoder and fuse them with latent feature maps to achieve classifier-free guidance. Denote a 2D
feature map X t , it is projected into queries by a linear layer fQ (·) and reshaped as Qt ∈ R(n,h×w,d)
where n denotes the number of attention heads, d is the feature dimension. Similarly Wp is projected
as keys and values Kp , Vp ∈ R(n,l,d) by linear layers fK (·), fV (·). The attention maps refer to the
product between queries and keys, denoted as a function fM (·)

                                                   Qt KpT
                     M t = fM (Qt , Kp ) = Softmax( √ ), M t ∈ R(n,h×w,l) .                                           (1)
                                                      d


                                                       3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                                                                                                     Query 𝑄 𝑡
                                                                                                                       2D feature maps        (unflattened for demo)
       Prompt: A room with
                                                                                                                                         𝑓𝑄
       blue walls and a                   CLIPtext                                                           𝑓𝐾 ; 𝑓𝑉
       white sink.                                                          𝒲𝑝
                                                                            A room with blue walls and …

                                                                                                                 𝐾𝑝
            𝑃𝑎𝑟𝑠𝑒𝑟 𝜉
                                                 ROOT                                                                       Attention
                                                                                                                            maps 𝑀𝑡
                                                          NP, 𝑐3
           Structured                                                                                                                                           walls
                                                                                                                                                             blue
         Representations                                                                                                                                   with
                                                                   NP, 𝑐4   𝒲2                              𝑓𝑉                                          room
                                 NP, 𝑐1         NP, 𝑐2                                                                                              a
            Constituency
               Tree
                                 A room with blue walls and a white sink
                                                                                                                  𝑉𝑝
            Scene Graph                                                          <bos> blue walls <pad> …         𝑉1                                    σ𝑖 𝑀𝑡 𝑉𝑖
                                                                                                                  𝑉2                             𝑂𝑡 =
                                               CLIPtext                                                                                                    5
                                                                                                                  𝑉3
                                                                                                                  𝑉4

                           Condition Encoding Stage                         Sequence Alignment                           Cross Attention Layers


Figure 3: An illustration of our cross-attention design with structured representations. We unflatten
the query and attention maps and omit the feature dimension d of all query, key, and value tensors for
demonstration purposes. Note that noun phrases at multiple hierarchies are extracted and encoded
through the frozen CLIP text encoder and projected to value vectors.


Cross Attention Controls Hertz et al. (2022) observes that the spatial layouts depend on the cross
attention maps in Imagen Saharia et al. (2022). These maps control the layout and structure of
generated images, while the values contain rich semantics mapped into attended regions. Therefore,
we assume that the image layout and content can be disentangled by controlling attention maps and
values separately.

2.2      S TRUCTURED D IFFUSION G UIDANCE

Given the challenging prompts in Fig. 1, the attribute-object pairs are available for free1 in many
structured representations, such as a constituency tree or a scene graph. We seek an implicit way of
combining language structures with the cross-attention layers. As is shown in Fig. 3, we can extract
multiple noun phrases (NPs) and map their semantics into corresponding regions. Since Mt provides
natural token-region associations (see Fig. 2), we can apply it to multiple values from different NPs
to achieve region-wise semantic guidance.
Specifically, given a parser ξ(·), we first extract a collection of concepts from all hierarchical levels
as C = {c1 , c2 , . . . , ck }. For constituency parsing, we extract all NPs from the tree structure (see
Fig.3 left). For the scene graphs, we extract objects and their relations with another object as text
segments. We encode each NP separately:
                             W = [Wp ,W1 , W2 , . . . , Wk ], Wi = CLIPtext (ci ), i = 1, . . . k.                                                                     (2)
The embedding sequence Wi is realigned with Wp as shown in the middle of Fig. 3. Embeddings
between ⟨bos⟩ and ⟨pad⟩ are inserted into Wp to create a new sequence, denoted as W i . We use
W p to obtain Kp and M t as in Eq. 1, assuming that the full-prompt key is able to generate layouts
without missing objects. We obtain a set of values from W and multiply each with M t to achieve a
conjunction of k NPs in C:
                                V = [fV (Wp ), fV (W 1 ), . . . , fV (W k )] = [Vp , V1 , . . . , Vk ].                                                                (3)
                                                        1   X
                                          Ot =                 (M t Vi ), i = p, 1, 2, . . . , k.                                                                      (4)
                                                     (k + 1) i

Compared to using fV (Wp ) only, Eq. 4 does not modify the image layout or composition since M t
is still calculated from Qt , Kp . Empirically, we justify the claim by a series of visualizations of Mt
   1
       For free means that the extra computational cost introduced here is trivial in the whole diffusion process.


                                                                            4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Algorithm 1 StructureDiffusion Guidance.
Require:
    Input: Prompt P, Parser ξ, decoder ψ, trained diffusion model ϕ.
    Output: Generated image x.
 1: Retrieve concept set C = [c1 , . . . , ck ] by traversing ξ(P);
 2: Wp ← CLIPtext (P), Wi ← CLIPtext (ci );                                              i = 1, . . . , k
 3: for t = T, T − 1, . . . , 1 do
 4:   for each cross attention layer in ϕ do
 5:      Obtain previous layer’s output X t .
 6:      Qt ← fQ (X t ), Kp ← fK (Wp ), Vi ← fV (W i );                               i = p, 1, . . . , k
 7:      Obtain attention maps M t from Qt , Kp ;                                            {Eq. 1}
 8:      Obtain Ot from M t , {Vi }, and feed to following layers;                           {Eq. 4}
 9:   end for
10: end for
11: Feed z 0 to decoder ψ(·) to generate x.


(see Appendix C). However, Stable Diffusion tends to omit objects in generated images (Fig. 1),
especially for concept conjunctions that connect two objects with the word “and”. We devise a variant
of our method that computes a set of attention maps M = {Mpt , M1t , . . .} from C and multiply them
to V:
                     K = {fK (Wi )}, Mt = {fM (Qt , Ki )}, i = p, 1, 2, . . . , k.                (5)
                                      1    X
                            Ot =              (Mit Vk ), i = p, 1, 2, . . . , k.                  (6)
                                  (k + 1) i
Ot is the output of a certain cross-attention layer and the input into downstream layers to generate
final image x. Our algorithm can be summarized as 1, which requires no training or additional data.

3     E XPERIMENT
3.1   E XPERIMENT S ETTINGS

Datasets To address attribute binding and compositional generation, we propose a new benchmark,
Attribute Binding Contrast set (ABC-6K). It consists of natural prompts from MSCOCO where each
contains at least two color words modifying different objects. We also switch the position of two
color words to create a contrast caption (Gardner et al., 2020). We end up with 6.4K captions or 3.2K
contrastive pairs. In addition to natural compositional prompts, we challenge our method with less
detailed prompts that conjunct two concepts together. These prompts follow the sentence pattern of
“a red apple and a yellow banana” and conjunct two objects with their attribute descriptions. We refer
to this set of prompts as Concept Conjunction 500 (CC-500). We also evaluate our method on 10K
randomly sampled captions from MSCOCO (Lin et al., 2014). We show that our method generalizes
beyond attribute binding and introduces no quality degradation for general prompts.

Evaluation Metrics We mainly rely on human evaluations for compositional prompts and concept
conjunction (ABC-6K & CC-500). We ask annotators to compare two generated images, from Stable
Diffusion and our method respectively, and indicate which image demonstrates better image-text
alignment or image fidelity. For image fidelity, we ask the annotators “Regardless of the text, which
image is more realistic and natural?”. We also investigate an automatic evaluation metric for image
compositions, i.e., using a SOTA phrase grounding model GLIP (Li et al., 2022) to match phrase-
object pairs. As for system-level evaluation, we follow previous work to utilize Inception Score (IS)
(Salimans et al., 2016), Frećhet Inception Distance (FID) (Heusel et al., 2017) and CLIP R-precision
(R-prec.) (Park et al., 2021). IS and FID mainly measure the image bank’s systematic quality and
diversity, while R-prec measures image-level alignment.

3.2   C OMPOSITIONAL P ROMPTS

Here we show the quantitative and qualitative evaluation results on ABC-6K. We observe that our
method sometimes generates very similar images to Stable Diffusion. Hence, we first generate


                                                  5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                         StructureDiffusion (ours)                       Alignment                                    Fidelity
  Benchmark
                                   v.s.                     Win (↑)           Lose (↓)       Tie       Win (↑)          Lose (↓)            Tie
 ABC-6K                         Stable Diffusion               42.2              35.6        22.2         48.3             39.1            12.6
                             Stable Diffusion                  31.8              27.7        38.9         37.8             30.6            31.6
 CC-500
                           Composable Diffusion                46.5              30.1        22.8         61.4             19.8            18.8

Table 1: Percentage of generated images of StructureDiffusion that are better than (win), tied with,
or worse than (lose) the compared model in terms of text-image alignment and image fidelity. We
filtered out 20% most similar image pairs for comparison (See Sec. E). Composable Diffusion cannot
be applied to ABC-6K as those prompts may not contain explicit “and” words that separate concepts.

      Stable Diffusion              Ours         Stable Diffusion               Ours               Stable Diffusion              Ours
        A white and brown bird with an orange       Two ripe spotted bananas are sitting
                                                                                                A black goat standing next to two white goats
        beak and legs standing in water             inside a green bowl on a gray counter


          A white and orange bird with a brown       Two ripe spotted bananas are sitting
                                                                                                A white goat standing next to two black goats
          beak and legs standing in water            inside a gray bowl on a green counter


                                                      (b) Scene-level compositionality                 (c) Scene-level compositionality
         (a) Object-level compositionality
                                                             & Attribute Binding                                  & Counting


Figure 4: Qualitative results on ABC-6K. Our method improves both object-level and scene-level
compositionality.


two images per prompt for our method and Stable Diffusion, involving around 12K image pairs to
compare. Then, we filter out 20% of the most similar pairs and then randomly sampled 1500 pairs for
human evaluations. As shown in Table 1, annotators indicate around a 42% chance of our method
winning the comparison, 7% higher than losing the comparison. There is still a 22% of chance that
our images are tied with images from Stable Diffusion.
We show qualitative examples characterizing three different perspectives in Fig. 4. Our method
fills in the correct color for different parts of an object or different objects, as shown in the first
two examples. The third example demonstrates that our method can mitigate the issue of “missing
objects”. Among the 42% winning cases, there are 31% for “fewer missing objects”, 14.1% for
“better-matched colors”, and 54.8% for “other attributes or details” as indicated by annotators. The
results certify that the improvement goes beyond colors to component completeness and fine-grained
details. More qualitative examples characterizing all three aspects can be found in Fig. 14 in the
Appendix.


3.3    C ONCEPT C ONJUNCTION

Here we address challenging concept conjunction prompts and evaluate our method on CC-500. Apart
from Stable Diffusion, we also compare to Composable Diffusion (Liu et al., 2022) implemented on
top of Stable Diffusion. For Composable Diffusion, we separate the prompts into text segments by the
keyword “and” and feed each span into an independent diffusion process. We generate three images
per prompt and use all images for human evaluation for Stable Diffusion. We randomly sampled 600
images for comparison to Composable Diffusion.


                                                                     6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                       CC-500 (Prompt format: “a [colorA] [objectA] and a [colorB] [objectB]” )
                                                   Human Annotations                           GLIP
                                                                                                                  Human-GLIP
                                    Zero/One                      Two obj. w/      Zero/One
 Methods                                              Two obj.                                     Two obj.       Consistency
                                     obj. (↓)                    correct colors     obj. (↓)
 Stable Diffusion                       65.5            34.5         19.2               69.0          31.0           46.4
 Composable Diffusion                   69.7            30.3         20.6               74.2          25.8           48.9
 StructureDiffusion (Ours)              62.0            38.0         22.7               68.8          31.2           47.6

Table 2: Fine-grained human and automatic evaluation results on CC-500. Recall that each prompt is
a conjunction of two different objects with different colors. “Zero/One obj.” means that the model
fails to generate all desired objects in the image. “Human-GLIP consistency” reflects the percentage
of images where human annotations align with GLIP detection results.

      Stable Diffusion     Composable                Ours            Stable Diffusion     Composable              Ours
                            Diffusion                                                      Diffusion
                     A red bird and a green apple                                 A green apple and a blue bowl


                    A green bird and a red apple                                  A blue apple and a green bowl


                         (a) Color leakage                                              (b) Missing objects


Figure 5: Qualitative results on CC-500 prompts that emphasize two aspects. (a) Color leakage: our
method prevents the green color from invading the bird or apple. (b) Missing objects: our method
completes the “blue bowl” and improves the quality of the “blue apple”.


As shown in Table 1, our method outperforms Stable Diffusion by around 4.1% and Composable
Diffusion by 16.4% in terms of image-text alignment. We also observe that our method enhances
some fine-grained details in the generated images, leading to a 7.2% improvement in image fidelity
when compared with Stable Diffusion. We observe that images from composable diffusion can be
oversaturated with unnatural visual textures and layouts, which could be the reason for StructureDif-
fusion to have high win rate in image fidelity. As shown in Fig. 5 and Fig. 13. Our approach prevents
color bleeding (left), missing objects (right) and strengthens details (right).
To further quantify the text-image alignment, we consider both human annotations and automatic
evaluations. For each object mentioned in the prompt, we ask annotators whether the object exists
in the image and whether it is in the correct color. We also apply a state-of-the-art detection model
GLIP (Li et al., 2022) to ground each “a [color] [object]” phrase into bounding boxes. We report
the percentage of images that contain incomplete objects / complete objects / complete objects with
correct colors in Table 2. StructureDiffusion improves the compositionality by 3.5% based on human
annotations while only 0.2% based on GLIP. We discover that humans disagree with GLIP for more
than 50% of the images, as entailed by the low consistency rate. Previous work also suggests the
deficiency of large pre-trained models in compositional understanding (Thrush et al., 2022).

3.4   OTHER PROMPTS

We show that our StructureDiffusion maintain the overall image quality and diversity on general
prompts. We follow the standard evaluation process and generate 10,000 images from randomly


                                                                 7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                  a large blue truck is traveling                                         a red teddy bear in a Christmas
A black dog standing
                                                                                                          hat sitting next to a glass, a can
on a surfboard on the             through a landscape that                                                and a plastic cup full of liquid, on
beach                             includes snow and bare trees                                            a table in a living room
 black       dog                                                                                                           teddy        next
                                     truck               large                                                red
                                                                                                                            bear         to
 Surf-                                           trees                                                    Christmas
                                                                                                                            in         glass
          standing                                                                                           hat
 board                             traveling                     bare
                                                include                                                     table                      can
                                                                                                                          liquid
    on      beach                                                                                                    in               plastic
                                   landscape    include          snow
                                                                                                           Living         full of
                                                                                                           room                        cup



    Figure 6: Qualitative results of using scene graph parser to generate structured representations.

                                                                                            𝑏𝑜𝑠 , 𝑡1 , 𝑡2 , … , 𝑡𝑘 , 𝑝𝑎𝑑1 , 𝑝𝑎𝑑2 , … , 𝑝𝑎𝑑76−𝑘
                                                                            Text encoding
                                                                                stage                            CLIPtext
                                                                                                                          1      2          76−𝑘
                                                                                               𝐸𝑏𝑜𝑠 , 𝐸1 , 𝐸2 , … , 𝐸𝑘 , 𝐸𝑝𝑎𝑑 , 𝐸𝑝𝑎𝑑 , … , 𝐸𝑝𝑎𝑑

                                                                                                             76−𝑘
                                                                                      Full: 𝐸𝑏𝑜𝑠 , 𝐸1 , … , 𝐸𝑝𝑎𝑑                    / Seq. Length: 77
                                                                                                                1
                                                                                      One pad: 𝐸𝑏𝑜𝑠 , 𝐸1 , … , 𝐸𝑝𝑎𝑑 / Seq. Length: 𝑘 + 2
                                                                                      No pad: 𝐸𝑏𝑜𝑠 , 𝐸1 , … , 𝐸𝑘                    / Seq. Length: 𝑘 + 1
                                                                                                            1
                                                                                      One pad only: 𝐸𝑏𝑜𝑠 , 𝐸𝑝𝑎𝑑                     / Seq. Length: 2


                                                                                        Full             One pad                    No pad       One pad only


Figure 7: Ablation study on the text sequence embeddings. We find that the padding embeddings are
fully contextualized, representing the prompt’s high-level semantics. However, not all padding tokens
are necessary to maintain a high-fidelity output from Stable Diffusion.


sampled MSCOCO captions. Stable Diffusion obtains 39.9 IS, 18.0 FID and 72.2 R-Precision. Our
method achieves 40.9 IS, 17.9 FID and 72.3 R-Precision. StructureDiffusion maintains the image
fidelity and diversity as indicated in the comparable IS/FID/R-Prec scores.

3.5      S CENE G RAPH I NPUT

We show that our method is not limited to constituency parsing but can also be extended to other
structured representations, such as scene graphs. As shown in Fig. 6, we first adopt the scene graph
parser (Wu et al., 2019) and obtain a graph like the ones next to each image from the input prompt.
The parser returns basic entities and their relations in between. We extract text spans of basic entities
with their attributes attached and text spans that include two related entities. We provide examples
in Appendix 3 and make comparison to the constituency parser. Similarly, we encode these spans
separately and re-align each with the entire prompt encoding sequence. On MS-COCO, the scene
graph parser setting maintains the image quality with 39.2 IS, 17.9 FID, and 72.0 R-Precision. When
compared to Stable Diffusion on ABC-6K, the scene graph parser achieves 34.2%-32.9%-32.9%
Win-Lose-Tie in image-text alignment and 34.5%-32.5%-33.0% Win-Lose-Tie in image fidelity. As
for CC-500, the scene graph parser leads to the same output images due to the same text spans. We
refer to Table 3 and Fig. 12 for more results and comparison.


4        A BLATION S TUDY

4.1      R E - ALIGNING S EQUENCE

In Section 2, we describe a method to realign the encoding of a text span back into the sequence of
the full prompt. Since the noun-phrase text spans are shorter than the full sequence, re-alignment
ensures that each token’s value vector corresponds to the correct attention map. On the other hand,
naively expanding the span to the length of the full sequence degrades the image quality by ∼2 IS /
FID (37.5 IS, 19.8 FID) compared to images with re-alignment or Stable Diffusion.


                                                                        8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


4.2   C ONTEXTUALIZED T EXT E MBEDDINGS

One limitation brought by our StructureDiffusion is that the cross-attention computation costs increase
by the number of noun phrases. Yet we noticed that most of the attention maps are computed from
padding embeddings, as Stable Diffusion adopts CLIP text encoders and automatically pads the
sequence to 77 tokens. We conjecture that not all padding tokens are necessary for generating
high-quality images. As is shown in Fig. 7, we study four different patterns of token embeddings.
We discover that leaving the nearest padding embeddings maintains a similar IS / FID score as the
full sequence. Further removing this padding embedding results in apparent degradation. While only
using the nearest padding embedding results in the worst image quality, we find that the high-level
image layout and semantics are preserved (see bottom right of Fig. 7). This phenomenon indicates
that the padding embeddings are fully contextualized with the full prompt semantics. This also
justifies our re-alignment operation that preserves padding embeddings of the main sequence Wfull .


5     R ELATED W ORK

Text-to-Image Synthesis The diffusion model is an emerging type of model that generate high-
quality images with a much more stable training process (Song & Ermon, 2019; Ho et al., 2020).
Rombach et al. (2022) proposes to encode an image with an autoencoder and then leverage a diffusion
model to generate continuous feature maps in the latent space. Stable Diffusion Rombach et al.
(2022) adopts similar architecture but is trained on large-scale image-text datasets with fixed CLIP
text encoder. Imagen (Saharia et al., 2022) addresses the importance of language understanding by
using a frozen T5 encoder (Raffel et al., 2020), a dedicated large language model. We mainly focus
on diffusion models and conduct our experiments on Stable Diffusion (Rombach et al., 2022), the
SOTA open-sourced T2I model.

Compositional Generation The compositional or controllable generation has been an essential
direction for T2I models to understand and disentangle basic concepts in the generation process. As
text inputs are relatively weak conditions, previous work leverage layout or scene graph to enhance
compositionality (Johnson et al., 2018; Hong et al., 2018; Yang et al., 2022; Gafni et al., 2022). More
recently, Liu et al. (2022) proposes an approach where the concept conjunctions are achieved by
adding estimated scores from a parallel set of diffusion processes. In contrast, our method can be
directly merged into the cross-attention layers with much less computational overhead.

Diffusion Guidance Ho & Salimans (2022) develops classifier-free guidance where a single
diffusion model is jointly trained under conditional and unconditional inputs. Most large-scale SOTA
models, including autoregressive ones, adopt this technique for flexible and improved conditional
synthesis results (Rombach et al., 2022; Ramesh et al., 2022; Gafni et al., 2022; Yu et al., 2022;
Saharia et al., 2022). Hertz et al. (2022) discovers unique properties of cross attention maps on
Imagen (Saharia et al., 2022) and achieves structure-preserving image editing by manipulating these
maps. We observe similar properties in Stable Diffusion (Rombach et al., 2022) but propose a
different algorithm for fine-grained, compositional text-to-image generation.


6     C ONCLUSION

In this work, we propose a training-free method for compositional text-to-image generation. First,
we observe that existing large-scale T2I diffusion models can still struggle in compositional image
synthesis. We address this challenge by explicitly focusing on binding objects with the correct
attributes. Second, we propose structured diffusion guidance incorporating language structures into
the cross-attention layers. We propose two simple techniques to align the structured encoding with
the attention maps. Using our structured guidance on Stable Diffusion, attributes can be bound more
accurately while maintaining the overall image quality and diversity. In addition, we justify our
approach by conducting an in-depth analysis of the frozen language encoder and attention maps.
Future work may explore explicit approaches to generate plausible image layouts without missing
components. We hope that our approach accelerates the development of interpretable and efficient
methods for diffusion-based text-to-image models.


                                                  9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
We would like to thank the Robert N. Noyce Trust for their generous gift to the University of California
via the Noyce Initiative. The work was also partially funded by an unrestricted gift from Google and
by the National Science Foundation award #2048122. The writers’ opinions and conclusions in this
publication are their own and should not be construed as representing the sponsors’ official policy,
expressed or inferred.

R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT
We release our core codebase containing the methodology implementation, settings, benchmarks
containing compositional prompts under supplementary materials.

E THICAL S TATEMENT
As for the data collection and verification, we use the Amazon Mechanical Turk platform and form the
comparison task as batches of HITs. We select workers from English-speaking countries, including
the US, CA, UK, AU, and NZ, since the task require understanding the English input prompt. Each
HIT takes around 15-30 seconds on average to accomplish, and we pay each submitted HIT with
0.15 US dollars, resulting in an hourly payment of 18 US dollars.

R EFERENCES
Prafulla Dhariwal and Alexander Nichol. Diffusion models beat gans on image synthesis. Advances
  in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:8780–8794, 2021.
Ming Ding, Wendi Zheng, Wenyi Hong, and Jie Tang. Cogview2: Faster and better text-to-image
 generation via hierarchical transformers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.14217, 2022.
Alaaeldin El-Nouby, Shikhar Sharma, Hannes Schulz, Devon Hjelm, Layla El Asri, Samira Ebrahimi
  Kahou, Yoshua Bengio, and Graham W.Taylor. Tell, Draw, and Repeat: Generating and Modifying
  Images Based on Continual Linguistic Instruction. In ICCV, 2019.
Tsu-Jui Fu, Xin Eric Wang, Scott Grafton, Miguel Eckstein, and William Yang Wang. SSCR: Iterative
  Language-Based Image Editing via Self-Supervised Counterfactual Reasoning. In EMNLP, 2020.
Oran Gafni, Adam Polyak, Oron Ashual, Shelly Sheynin, Devi Parikh, and Yaniv Taigman. Make-a-
  scene: Scene-based text-to-image generation with human priors. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.13131,
  2022.
Matt Gardner, Yoav Artzi, Victoria Basmov, Jonathan Berant, Ben Bogin, Sihao Chen, Pradeep
 Dasigi, Dheeru Dua, Yanai Elazar, Ananth Gottumukkala, et al. Evaluating models’ local decision
 boundaries via contrast sets. Findings of Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing,
 2020.
Shuyang Gu, Dong Chen, Jianmin Bao, Fang Wen, Bo Zhang, Dongdong Chen, Lu Yuan, and
  Baining Guo. Vector quantized diffusion model for text-to-image synthesis. In Proceedings of the
  IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 10696–10706, 2022a.
Shuyang Gu, Dong Chen, Jianmin Bao, Fang Wen, Bo Zhang, Dongdong Chen, Lu Yuan, and
  Baining Guo. Vector quantized diffusion model for text-to-image synthesis. In Proceedings of the
  IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 10696–10706, 2022b.
Amir Hertz, Ron Mokady, Jay Tenenbaum, Kfir Aberman, Yael Pritch, and Daniel Cohen-Or. Prompt-
 to-prompt image editing with cross attention control. arXiv preprint arXiv:2208.01626, 2022.
Martin Heusel, Hubert Ramsauer, Thomas Unterthiner, Bernhard Nessler, and Sepp Hochreiter. Gans
 trained by a two time-scale update rule converge to a local nash equilibrium. Advances in neural
 information processing systems, 30, 2017.


                                                  10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Jonathan Ho and Tim Salimans. Classifier-free diffusion guidance. arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.12598,
  2022.
Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. Denoising diffusion probabilistic models. Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:6840–6851, 2020.
Seunghoon Hong, Dingdong Yang, Jongwook Choi, and Honglak Lee. Inferring semantic layout for
  hierarchical text-to-image synthesis. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision
  and pattern recognition, pp. 7986–7994, 2018.
Justin Johnson, Agrim Gupta, and Li Fei-Fei. Image generation from scene graphs. In Proceedings
  of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 1219–1228, 2018.
Doyup Lee, Chiheon Kim, Saehoon Kim, Minsu Cho, and Wook-Shin Han. Autoregressive image
  generation using residual quantization. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
 Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 11523–11532, 2022.
Bowen Li, Xiaojuan Qi, Thomas Lukasiewicz, and Philip Torr. Controllable text-to-image generation.
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 32, 2019.
Liunian Harold Li, Pengchuan Zhang, Haotian Zhang, Jianwei Yang, Chunyuan Li, Yiwu Zhong,
  Lijuan Wang, Lu Yuan, Lei Zhang, Jenq-Neng Hwang, et al. Grounded language-image pre-training.
  In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp.
  10965–10975, 2022.
Tsung-Yi Lin, Michael Maire, Serge Belongie, James Hays, Pietro Perona, Deva Ramanan, Piotr
  Dollár, and C Lawrence Zitnick. Microsoft coco: Common objects in context. In European
  conference on computer vision, pp. 740–755. Springer, 2014.
Luping Liu, Yi Ren, Zhijie Lin, and Zhou Zhao. Pseudo numerical methods for diffusion models on
  manifolds. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2021a.
Nan Liu, Shuang Li, Yilun Du, Antonio Torralba, and Joshua B Tenenbaum. Compositional visual
  generation with composable diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.01714, 2022.
Xihui Liu, Dong Huk Park, Samaneh Azadi, Gong Zhang, Arman Chopikyan, Yuxiao Hu, Humphrey
  Shi, Anna Rohrbach, and Trevor Darrell. More control for free! image synthesis with semantic
  diffusion guidance. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.05744, 2021b.
Chao Lou, Wenjuan Han, Yuhuan Lin, and Zilong Zheng. Unsupervised vision-language parsing:
  Seamlessly bridging visual scene graphs with language structures via dependency relationships. In
  Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR),
  pp. 15607–15616, June 2022.
Alex Nichol, Prafulla Dhariwal, Aditya Ramesh, Pranav Shyam, Pamela Mishkin, Bob McGrew,
  Ilya Sutskever, and Mark Chen. Glide: Towards photorealistic image generation and editing with
  text-guided diffusion models. ICML, 2021.
Dong Huk Park, Samaneh Azadi, Xihui Liu, Trevor Darrell, and Anna Rohrbach. Benchmark for
  compositional text-to-image synthesis. In Thirty-fifth Conference on Neural Information Processing
 Systems Datasets and Benchmarks Track (Round 1), 2021.
Peng Qi, Yuhao Zhang, Yuhui Zhang, Jason Bolton, and Christopher D. Manning. Stanza: A Python
  natural language processing toolkit for many human languages. In Proceedings of the 58th Annual
  Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics: System Demonstrations, 2020.
Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal,
  Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al. Learning transferable visual
  models from natural language supervision. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp.
  8748–8763. PMLR, 2021.
Colin Raffel, Noam Shazeer, Adam Roberts, Katherine Lee, Sharan Narang, Michael Matena,
  Yanqi Zhou, Wei Li, and Peter J. Liu. Exploring the limits of transfer learning with a unified
  text-to-text transformer. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 21(140):1–67, 2020. URL
  http://jmlr.org/papers/v21/20-074.html.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Aditya Ramesh, Mikhail Pavlov, Gabriel Goh, Scott Gray, Chelsea Voss, Alec Radford, Mark Chen,
  and Ilya Sutskever. Zero-shot text-to-image generation. In International Conference on Machine
  Learning, pp. 8821–8831. PMLR, 2021.
Aditya Ramesh, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alex Nichol, Casey Chu, and Mark Chen. Hierarchical text-
  conditional image generation with clip latents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.06125, 2022.
Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and Björn Ommer. High-
  resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Confer-
  ence on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 10684–10695, 2022.
Olaf Ronneberger, Philipp Fischer, and Thomas Brox. U-net: Convolutional networks for biomedical
  image segmentation. In International Conference on Medical image computing and computer-
  assisted intervention, pp. 234–241. Springer, 2015.
Nataniel Ruiz, Yuanzhen Li, Varun Jampani, Yael Pritch, Michael Rubinstein, and Kfir Aberman.
  Dreambooth: Fine tuning text-to-image diffusion models for subject-driven generation. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2208.12242, 2022.
Chitwan Saharia, William Chan, Saurabh Saxena, Lala Li, Jay Whang, Emily Denton, Seyed
  Kamyar Seyed Ghasemipour, Burcu Karagol Ayan, S Sara Mahdavi, Rapha Gontijo Lopes, et al.
  Photorealistic text-to-image diffusion models with deep language understanding. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2205.11487, 2022.
Tim Salimans, Ian Goodfellow, Wojciech Zaremba, Vicki Cheung, Alec Radford, and Xi Chen.
  Improved techniques for training gans. Advances in neural information processing systems, 29,
  2016.
Sebastian Schuster, Ranjay Krishna, Angel Chang, Li Fei-Fei, and Christopher D Manning. Generat-
  ing semantically precise scene graphs from textual descriptions for improved image retrieval. In
  Proceedings of the fourth workshop on vision and language, pp. 70–80, 2015.
Yang Song and Stefano Ermon. Generative modeling by estimating gradients of the data distribution.
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 32, 2019.
Ming Tao, Hao Tang, Fei Wu, Xiao-Yuan Jing, Bing-Kun Bao, and Changsheng Xu. Df-gan: A simple
 and effective baseline for text-to-image synthesis. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
 Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 16515–16525, 2022.
Tristan Thrush, Ryan Jiang, Max Bartolo, Amanpreet Singh, Adina Williams, Douwe Kiela, and Can-
  dace Ross. Winoground: Probing vision and language models for visio-linguistic compositionality.
  In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp.
  5238–5248, 2022.
Bo Wan, Wenjuan Han, Zilong Zheng, and Tinne Tuytelaars. Unsupervised vision-language grammar
  induction with shared structure modeling. In International Conference on Learning Representa-
  tions, 2021.
Hao Wu, Jiayuan Mao, Yufeng Zhang, Yuning Jiang, Lei Li, Weiwei Sun, and Wei-Ying Ma.
  Unified visual-semantic embeddings: Bridging vision and language with structured meaning
  representations. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
  Recognition, pp. 6609–6618, 2019.
Zuopeng Yang, Daqing Liu, Chaoyue Wang, Jie Yang, and Dacheng Tao. Modeling image compo-
  sition for complex scene generation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
  Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 7764–7773, 2022.
Jiahui Yu, Yuanzhong Xu, Jing Yu Koh, Thang Luong, Gunjan Baid, Zirui Wang, Vijay Vasudevan,
   Alexander Ku, Yinfei Yang, Burcu Karagol Ayan, et al. Scaling autoregressive models for content-
   rich text-to-image generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.10789, 2022.
Han Zhang, Jing Yu Koh, Jason Baldridge, Honglak Lee, and Yinfei Yang. Cross-modal contrastive
  learning for text-to-image generation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer
  vision and pattern recognition, pp. 833–842, 2021.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Yiwu Zhong, Liwei Wang, Jianshu Chen, Dong Yu, and Yin Li. Comprehensive image captioning via
  scene graph decomposition. In European Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 211–229. Springer,
  2020.
Yufan Zhou, Ruiyi Zhang, Changyou Chen, Chunyuan Li, Chris Tensmeyer, Tong Yu, Jiuxiang
  Gu, Jinhui Xu, and Tong Sun. Towards language-free training for text-to-image generation.
  In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp.
  17907–17917, 2022.
Minfeng Zhu, Pingbo Pan, Wei Chen, and Yi Yang. Dm-gan: Dynamic memory generative adversarial
 networks for text-to-image synthesis. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer
 vision and pattern recognition, pp. 5802–5810, 2019.


A    R ELATED W ORK
Text-to-Image Synthesis There are mainly three types of models for text-to-image synthesis:
GAN-based (Tao et al., 2022; Zhu et al., 2019; Li et al., 2019; Fu et al., 2020; El-Nouby et al., 2019),
autoregressive (Gu et al., 2022b; Lee et al., 2022; Ding et al., 2022) and diffusion models (Liu et al.,
2021b; Nichol et al., 2021; Ruiz et al., 2022). Zhang et al. (2021) proposes XMC-GAN, a one-stage
GAN that employs multiple contrastive losses between image-image, image-text, and region-token
pairs. More recently, LAFITE (Zhou et al., 2022) enables language-free training by constructing
pseudo image-text feature pairs using CLIP (Radford et al., 2021). As for autoregressive models,
DALL-E adopts VQ-VAE to quantize image patches into tokens and then uses a transformer to
generate discrete tokens sequentially (Ramesh et al., 2021). Parti (Yu et al., 2022) and Make-A-Scene
(Gafni et al., 2022) both leverage classifier-free guidance to improve controllability. As for diffusion
models, Gu et al. (2022a) concatenates VQ-VAE with the diffusion model and shows that the diffusion
process can operate in discrete latent space. DALL-E 2 adopts the CLIP text encoder so that the
diffusion process inverts the textual features into images (Ramesh et al., 2022).

Structured Representations for Vision and Language Inferring shared structures across language
and vision has been a long-term pursuit in unifying these modalities (Schuster et al., 2015; Johnson
et al., 2018; Zhong et al., 2020; Lou et al., 2022). Wu et al. (2019) utilizes the structure from semantic
parsing in a visual-semantic embedding framework to facilitate embedding learning. Wan et al. (2021)
proposes a new task in which the goal is to learn a joint structure between semantic parsing and image
regions. To the best of our knowledge, our work is the first attempt in T2I to incorporate language
structures into the image synthesizing process.

Diffusion Guidance To convert an unconditional diffusion model into a class-conditional one,
Dhariwal & Nichol (2021) input the noisy image from each step into a classifier and calculate the
classification loss. The loss can be back-propagated to the image space to provide a gradient that
marginalizes the score estimation from the log of conditional probability. Similarly, in the T2I
subdomain, Liu et al. (2021b) and Nichol et al. (2021) apply a noisy CLIP model to measure the
cosine similarity between text prompts and noisy images.

B    I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS
Throughout the experiments, we implement our method upon Stable Diffusion v1.4. For all compar-
isons between our method and Stable Diffusion, we fix the seed to generate the same initial Gaussian
map and use 50 diffusion steps with PLMS sampling (Liu et al., 2021a). We fix the guidance scale to
7.5 and equally weight the key-value matrices in cross-attention layers if not otherwise specified. We
do not add hand-crafted prompts such as “a photo of” to the text input. We use the Stanza Library (Qi
et al., 2020) for constituency parsing and obtain noun phrases if not otherwise specified.

C    V ISUALIZATION OF ATTENTION M APS
In this section, we demonstrate the visualization of cross-attention maps to support our assumptions
and claims in Sec. 2. As is shown in Fig. 8, the attention maps of Stable Diffusion and our method


                                                   13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                       “A long , narrow yellow kitchen with black and white floor tiles”
              𝑡=𝑇                                                                          𝑡=1

              𝑇𝑜𝑘𝑒𝑛 = "𝑦𝑒𝑙𝑙𝑜𝑤"

 Stable
Diffusion                                                                                         Stable
                                                                                                 Diffusion
  Ours



             𝑇𝑜𝑘𝑒𝑛 = "𝑏𝑙𝑎𝑐𝑘"

 Stable
Diffusion

                                                                                                   Ours
  Ours



             𝑇𝑜𝑘𝑒𝑛 = "𝑤ℎ𝑖𝑡𝑒"

  Stable
 Diffusion


  Ours



             𝑇𝑜𝑘𝑒𝑛 = "𝑓𝑙𝑜𝑜𝑟"

  Stable
 Diffusion


  Ours



Figure 8: Visualization of cross attention maps of Stable Diffusion and our method. We compare
maps of multiple tokens throughout the whole diffusion process with equal intervals.


have similar spatial distribution and highlights throughout the diffusion process. This phenomenon
supports our assumption in Sec. 2.2 that the attention map Mt is unchanged even with multiple values
in each cross-attention layer. We can observe a similar phenomenon in Fig. 9 except that our method
accelerates the formation of interpretable attentions for both “green” and “clock” tokens.
Fig. 8, 9 also justify our claim that values represent rich textual semantics mapped to the image
space as contents. For instance, our method parses the prompt in Fig. 8 into “A long narrow yellow
kitchen” and “black and white floor tiles”, encodes and aligns them separately to form V. Empirically,
these operations enhance the semantics of “yellow” and “black and white” separately and mitigate
“yellow” being blended into “black and white”. This explains the disappearance of color leakage in
our image compared to Stable Diffusion. Though one may attribute the leakage to incorrect attention
distribution of the “yellow” token, we argue that this is not the critical reason. Despite the attention
maps of “yellow” from our method slightly highlighting the “floor tile” regions, we cannot observe
any yellow in our generated image. This proves that inaccurate attention distributions contribute little
to the final image content. In addition, we also show in Fig. 10 that using multiple Keys is able to
rectify the image layouts to mitigate missing object issues. The sheep-like attention maps in the third
row verify the proposed variants of our method for concept conjunctions.


                                                             14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                          “A tall brown building with a tall green clock tower behind”
              𝑡=𝑇                                                                        𝑡=1         Stable Diffusion
              𝑇𝑜𝑘𝑒𝑛 = "𝑔𝑟𝑒𝑒𝑛"

 Stable
Diffusion


    Ours

                                                                                                         Ours
             𝑇𝑜𝑘𝑒𝑛 = “𝑐𝑙𝑜𝑐𝑘"

 Stable
Diffusion


    Ours



Figure 9: Visualization of cross attention maps corresponding to token “green” and “clock” across
the full diffusion timestamps from step 50 to step 1 in equal intervals. Red boxes highlight steps
where our method accelerates the formation of correct attention on the clock region. The evolution
of the token “green” is also more interpretable in our method. Although the image composition is
imperfect, the visualization still supports our assumptions and claims in Sec. 2.2.

                         Attention maps of token “sheep” in “a red car and a white sheep”
                𝑡=𝑇                                                                            𝑡=1

  Stable
 Diffusion
    𝑀𝑝


 Ours, 𝑀𝑝


 Ours, 𝑀𝑝



 Ours, 𝑀1



 Ours, 𝑀2



Figure 10: Visualization of attention maps for token “sheep” of different methods. Our method with
multiple Keys successfully rectify image layouts.


D      A BLATION S TUDY

D.1        A CASE STUDY OF ATTRIBUTE BINDING

Here, we present a case study to show evidence of two root causes of incorrect attribute binding. The
first one is the contextualized token embeddings due to causal attention masks. As is shown on the
left side of Fig. 11, we first encode two different prompts with a shared component, e.g. “a red apple”
as the naive one and “a green bag and a red apple”. Using the encoding sequence of the naive prompt,


                                                            15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


      a red apple         <bos> A green bag and a red apple <pad>                Prompt = A furry bear watching a bird
                                                                                     Attention maps of token "bird"

      CLIPtext                          CLIPtext                          Input block 4      Input block 7       Input block 8
<bos> a red apple <pad>   <bos> A green bag and a red apple <pad>


                     Initialization



                                                                         Output block 8     Output block 8       Final Image


Figure 11: Examples showing the potential root causes of incorrect attribute binding. Left: The large
green regions in the second image prove that the hidden state’s output of token “red” is contextualized
with token “green” before it. Right: Visualization of attention maps showing that the semantics from
the token “bird” is mistakenly attended to the mouth region of the bear. The final image shows the
unnatural beak-like shape of the bear.


we are able to get an image of red apple only. It is reasonable to assume that the yellow
green regions are natural results of learning from authentic apple images. Then, we replace the tokens
of the naive prompt with embeddings of the same token from the more complicated prompt. We use
the same gaussian noise as initialization and generate an unnatural image with a solid green region (in
the yellow bounding box). This result proves that the token “red” is contaminated with the semantics
of “green” before it and explains some images with color leakage problems (e.g., Fig. 1).
The second reason attributes to inaccurate attention maps. In Fig. 11 (right), we visualize five cross-
attention maps (averaged across attention heads) from both downsample and upsampling blocks. The
attention maps show the salient regions corresponding to the token “bird”. These maps demonstrate
highlighted regions in the bottom left corner where the bird is located in the final image. Despite the
interpretable structures, the maps also show saliency around the mouth region of the bear across all
five layers. Thus, the inaccurate attention maps lead to a beak-like mouth of the bear in the image.

D.2    C OMPARISON OF PARSERS

In this subsection, we compare the difference between using a constituency parser and a scene graph
parser to obtain text spans and generate images. Table 3 compares the extracted text spans using
constituency parser and scene graph parser. Example 0 shows that both parsers end up with the same
results for CC-500 prompts. For Example 1-4, the scene graph parser generates more spans than the
constituency parser. We notice that concepts in the middle of the sentence appear more often in these
spans than other noun tokens, like “egg” or “red sauce” in Example 3. This imbalance potentially
explains why the “egg” looks more highlighted in Fig. 12 (bottom left). On the other hand, “orange
slices” appear more often in constituency parsing results, leading to better “orange” textures in the
generated image. Similar observations can be made in Example 2, where “green pole” is emphasized
more often by the constituency parser.

E     L IMITATIONS & F UTURE W ORK

There are several limitations of our work. First of all, our method depends on an external parsing
function that may not be perfect. We adopt the commonly used Stanza Library Qi et al. (2020) for
constituency parsing. The parsing function can be replaced with a more advanced learning-based
method for improvement. Secondly, our method mainly focuses on compositional T2I neglecting any


                                                                    16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                Constituency Parser                                           Scene Graph Parser
                                                   CC-500 Prompt: A white sheep and a red car
 Example 0
                            “A white sheep”, “a red car”                                   “A white sheep”, “a red car”
                                            Prompt: A silver car with a black cat sleeping on top of it
 Example 1                  “A silver car”, “a black cat”,                          “A silver car”, “a black cat”, “top of it”,
                           “A silver car with a black cat”                             “a black cat sleeping on top of it”
                                   Prompt: A horse running in a white field next to a black and green pole
                           “A horse”, “a white field”,                                    “A horse”, “a white field”,
 Example 2                  “a black and green pole”,                                      “a black and green pole”,
                 “a white field next to a black and green pole”                        “A horse running in a white field”
                              Prompt: Rice with red sauce with eggs over the top and orange slices on the side
                                                                                            “red sauce”, “the side”,
                              “red sauce”, “the side”,                                    “the top and orange slices”,
 Example 3                  “the top and orange slices”,                        “Rice with red sauce”, “red sauce with eggs”,
                      “the top and orange slices on the side”                       “the top and orange slices on the side”,
                                                                             “red sauce with eggs over the top and orange slices”
                                           Prompt: A pink scooter with a black seat next to a blue car

 Example 4                                                                       “A pink scooter”, “a black seat”, “a blue car”,
                  “A pink scooter”, “a black seat”, “a blue car”                      “a pink scooter with a black seat”,
                                                                                       “a black seat next to a blue car”

Table 3: Comparison between the constituency parser and scene graph parser. For CC-500 prompts,
both parsers end up with the same results. As for general prompts, scene graph parser tends to
generate more text spans with middle concepts appearing multiple times across different spans.

         Stable                Ours                    Ours                      Stable               Ours                  Ours
       Diffusion          (Constituency)          (Scene Graph)                Diffusion         (Constituency)        (Scene Graph)
      A silver car with a black cat sleeping on top of it                  A horse running in a white field next to a black and green pole


Rice with red sauce with eggs over the top and orange slices on the side     A pink scooter with a black seat next to a blue car


Figure 12: Synthesized images corresponding to prompts in Table 3. Yellow boxes annotate composi-
tions that are improved using different parsers.


style descriptions. The parsing mechanism may categorize a style description, e.g. “in Van Gogh
style” as a separate noun phrase that cannot be grounded in the image space. In addition, we discover
that StructureDiffusion tends to generate similar images as Stable Diffusion. Thus we filtered out 20%
of most similar image pairs in Table 1, considering the efficiency of human evaluation. Therefore, the
improvement could be compromised when evaluated on the full set of generated images. Future work
may focus on devising explicit methods to associate attributes to objects using spatial information as
input. For example, how to make a text-to-image synthesis model interpret coordinate information
with limited fine-tuning or prompt tuning steps would be an appealing direction.

F     A DDITIONAL R ESULTS


                                                                     17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


 Stable Diffusion             Ours                  Stable Diffusion         Ours
      A green apple and a red banana                    A red bird and a green banana


      A gold clock and a green bench                    A blue bird and a brown bowl


      A red cake and a blue suitcase                  A blue backpack and a brown bear


     A brown dog and a blue suitcase                  A blue backpack and a brown cow


       A yellow bowl and a blue cat                     A brown dog and a blue horse


                           Figure 13: Qualitative results on CC-500



                                               18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


     Stable                              Stable                            Stable
                     Ours                                  Ours                             Ours
    Diffusion                           Diffusion                         Diffusion
  a purple cat with a orange hat       A red cat sits on a rug with a   A yellow cat is wearing a blue
            on its head                         black cord                   plastic baseball hat.


                                                                         Two elephants walking by a
   A red helmet is on a yellow        A red stop sign above a white     green wall with tan palm trees
         toilet in the dirt               walk across road sign                 painted on it


                                      A spacious kitchen has white      A large white bed sitting in a
 A bathroom with red tile and a
                                      walls , red countertops , and a     hotel room next to a red
     green shower curtain
                                                 large stove                       couch


   A white toilet bowl with a             A pink towel stands out       A large pizza on a white plate
      purple rug in front              greatly in the white bathroom        sitting on a blue table


                                                                          A black and white curtain
  A spoon and bowl of red pea          A cow standing outside of a        hanging in a room that is
   soup and green beans with            white building with a blue      decorated in black, white and
            onions                              entrance                             red


                                Figure 14: Qualitative results on ABC-6K


                                                    19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


      Stable          Structure          Stable            Structure           Stable          Structure
     Diffusion        Diffusion         Diffusion          Diffusion          Diffusion        Diffusion
                                                                               two back to back wooden
   small wooden laptop sitting on      small silver laptop sitting on top    benches next to a shrub near a
    top of a silver computer desk       of a wooden computer desk                   stone walkway


  a skateboarder jumps over a silver
   dome with stone domes in front        a silver stove sits next to a        a shiny silver metal microwave
       of it and bicycler behind         counter on a wooden floor                near wooden cabinets


  a stone building with a wooden       a wooden building with a stone         a cat is perched upon a stone
        bench placed near it                bench placed near it            bench that sits on a wooden patio


  a wooden building with a stone
       bench placed near it            a red sphere and a yellow cube        a brown sphere and a cyan cube


   a red sphere and a blue cube         a blue sphere and a red cube          a green sphere and a red cube


Figure 15: Qualitative results characterizing attributes beyond colors, including shape, size and
materials.


                                                      20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 16: A prompt “an astronaut riding a horse” appended with different (combinations of) style
descriptions. Our method has no negative effects on the image style. “base” refers to Stable Diffusion.



                                                  21
