Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


M IN -M AX M ULTI - OBJECTIVE B ILEVEL O PTIMIZATION
WITH A PPLICATIONS IN ROBUST M ACHINE L EARNING

 Alex Gu† , Songtao Lu‡ , Parikshit Ram‡ , Tsui-Wei Weng*
 †
   MIT CSAIL, ‡ IBM Research, * UCSD
 †
   gua@mit.edu, ‡ {songtao, parikshit.ram}@ibm.com, * lweng@ucsd.edu



                                             A BSTRACT

         We consider a generic min-max multi-objective bilevel optimization problem with
         applications in robust machine learning such as representation learning and hyper-
         parameter optimization. We design MORBiT, a novel single-loop gradient descent-
         ascent bilevel optimization algorithm, to solve the generic problem and present a
         novel analysis showing that MORBiT converges to the first-order stationary point
                      e 1/2 K −2/5 ) for a class of weakly convex problems with n objectives
         at a rate of O(n
         upon K iterations of the algorithm. Our analysis utilizes novel results to handle the
         non-smooth min-max multi-objective setup and to obtain a sublinear dependence in
         the number of objectives n. Experimental results on robust representation learning
         and robust hyperparameter optimization showcase (i) the advantages of considering
         the min-max multi-objective setup, and (ii) convergence properties of the proposed
         MORBiT. Our code is at https://github.com/minimario/MORBiT.


1    I NTRODUCTION
We begin by examining the classic bilevel optimization (BLO) problem as follows:
                      min     f (x, y ⋆ (x)) subject to     y ⋆ (x) ∈ arg min g(x, y)                  (1)
                   x∈X ⊆Rdx                                          y∈Y=Rdy

where f : X × Y → R is the upper-level (UL) objective function and g : X × Y → R is the
lower-level (LL) objective function. X and Y, respectively, denote the domains for the UL and LL
optimization variables x and y, incorporating any respective constraints. Equation 1 is called BLO
because the UL objective f depends on both x and the solution y ⋆ (x) of the LL objective g. BLO
is well-studied in the optimization literature (Bard, 2013; Dempe, 2002). Recently, stochastic BLO
has found various applications in machine learning (Liu et al., 2021; Chen et al., 2022a), such as
hyperparameter optimization (Franceschi et al., 2018), reinforcement learning or RL (Hong et al.,
2020), multi-task representation learning (Arora et al., 2020), model compression (Zhang et al., 2022),
adversarial attack generation (Zhao et al., 2022) and invariant risk minimization (Zhang et al., 2023).
In this work, we focus on a robust generalization of equation 1 to the multi-objective setting, where
there are n different objective function pairs (fi , gi ). Let [n] ≜ {1, 2, · · · , n} and fi : X × Yi → R,
gi : X × Yi → R denote the ith UL and LL objectives respectively. We study the following problem:
           min     max fi (x, yi⋆ (x)) subject to       yi⋆ (x) ∈ arg min gi (x, yi ), ∀i ∈ [n].       (2)
         x∈X ⊆Rdx i∈[n]                                          yi ∈Yi =Rdyi

Here, the optimization variable x is shared across all objectives fi , gi , i ∈ [n], while the variables
yi , i ∈ [n] are only involved in their corresponding objectives fi , gi . The goal is to find a robust
solution x ∈ X , such that, the worst-case across all objectives is minimized. This is a generic
problem which reduces to equation 1 if we have a single objective pair, that is n = 1. Such a robust
optimization problem is useful in various applications, and especially necessary in any safety-critical
ones. For example, in decision optimization, the different objectives (fi , gi ) can correspond to
different “scenarios” (such as plans for different scenarios), with x being the shared decision variable
and yi ’s being scenario-specific decision variables. The goal of equation 2 is to find the robust
shared decision x which provides robust performance across all the n considered scenarios, so that
such a robust assignment of decision variables will generalize well on other scenarios. In machine


                                                    1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


learning, robust representation learning is important in object recognition and facial recognition where
we desire robust worst-case performance across different groups of objects or different population
demographics. In RL applications with multiple agents (Busoniu et al., 2006; Li et al., 2019; Gronauer
& Diepold, 2022), our robust formulation in equation 2 would generate a shared model of the world –
the UL variable x – such that the worst-case utility, maxi fi (x, yi⋆ (x)), of the agent-specific optimal
action – the LL variable yi⋆ (x) – is optimized, ensuring robust performance across all agents.
An additional technical advantage of the general multi-objective problem in equation 2 is that it allows
the objective-specific variables yi ∈ Yi to come from different domains, that is, Yi ̸= Yj , i, j ∈ [n];
as stated in equation 2, this implies that the dimensionality dyi for the per-objective yi need not be
the same across all objectives. This allows for a larger class of problems where each objective can
then have different number of objective specific variables but we still require a robust shared variable
x. For example, in multi-agent RL, different agents can have different action spaces because they
need to operate in different mediums (land, water, air, etc).
Focusing on stochastic objectives common in ML, the main contributions of this work are as follows:
▶ (New algorithm design) We present a single loop Multi-Objective Robust Bilevel Two-timescale
  optimization algorithm, MORBiT, which uses (i) SGD for the unconstrained strongly convex LL
  problem, and (ii) projected SGD for the constrained weakly convex UL problem.
▶ (Theoretical convergence guarantees) We demonstrate that, under standard smoothness and
  regularity conditions, MORBiT with n objectives converges to a O(ne 1/2 K −5/2 )-stationary point
  with K iterations, matching the best convergence rate for single-loop single-objective (n = 1)
  BLO algorithms with the constrained UL problem while using vanilla SGD for the LL problem,
  and providing a sublinear n1/2 -dependence on the number of objective pairs n.
▶ (Two sets of applications) We present two applications involving min-max multi-objective bilevel
  problems, robust representation learning and robust hyperparameter optimization (HPO), and
  demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed algorithm MORBiT.
Paper Outline. In the following section 2, we further discuss the different aspects of the problem
in equation 2 and compare that to the problems and solutions considered in existing literature. We
present our novel algorithm, MORBiT, and analyse its convergence properties in section 3, and
empirically evaluate it in section 4. We conclude with future directions in section 5.


2    P ROBLEM AND R ELATED W ORK

We first discuss the different aspects of the robust multi-objective BLO problem with constrained
UL in equation 2. While BLO is used in machine learning (Liu et al., 2021; Chen et al., 2022a),
multi-objective BLO has not received much attention. In multi-task learning (MTL), the optimization
problem is a multi-objective problem in nature, but is usually solvedPby summing the objectives
and using a single-objective solver, that is, optimizing the objective i fi . The robust min-max
extension of MTL (Mehta et al., 2012; Collins et al., 2020) and RL (Li et al., 2019) have been shown
to improve generalization performance, supporting P the need for a more complex multi-objective
optimization problem that replaces the objective i fi with the objective maxi fi .
For SGD-based solutions to stochastic BLO, one critical aspect is whether the algorithm is single-loop
(a single update for both x and y in each iteration) or double-loop (multiple updates for the LL y
between each update of the UL x). Double-loop algorithms can have faster empirical convergence,
but are more computationally intensive, and their performance is extremely sensitive to the step-sizes
and termination criterion for the LL updates. Double-loop algorithms are not applicable when the
(stochastic) gradients of the LL and UL problems are only provided sequentially, such as in logistics,
motion planning and RL problems. Hence, we develop and analyse a single-loop algorithm.
A final aspect of BLO is the constrained UL problem. When the UL variable x corresponds to some
decision variable in a decision optimization problem or a hyperparameter in HPO, we must consider
a constrained form, x ∈ X ⊂ Rdx . To capture a more general form of the bilevel problem, we
focus on the constrained UL setup. In the remainder of this section, we will review existing literature
on single-objective and multi-objective BLO and robust optimization, especially in the context of
machine learning. Table 1 provides a snapshot of the properties of the problems and algorithms (with
rigorous convergence analysis) studied in recent machine learning literature.


                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Table 1: The problem studied here relative to representative related work. If the studied problem is not a
BLO, the notion of single-loop or constrained UL (X ⊂ Rdx ) is not applicable. The 1st row block lists general
problems. The 2nd block lists algorithms with analyses. The final row is MORBiT. †: This problem has been
viewed both as single-level and bilevel. □: The problem can be multi-objective but is treated as single-objective
by summing the objectives. △: In bilevel adversarial learning, the UL is unconstrained but the LL is constrained.
            Problem/Method                     Bilevel   Multi-objective   Min-max   Single-loop   X ⊂ Rdx
            Distributionally Robust Learning     †             ✗             ✓            -          -
            Adversarially Robust Learning        †             ✗             ✓            -          △
            Multi-task Learning (MTL)            †             □             ✗            -          -
            Robust MTL (Mehta et al., 2012)      †             ✓             ✓            -          -
            Meta-learning                        †             □             ✗            -          -
            BSA (Ghadimi & Wang, 2018)           ✓             ✗             ✗           ✗            ✓
            HiBSA (Lu et al., 2020)              ✗             ✗             ✓           ✓            ✓
            GDA (Lin et al., 2020)               ✗             ✗             ✓           ✓            ✗
            TR-MAML (Collins et al., 2020)       ✗             ✓             ✓           ✓            ✓
            TTSA (Hong et al., 2020)             ✓             ✗             ✗           ✓            ✓
            StocBio (Ji et al., 2021)            ✓             ✗             ✗           ✗            ✗
            MRBO (Yang et al., 2021)             ✓             ✗             ✗           ✓            ✗
            VRBO (Yang et al., 2021)             ✓             ✗             ✗           ✗            ✗
            ALSET (Chen et al., 2021)            ✓             ✗             ✗           ✓            ✗
            STABLE (Chen et al., 2022b)          ✓             ✗             ✗           ✓            ✓
            MMB (Hu et al., 2022)                ✓             ✗             ✓           ✓            ✗
            MORBiT (Ours)                        ✓             ✓             ✓           ✓            ✓

Single-Objective BLO. Lately, many new algorithms have been proposed to solve the single-objective
stochastic BLO problem in equation 1. Ghadimi & Wang (2018) proposed the first double-loop BSA
approach. StocBio (Ji et al., 2021) and VRBO (Yang et al., 2021) are double-loop schemes that
improve upon the convergence rate of BSA but do not consider constrained UL problems. TTSA
(Hong et al., 2020) is a single-loop algorithm that handles UL constraints. MRBO (Yang et al., 2021)
and ALSET (Chen et al., 2021) are single-loop algorithms improving TTSA’s convergence rate but
do not consider UL constraints. STABLE (Chen et al., 2022b) improves upon TTSA by leveraging
an additive correction term in the LL update step (beyond a basic SGD step) while still handling UL
constraints. In contrast to the above single-objective bilevel setup, our formulation in equation 2 gives
flexibility for inherently multi-objective problems in a robust manner to obtain stronger guarantees,
ensuring convergence of each individual objective, rather than the average objective.
Multi-Objective BLO. There has been a limited number of works analyzing multi-objective BLO
schemes (Sinha et al., 2015; Deb & Sinha, 2009; Ji et al., 2017). All of these works analyze the
multi-objective BLO problem from a game-theoretic point of view, using a vector-valued objective
with the notion of Pareto optimality. In contrast, we are the first to study the multi-objective BLO
problem from a traditional optimization perspective in terms of convergence properties and consider a
min-max robust version of the multi-objective problem which produces a single solution that ensures
the convergence of each individual objective instead of generating multiple Pareto-optimal solutions
which trade-off the optimality of the different objectives. See further discussion in Appendix D.4.
Min-max Robust Optimization in Machine Learning. Min-max optimization is commonly used
to achieve robustness, such as in distributionally robust learning (DRL) and adversarially robust
learning (ARL). In DRL, Duchi & Namkoong (2018) and Shalev-Shwartz & Wexler (2016) showed
that a min-max loss improves generalization due to variance regularization. HiBSA (Lu et al., 2020)
and GDA (Lin et al., 2020) compute quasi-Nash equilibria with convergence guarantees. Robust
optimization is shown to have strong generalization for new tasks in multi-task learning (Mehta et al.,
2012) and meta-learning (Collins et al., 2020). While the classic MAML (Finn et al., 2017) can be
formulated as a BLO problem (Rajeswaran et al., 2019), the precise problem analysed in Collins
et al. (2020) is a single-level one. In fact, we consider the bilevel form of the TR-MAML problem
as one of our applications for empirical evaluation. In ARL, the minimum is over the loss and the
maximum is over the worst-case perturbation to inputs (Madry et al., 2017; Wang et al., 2019). In
both DRL and ARL, the min-max objective is in the form minx maxy f (x, y) with a single-objective.
In contrast, we study general robust multi-objective BLO where the UL objective is dependent on the
LL solutions, and where the minimization is over the variable x shared across all objectives, and the
maximization is over the multiple objectives, ensuring that each individual objective converges fast.
Closely related and concurrent work. Since our goals align with the properties of TTSA (Hong
et al., 2020) – the single-loop nature and the ability to handle UL constraints – our proposed MORBiT
is inspired by TTSA and can be viewed as a robust multi-objective version. Beyond this advancement,


                                                              3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


our contribution also lies in the convergence analysis of MORBiT, which significantly diverges from
that of TTSA. After our MORBiT was developed and released (Gu et al., 2021), STABLE (Chen
et al., 2022b) was recently presented as an improvement of TTSA, and we wish to explore similar
improvements to MORBiT in future work. A very recent work (Hu et al., 2022) studies a problem that
appears to be quite similar to equation 2, with common elements such as bilevel and min-max, and
proposes a single-loop multi-block min-max bilevel (MMB) algorithm. However, there are significant
differences: (i) Firstly, in their setup, they consider an extension of a min-max single level problem to a
min-max BLO, and min-max is not meant to provide “robustness” among objectives. The applications
in Hu et al. (2022) are restricted to problems such as multi-task AUC maximization instead of the
common bilevel applications of representation learning and HPO. (ii) Also, Hu et al. (2022) do
not consider a constrained UL problem. The problem in equation 2 is not a generalization of their
problem – both our work and theirs are considering different setups with high-level commonalities.
For more details, see Appendix D.2. Table 1 shows how our setup compares to existing literature. To
the best of our knowledge, the precise problem in equation 2 has not been studied in ML literature.

3     A LGORITHM AND A NALYSIS
In this section, we propose a simple single-loop algorithm MORBiT to solve equation 2, and establish
a rigorous convergence rate and sample complexity for this algorithm. For the theoretical results,
we defer the precise assumptions, statements and proofs to Appendix A and present the high-level
theoretical results and critical novel proof steps here. In the sequel, we will always use the subscript
i ∈ [n] to denote the objective index and the superscript (k) to denote the iteration index, with x(k)
                                                                               (k)
denoting the k th iterate of the shared variable x ∈ X ⊆ Rdx and yi denoting the k th iterate of
the ith -objective-specific variable yi ∈ Rdyi . We will also use the shorthand y to denote all the
per-objective variables [y1 , y2 , . . . , yn ], with y (k) denoting the k th iterate of all the per-objective
             (k) (k)          (k)
variables [y1 , y2 , . . . , yn ]. Given our assumption that the LL objectives gi are strongly convex,
we define yi (x) ≜ arg minyi ∈Rdyi gi (x, y), and use the shorthand ℓi (x) ≜ fi (x, yi⋆ (x)).
             ⋆



3.1   MORBiT A LGORITHM

We begin with a standard reformulation of robust min-max problems (Duchi et al., 2008). We can
rewrite the non-smooth min-max problem in equation 2 as
                   X
        min max        λi fi (x, yi⋆ (x)) subject to yi⋆ (x) = arg min gi (x, yi ), ∀i ∈ [n] (3)
        x∈X λ∈∆n
                     i∈[n]                                              yi ∈Rdyi

where ∆n ∈ Rn+ is the n-simplex defined as ∆n := {λ ∈ Rn+ : λi ≥ 0, ∀i ∈ [n], i∈[n] λi =
                                                                                                 P

1}. This problem is equivalent to the min-max problem in equation 2, but allows us to solve the
problem with (projected) gradient based methods. The gradient for yi , i ∈ [n] is the straightforward
∇yi gi (x, yi ) and we denote hi as its stochastic estimate, with h as the shorthand for the per-objective
stochastic gradient estimates [h1 , h2 , . . . , hn ]. The gradient for the x-update is more involved because
of the hierarchical structure of the BLO problem. Then, we consider the following weighted objectives
utilizing the simplex variable λ ∈ ∆n to define the necessary gradients:
                               X                                        X
                    F (x, λ) =            λi ℓi (x), F (x, y, λ) =              λi fi (x, yi ).           (4)
                                   i∈[n]                                i∈[n]

Note that F (x, λ) is the UL objective in equation 3, and the UL gradients can be defined as:
                             X
              ∇x F (x, λ) =           λi ∇ℓi (x), ∇λ F (x, λ) = [ℓ1 (x), · · · , ℓn (x)]⊤ ,               (5)
                                   i∈[n]

where ∇x ℓi (x) for any i ∈ [n] can be defined as follows utilizing the strong convexity of the LL
problem and implicit gradients (Gould et al., 2016):
                                                                                  −1
    ∇ℓi (x) = ∇x fi (x, yi⋆ (x)) − ∇2xyi gi (x, yi⋆ (x)) ∇2yi yi gi (x, yi⋆ (x))     ∇yi fi (x, yi⋆ (x)).

                                                                                                          (6)
Note that in general, yi⋆ (x) cannot be computed exactly. Following Ghadimi & Wang (2018), we
use an approximation of ∇x ℓi (x) as a surrogate, denoted by ∇x fi (x, yi ), by replacing yi⋆ (x) in
equation 6 with any yi ∈ Rdyi as follows:
                                                                                   −1
           ∇x fi (x, yi ) = ∇x fi (x, yi ) − ∇2xyi gi (x, yi ) ∇2yi yi gi (x, yi )

                                                                                      ∇yi fi (x, yi ). (7)


                                                      4
  Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


  Consequently, we define our approximate gradients for the UL variables x (and λ) as:
                      X
     ∇x F (x, y, λ) =         λi ∇x fi (x, yi ), ∇λ F (x, y, λ) = [f1 (x, yi ), · · · , fn (x, yn )]⊤ .      (8)
                             i∈[n]

  We denote the (possibly biased) stochastic estimates of ∇x F (x, y, λ) as hx and ∇λ F (x, y, λ) as hλ .

  Algorithm 1: MORBiT with learning                 Given the gradients and their stochastic estimates, we
  rates α, β and γ for x, y, λ respectively         present our single-loop algorithm MORBiT in algo-
                                                    rithm 1, where we utilize learning rates α, β, γ > 0 for
1 for k = 1, 2, · · · , K do
        (k+1)         (k)        (k)
                                                    the UL variable x, LL variables yi , i ∈ [n] and the sim-
2     y        ← y − βh                             plex variable λ respectively. The algorithm tracks three
                                          (k)
3     x(k+1) ← projX (x(k) − αhx )                                                     (k) (k)           (k)
                                                    sets of variables x(k) , y (k) = [y1 , y2 , . . . , yn ] and
        (k+1)                   (k)         (k)
4     λ        ← proj∆n (λ + γhλ )                  λ(k) through a total of K iterations. The per-iterate
5 end
                                                    gradient estimates h(k) of the LL variables y is defined
6 Sample τ ∼ U ({1, · · · , K})
                  (τ )          (τ −1)              as the collection of the per-objective gradient estimate
7 return x̄ ← x        , ȳi ← yi      , λ̄ ← λ(τ )   (k)                        (k)
                                                    hi evaluated at (x(k) , yi ) for all i ∈ [n]. The gra-
                          (k)        (k)
  dient estimates hx and hλ of the UL variables x and λ are evaluated at (x(k) , y (k+1) , λ(k) ). We
                                                                                                              (k)
  perform a standard gradient descent update for the objective specific variables yi , i ∈ [n] from yi
       (k+1)
  to yi      . For the shared UL variable x, we perform a projected gradient descent to satisfy the
  UL constraints, where projX (·) denotes the projection operation onto the constrained set X . We
  update the simplex variable λ via projected gradient ascent, where we project the variable back
  onto the n-simplex after a gradient ascent step with proj∆n (·). Given the learning rates (α, β, γ),
  MORBiT is quite straightforward in terms of implementation. When n = 1, the problem reduces to
  single-objective BLO, λ(k) = 1, and MORBiT reduces to TTSA (Hong et al., 2020).

  3.2   A NALYSIS

  Given the single-loop MORBiT, we establish conditions under which MORBiT has finite-horizon
  convergence. The coupling of the stochastic errors due to the sampling process makes the convergence
  analysis of this three-sequence-based algorithm much more challenging than existing BLO algorithms.
  Assumptions. We summarize the following typical assumptions (detailed in Appendix A.1) for
  all objective pairs (fi , gi ), i ∈ [n]. Focusing on the smoothness and regularity properties of the
  objectives, we assume that (i) the LL objective gi is strongly convex in yi , twice-differentiable, and
  has sufficiently smooth first and second order gradients (Assumption 2 in Appendix A.1), (ii) the UL
  objective fi has sufficiently smooth first order gradients, and (iii) the function ℓi (x) ≜ fi (x, yi⋆ (x))
  is weakly convex, bounded and has bounded first-order gradients (Assumption 1 in Appendix A.1,
                                                                                    (k)            (k)
  also see Appendix D.1). Regarding the quality of the gradient estimates hi , i ∈ [n], hx and
    (k)                                       (k)                                                         (k)
  hλ , we assume that, for all k > 0, (i) hi is an unbiased estimate with bounded variance, (ii) hλ
                                          (k)
  is an unbiased estimate, and (iii) hx has bounded variance, and can be a biased estimate of the
           (k)  (k+1)    (k)
  ∇x F (x , y         , λ ) term defined in equation 8, but the bias norm at iteration k is bounded
  by bk ≥ 0, with {bk , k ≥ 0} forming a non-increasing sequence. These gradient estimate quality
                                                                                                    (k)
  assumptions are detailed in Assumption 3 in Appendix A.1. While the assumptions on hi and
    (k)                                                                         (k)
  hλ are standard (Hong et al., 2020; Lu et al., 2022), the assumption on hx actually can be easily
  satisfied when a Hessian inverse approximation (HIA) based mini-batch sampling strategy is adopted,
  which can also avoid the matrix inversion by leveraging the Neumann series (Agarwal et al., 2017;
  Ghadimi & Wang, 2018; Hong et al., 2020).
  Optimality and Stationarity of Solutions. To quantify the convergence properties of the solutions
  x̄, ȳi , i ∈ [n], λ̄ generated by MORBiT, we use the following optimality properties of the optimal
  solutions x⋆ , yi⋆ , i ∈ [n], λ⋆ of the problem in equation 3. (i) The per-objective optimal LL variable
  yi⋆ = yi⋆ (x⋆ ) = arg minyi ∈Rdyi gi (x⋆ , yi ); (ii) The optimal simplex variable λ⋆ : F (x⋆ , λ⋆ ) =
  maxλ∈∆n F (x⋆ , λ). Given the constrained UL, the first-order stationarity condition is satisfied if
  ⟨∇x F (x⋆ , λ⋆ ), x − x⋆ ⟩ ≥ 0∀x ∈ X . (iii) For establishing near-stationarity of UL variable x, the
  proximal map x̂(z) ∈ X , defined below,
                                        ρ
                        x̂(z) ≜ arg min ∥x − z∥2 + F (x, λ), ρ > 0 is a fixed constant.                (9)
                                  x∈X   2

                                                        5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


is employed (Davis & Drusvyatskiy, 2018; Hong et al., 2020) to quantify the convergence for a
constrained variable x in the stochastic setting. If ∥x̂(x(k) )−x(k) ∥2 is small, then, near-stationarity of
x(k) is achieved at iteration k. Therefore, we need to bound ∥x̂(x̄) − x̄∥ to guarantee the convergence
of the UL solution x̄ returned by MORBiT. Given the convergence of the UL x̄, we also need to bound
∥ȳi −yi⋆ (x̄)∥2 for each i ∈ [n] simultaneously to quantify the convergence of the LL variables. Finally,
the convergence of λ̄ requires us to bound the difference between F (x̄, λ̄) and maxλ∈∆n F (x̄, λ).
Theoretical Convergence Rate. Now, we are ready to state our main theoretical result: a rigorous
convergence rate for the solution returned by MORBiT (algorithm 1). We state an abbreviated version
of the result, deferring details to Theorem 2 in Appendix A.2:
Theorem 1 (MORBiT convergence). Suppose that the previously stated assumptions holds and
learning rates are set as α = O(K −3/5 ), β = O(K −2/5 ) and γ = O(n−1/2 K −3/5 ). Then, if b2k ≤ α,
the solutions x̄, ȳi , i ∈ [n], λ̄ generated by algorithm 1 satisfy:
                                                                      √
                                                                   e nK −2/5 ),
                                              E[∥x̂(x̄) − x̄∥2 ] ≤ O(                          (10a)
                                                                      √

                                      E max ∥ȳi − yi⋆ (x̄)∥2 ≤ O( e nK −2/5 ),                (10b)
                                     i∈[n]
                                                                 √
                                                              e nK −2/5 ),
                           max E[F (x̄, λ)] − E[F (x̄, λ̄)] ≤ O(                                     (10c)
                             λ

with expectation over the stochastic gradient estimates and the random index τ (algorithm 1, line 6).

                            e 1/2 K −2/5 )-stationarity achieved by K iterations of MORBiT for both
This result establishes the O(n
the UL and LL variables if all the assumptions are satisfied and the learning rates are selected
appropriately. Note that, if the UL problem is unconstrained, that is x ∈ X = Rdx , the definition
of the proximal map (equation 9) implies that E∥∇x F (x̄, λ̄)∥ ≤ O(n       e 1/2 K −2/5 ), providing the
                            1/    − 2/
convergence of x̄ to a O(n
                        e     2
                                K     5
                                        )-stationary point if the UL problem is unconstrained.
Comparison with Related Work. We would like to further highlight the differences between the
convergence results of TTSA and MORBiT to highlight the major novelties in our analyses and
theorem proving techniques. First, we consider a more general proximal map in equation 9 involving
a weighted sum of weakly convex functions ℓi instead of a single weakly convex function in TTSA,
requiring new construction of potential functions for establishing the convergence of the UL variable
x̄ in equation 10a. Secondly, even though TTSA provides a convergence rate for a single LL variable
(equivalent to bounding E[∥ȳi − yi⋆ (x̄)∥2 ] for a single i ∈ [n]), we provide a much stronger result for
multiple LL optimization objectives, in the sense that simultaneously establishing convergence for all
LL variables in equation 10b through measuring the convergence rate of E[maxi∈[n] ∥ȳi − yi⋆ (x̄)∥2 ].
This is especially challenging since a bounded E[∥ȳi − yi⋆ (x̄)∥] for each i ∈ [n] does not directly
imply a bounded E[maxi∈[n] ∥ȳi − yi⋆ (x̄)∥2 ]; in fact this can be generally unbounded. Finally, to
satisfy the requirements of the min-max problem in equation 3, we have to additionally establish
convergence for the simplex solution λ̄ in equation 10c while TTSA does not have any such analysis.
Given the convergence rate, another related quantity of interest is the sample complexity which
pertains to the number of queries to the stochastic gradient oracle required to achieve a desired level
of stationarity. For example, for an iterative algorithm that converges to a O(K −µ )-stationary point
with K iterations for some µ > 0, requiring O(1) queries to the stochastic gradient oracle in each
iteration, the sample complexity to find an ϵ-optimal solution is O(ϵ−1/µ ). The number of stochastic
gradient oracle queries required is directly related to the conditions in the gradient estimate quality
assumptions (Assumption 3 in Appendix A.1 in our case). While the conditions on the per-iterate
                       (k)                                            (k)
gradient estimates hi (for the per-objective LL variables) and hλ (for the simplex variable λ)
both only require O(1) stochastic gradient oracle queries from each of the n objective pairs in each
iteration, the condition b2k ≤ α on the non-increasing squared norm of the per-iterate bias of the
                     (k)
gradient estimate hx (for the UL variable) require O(log K) stochastic gradient oracle queries for
each of the n objective pairs leveraging the HIA sampling techniques in Ghadimi & Wang (2018)
and Hong et al. (2020) using the Neumann series (Agarwal et al., 2017). This gives us the following
sample complexity bound for MORBiT (see Appendix D.3 on potential improvements):
Corollary 1. Under the conditions of Theorem 1, MORBiT converges to ϵ-(near)-stationarity with
O(n5/4 ϵ−5/2 log(1/ϵ)) queries to the stochastic gradient oracle for each of the n objective pairs.


                                                     6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Proof Sketch of Theorem 1. We now give a proof sketch of our main theorem, with constant terms
abstracted away with O notation. In order to show equation 10a of Theorem 1 (convergence of x), we
will derive a descent lemma comparing successive iterates x(k) and x(k+1) . Descent lemmas often
                                                                                   (k)
contain a quadratic term ∥x(k+1) − x(k) ∥2 , so it is natural that we must bound ∥hx ∥2 . In Lemma 1,
we bound the expected squared norm of the stochastic gradient estimate:
                                                                                                    !
                                                       (k) 2           P (k) ⋆ (k)          (k+1) 2
Lemma 1. Under our regularity assumptions, E[∥hx ∥ ] ≤ O                  λi ∥yi (x ) − yi       ∥ .
                                                                       i∈[n]

                                                                          (k)
Turning to equation 10b of Theorem 1, we use a descent relation on yi − yi⋆ (x(k−1) ). While ideally
                                                       (k)
we would obtain a descent relation purely involving yi terms themselves, the intricate coupling of
the x and yi terms result in an extra x(k−1) − x(k) term. The resulting relation is shown in Lemma 2.
                               µ β
Here, we have that c1 = 1 − g2 , c2 = µg2β − 1, where µg β < 1.

                 (k+1)                                    (k)
Lemma 2. E[∥yi         −yi⋆ (x(k) )∥2 ] ≤ O (1 − c1 )E[∥yi − yi⋆ (x(k−1) )∥2 ] + c2 E[∥x(k−1) − x(k) ∥2 ] .

                                                      (k)
From this lemma, intuitively, we know that E[∥yi − yi⋆ (x(k−1) )∥2 ] is decreasing as k increases,
as long as the E[∥x(k−1) − x(k) ∥2 ]’s are not too large. Therefore, it is important to have another
descent relation that upper bounds this quantity, which we do next in Lemma 3. The lemma naturally
                                                                                     1      L
involves the objective F (x(k) , λ(k) ), which will telescope. Here, we have c3 = 4α    − 2f , c4 = 4αL2 .
As k → ∞, α → 0, and c3 is positive.
                                                          (k)
Lemma 3. Let L(k) ≜ E[F (x(k) , λ(k) )] = i∈[n] λi E[ℓi (x(k) )]. Then, the L(k) satisfies:
                                               P

                                                                                              √

                                                                    (k+1)
 L(k+1) − L(k) ≤ O −c3 E[∥x(k+1) − x(k) ∥2 ] + c4 max E[∥yi               − yi⋆ (x(k) )∥2 ] + nγ + α .
                                                            i∈[n]


Following the intuition previously described, we then use Lemmas 2 and 3 to show that the
                                                           (k)
E[∥x(k−1) − x(k) ∥2 ] terms are small enough and that the yi iterates converge in Lemma 4.
             PK                (k)                        √
           1
                                   − yi⋆ (x(k−1) )∥2 ≤ O( nK −2/5 ).

Lemma 4. K      k=1 max E ∥yi
                       i∈[n]

Finally, we can use the convergence of yi to prove convergence of λ and x. Theorem 1 then follows.
A more detailed proof plan can be found in Appendix A.3.

4    E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS
In this section, we consider two applications where the min-max multi-objective bilevel formulation in
equation 2 enhances robustness – multi-task representation learning and hyperparameter optimization.
We will highlight the advantage of the min-max formulation and the convergence of MORBiT on these
applications. We use PyTorch (Paszke et al., 2019), and implementation details are in Appendix C.
All results are aggregated over 10 trials.
Representation Learning. In this setup, each objective pair corresponds to a learning “task” i ∈ [n],
with its own training and validation dataset pair Dit , Div . We consider a shared representation network
ϕx with ReLU nonlinearity (making the UL problem weakly convex) parameterized with x ∈ Rdx
and a per-task linear model wyi parameterized with yi ∈ Rdyi . Here the UL is unconstrained. Using
L(f, D) to denote the loss of a model f on data D, we consider the problem in equation 2 with
             fi (x, yi ) ≜ L(wyi ◦ ϕx , Div ),   gi (x, yi ) ≜ L(wyi ◦ ϕx , Dit ) + ρ∥wyi ∥22 ,      (11)
with ρ > 0 as a regularization penalty (ensuring that the LL problem is strongly convex). We
first consider a multi-task setup with n = 10 binary classification tasks from the FashionMNIST
dataset (Xiao et al., 2017). The goal is to learn a shared representation and per-task models so that each
of the
    P tasks generalizes well. Usually, this problem is solved as a single-objective BLO by minimizing
1/n
       i fi ; we call this min-avg. We theoretically show that solving the min-max multi-objective
BLO in equation 2 provides a tighter generalization guarantee (Proposition 2, Appendix B).


                                                     7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


(a) Quality of min-avg vs min-max.      (b) Convergence of ∥∇x ∥2 .      (c) Task-gen. of min-avg vs min-max.
                     Figure 1: Numerical results for representation learning application.

Here we demonstrate the same in figure 1a – we plot the worst-case UL objective (the validation
loss) and the worst-case generalization loss across all tasks/objectives throughout the optimization
trajectory, comparing the behaviour of the solution of min-avg problem to that of the min-max
problem. The results indicate solving the min-max problem significantly reduces the worst-case
validation loss and this also results in a significant reduction of the worst-case generalization loss,
highlighting the utility of solving the min-max multi-objective bilevel problem in equation 2.
We study the convergence of the UL variable for the min-max problem in the form of the trajectory of
                                                                                    e −2/5 ) rate. We
the (stochastic) gradient norm ∥∇x ∥2 in figure 1b, comparing it to the theoretical O(K
see that the empirical trajectory of the gradient norm closely tracks the theoretical rate.
We also consider a bilevel extension of the robust meta-learning application (Collins et al., 2020) for
a sinusoid regression task, a common meta-learning application introduced by Finn et al. (2017)1 .
Here the goal of solving the problem in equation 2 with the objectives defined in equation 11 would
be to learn a robust representation network such that we not only improve generalization on tasks
seen during the optimization but also improve generalization for related unseen tasks.
We theoretically show that that solving the min-max multi-objective bilevel problem in equation 2
also provides a tighter generalization guarantee for the unseen tasks (Proposition 3, Appendix B).
Note that these results are similar in spirit to those of Mehta et al. (2012) and Collins et al. (2020), but
our results are the first for a general bilevel setup. The results in figure 1c support this, showing that
solving the min-max problem not only improves the generalization on seen tasks, but significantly
improves the generalization on unseen tasks when compared to solving the min-avg problem. These
results are also consistent with the results for robust MTL in figure 1a.
Hyperparameter Optimization. In this setup, each objective pair again corresponds to a learning
“task” i ∈ [n], each with its own d dimensional training/validation dataset pair Dit , Div . We consider
a shared hyperparameter optimization problem for kernel logistic regression (Zhu & Hastie, 2001)
with K random Fourier features (RFFs) (Rahimi & Recht, 2007), where x = {xρ ∈ R2K                    d
                                                                                         + , xσ ∈ R+ }
are the regularization penalty and the bandwidth hyperparameters respectively, with ϕxσ denoting the
RFF2 . The per-task linear model wyi on top of the RFFs are parameterized with yi ∈ R2K . In this
setup, we have a weakly convex constrained UL problem (the hyperparameters need to be positive),
and an unconstrained strongly convex LL problem. Again using L(f, D) to denote the learning loss
of a model f on a dataset D, we consider the problem in equation 2 with

          fi (x, yi ) ≜ L(wyi ◦ ϕxσ , Div ),    gi (x, yi ) ≜ L(wyi ◦ ϕxσ , Dit ) + ∥xρ ⊙ wyi ∥22 ,        (12)
where ⊙ denotes the elementwise vector multiplication, and we consider a weighted regression
penalty3 . We generate n = 16 binary classification tasks from the Letter dataset (Frey & Slate, 1991)
and compare the generalization of the min-max solution of equation 2 to that of the min-avg.
The results in figure 2a indicate that the solution of equation 2 provides a robust solution x (hyper-
parameters), significantly improving not only the worst-case validation loss but also the worst-case
generalization loss for the supervised learning problems. This result highlights the advantage of
   1
      We use the formulation of Raghu et al. (2020) to separate the representation and the model parameters.
   2
      For a d-dimension point p, the RFF ϕxσ (p) = [sin(W (xσ ⊙ p))⊤ , cos(W (xσ ⊙ p))⊤ ]⊤ ∈ R2K , where
W ∈ RK×d is a random normal matrix and the sin(·) and cos(·) are applied elementwise.
    3
      The weighted regression penalty mitigates bias especially in the high-dimensional learning setting (Candes
et al., 2008; Gasso et al., 2009; Šehić et al., 2022), which is common when using RFFs.


                                                       8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


 (a) Quality of min-avg vs min-max. (b) Effect of n on convergence.           (c) Effect of batch size.
                   Figure 2: Numerical results for hyperparameter optimization application.
solving the min-max problem in equation 2 and the ability of the single-loop MORBiT to handle a
weakly convex constrained UL problem.
We study the effect of the number of objective pairs n on the convergence. We consider n ∈
{4, 16, 64}, increasing n with a factor of 4 (implying
                                                   √ a theoretical convergence slow down by a factor
of 2) to check how the convergence matches the n-dependence in our theoretical result.
In this case, we consider the trajectory of the (stochastic) gradient norm ∥∇x ∥2 (as in figure 1b). The
results in figure 2b display such a behaviour – for a fixed K (outer iterations), as the number of tasks
is increased 4-fold, the gradient norm approximately increases 2-fold (note the log2 -scale on the
vertical axis). This validates our theoretical dependence on the number of objective pairs n.
We also study the effect of the batch size on the generalization performance of the min-max solution.
In the previous experiments, we considered a batch size of 8 for both the UL and LL stochastic
gradients. Here, we will consider batch sizes from {8, 32, 128}, using the same batch size for
gradients of both levels and variables.
Note that, in this problem, each of the 16 learning tasks (and hence, objective pairs) has a training
set size of around 900 samples (for the LL loss), with 300 samples each for the UL loss and for
computing the generalization loss. Unlike figures 1a and 2a, we only show the generalization loss
(dropping the validation loss) in figure 2c. The results indicate that increasing the batch size improves
the stability and reduces the variance of the overall generalization. However, the convergence follows
a similar trend for all batch sizes, and converges to a very similar level of generalization, supporting
the O(1)
     e     batch size requirement for convergence.
    Empirical conclusion

    The empirical evaluations highlight that considering the more robust min-max problem in
    equation 2 does provide improved generalization in multiple applications (representation
    learning for MTL and meta-learning, and for hyperparameter optimization).

    The results also highlight the validity of our theoretical convergence analysis both in terms
    of the number of iterations K and the number of objective pairs n.


5    C ONCLUDING R EMARKS
Motivated by the desiderata of robustness in bilevel learning applications, we study a new min-
max multi-objective BLO framework (equation 2) that provides full flexibility and generality. We
propose MORBiT (algorithm 1), a single-loop gradient descent-ascent based algorithm for finding
an solution to our proposed min-max multi-objective framework. We establish its convergence rate
(Theorem 1) and sample complexity (Corollary 1), demonstrating both the advantage of the min-max
multi-objective BLO framework and the validity of our theoretical analyses on robust representation
learning and hyperparameter optimization applications. We wish to explore further applications
where robustness would be beneficial such as in RL, federated learning and domain generalization.
On the theoretical side, we wish to develop single-loop algorithms with improved convergence
rates (for example, exploring techniques in Chen et al. (2022b)) and double-loop algorithms with
convergence guarantees for applications where a single-loop algorithm is not feasible (e.g., federated
learning). Finally, we also wish to develop algorithms for large n (the number of objective pairs) or
even n → ∞ where MORBiT is not computationally feasible.


                                                      9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT
The formal definitions, assumptions, precise theorem statments, high level proof outline and detailed
proofs for our main theoretical results are presented in Appendix A. We provide appropriate citations
for the datasets used in our experiments and the experimental setup and details are presented in Ap-
pendix C. Our implementation is available at https://github.com/minimario/MORBiT.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
A.G. is supported by the National Science Foundation (NSF) Graduate Research Fellowship under
Grant No. 2141064, and T.-W. Weng is supported by NSF under Grant No. 2107189. We would like
to thank the MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab (https://mitibmwatsonailab.mit.edu/) and the
MIT-UROP program (https://urop.mit.edu/) for their support. We would also like to thank
the organizers of the “Beyond First-order Methods in ML Systems” workshop at ICML’21 and the
“Bilevel Stochastic Methods for Optimization and Learning” session at INFORMS’22 for giving us
the opportunity to present various iterations of our work (Gu et al., 2021; 2022). Finally, we would
like to thank Soumyadip Ghosh and Mark Squillante for some insightful discussions.

R EFERENCES
Naman Agarwal, Brian Bullins, and Elad Hazan. Second-order stochastic optimization for machine
  learning in linear time. The Journal of Machine Learning Research, 18(1):4148–4187, 2017. 5, 6,
 16, 32
Sanjeev Arora, Simon Du, Sham Kakade, Yuping Luo, and Nikunj Saunshi. Provable representation
  learning for imitation learning via bi-level optimization. In Proceedings of International Conference
  on Machine Learning (ICML), pp. 367–376. PMLR, 2020. 1
Jonathan F Bard. Practical bilevel optimization: algorithms and applications, volume 30. Springer
  Science & Business Media, 2013. 1
Lucian Busoniu, Robert Babuska, and Bart De Schutter. Multi-agent reinforcement learning: A
  survey. In Proceedings of the 9th International Conference on Control, Automation, Robotics and
  Vision, pp. 1–6. IEEE, 2006. 2
Emmanuel J Candes, Michael B Wakin, and Stephen P Boyd. Enhancing sparsity by reweighted ℓ1
 minimization. Journal of Fourier Analysis and Applications, 14(5):877–905, 2008. 8
Can Chen, Xi Chen, Chen Ma, Zixuan Liu, and Xue Liu. Gradient-based bi-level optimization for
  deep learning: A survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.11719, 2022a. 1, 2
Tianyi Chen, Yuejiao Sun, and Wotao Yin. Closing the gap: Tighter analysis of alternating stochastic
  gradient methods for bilevel problems. Proceedings of Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems (NeurIPS), 34:25294–25307, 2021. 3
Tianyi Chen, Yuejiao Sun, Quan Xiao, and Wotao Yin. A single-timescale method for stochastic
  bilevel optimization. In Proceedings of International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and
  Statistics (AISTATS), pp. 2466–2488. PMLR, 2022b. 3, 4, 9, 35
Liam Collins, Aryan Mokhtari, and Sanjay Shakkottai. Task-robust model-agnostic meta-learning.
  Proceedings of Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 33, 2020. 2, 3, 8,
  16, 30, 32, 36
Damek Davis and Dmitriy Drusvyatskiy. Stochastic subgradient method converges at the rate
  O(k −1/4 ) on weakly convex functions. arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.02988, 2018. 6
Kalyanmoy Deb and Ankur Sinha. Solving bilevel multi-objective optimization problems using
  evolutionary algorithms. In Proceedings of International Conference on Evolutionary Multi-
  Criterion Optimization, pp. 110–124. Springer, 2009. 3
Stephan Dempe. Foundations of Bilevel Programming. Springer Science & Business Media, 2002. 1


                                                  10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


John Duchi and Hongseok Namkoong. Learning models with uniform performance via distributionally
  robust optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.08750, 2018. 3
John Duchi, Shai Shalev-Shwartz, Yoram Singer, and Tushar Chandra. Efficient projections onto the
  ℓ1 -ball for learning in high dimensions. In Proceedings of the 25th International Conference on
  Machine Learning, pp. 272–279, 2008. 4
Heshan Devaka Fernando, Han Shen, Miao Liu, Subhajit Chaudhury, Keerthiram Murugesan, and
  Tianyi Chen. Mitigating gradient bias in multi-objective learning: A provably convergent approach.
  In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023. URL https://openreview.
  net/forum?id=dLAYGdKTi2. 36
Chelsea Finn, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. Model-agnostic meta-learning for fast adaptation of
  deep networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1703.03400, 2017. 3, 8, 32
Luca Franceschi, Paolo Frasconi, Saverio Salzo, Riccardo Grazzi, and Massimiliano Pontil. Bilevel
  programming for hyperparameter optimization and meta-learning. In Proceedings of International
  Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 1568–1577. PMLR, 2018. 1, 36
Peter W Frey and David J Slate. Letter recognition using holland-style adaptive classifiers. Machine
  Learning, 6(2):161–182, 1991. 8
Gilles Gasso, Alain Rakotomamonjy, and Stéphane Canu. Recovering sparse signals with a certain
  family of nonconvex penalties and dc programming. IEEE Transactions on Signal Processing, 57
  (12):4686–4698, 2009. 8
Saeed Ghadimi and Mengdi Wang. Approximation methods for bilevel programming. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1802.02246, 2018. 3, 4, 5, 6, 14, 16, 32
Stephen Gould, Basura Fernando, Anoop Cherian, Peter Anderson, Rodrigo Santa Cruz, and Edison
  Guo. On differentiating parameterized argmin and argmax problems with application to bi-level
  optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:1607.05447, 2016. URL https://arxiv.org/pdf/
  1607.05447.pdf. 4
Sven Gronauer and Klaus Diepold. Multi-agent deep reinforcement learning: a survey. Artificial
  Intelligence Review, 55(2):895–943, 2022. 2
Alex Gu, Songtao Lu, Parikshit Ram, and Lily Weng. Nonconvex min-max bilevel optimization for
  task robust meta learning. In Beyond First-order Methods in ML Systems workshop at ICML’21,
  2021. 4, 10
Alex Gu, Songtao Lu, Parikshit Ram, and Lily Weng. Robust multi-objective bilevel optimization
  with applications in machine learning. In INFORMS Annual Meeting, 2022. 10
Mingyi Hong, Hoi-To Wai, Zhaoran Wang, and Zhuoran Yang. A two-timescale framework for bilevel
 optimization: Complexity analysis and application to actor-critic. arXiv preprint arXiv:2007.05170,
 2020. URL https://arxiv.org/pdf/2007.05170.pdf. 1, 3, 5, 6, 14, 15, 16, 32, 35
Quanqi Hu, Yongjian Zhong, and Tianbao Yang. Multi-block min-max bilevel optimization with
  applications in multi-task deep auc maximization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.00260, 2022. 3, 4, 35
Kaiyi Ji, Junjie Yang, and Yingbin Liang. Provably faster algorithms for bilevel optimization and
  applications to meta-learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.07962, 2020. 33
Kaiyi Ji, Junjie Yang, and Yingbin Liang. Bilevel optimization: Convergence analysis and enhanced
  design. In Proceedings of International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), pp. 4882–4892.
  PMLR, 2021. 3, 32
Ying Ji, Shaojian Qu, and Zhensheng Yu. A new method for solving multiobjective bilevel programs.
  Discrete Dynamics in Nature and Society, 2017, 2017. 3
Shihui Li, Yi Wu, Xinyue Cui, Honghua Dong, Fei Fang, and Stuart Russell. Robust multi-agent
  reinforcement learning via minimax deep deterministic policy gradient. In Proceedings of the
  AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 33, pp. 4213–4220, 2019. URL https:
  //ojs.aaai.org/index.php/AAAI/article/view/4327/4205. 2


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Tianyi Lin, Chi Jin, and Michael Jordan. On gradient descent ascent for nonconvex-concave minimax
  problems. In Proceedings of International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), pp. 6083–
  6093. PMLR, 2020. 3
Risheng Liu, Jiaxin Gao, Jin Zhang, Deyu Meng, and Zhouchen Lin. Investigating bi-level opti-
  mization for learning and vision from a unified perspective: A survey and beyond. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2101.11517, 2021. 1, 2
Songtao Lu, Ioannis Tsaknakis, Mingyi Hong, and Yongxin Chen. Hybrid block successive ap-
  proximation for one-sided non-convex min-max problems: algorithms and applications. IEEE
  Transactions on Signal Processing, 68:3676–3691, 2020. 3
Yucheng Lu, Si Yi Meng, and Christopher De Sa. A general analysis of example-selection for stochas-
  tic gradient descent. In Proceedings of International Conference on Learning Representations
  (ICLR), 2022. 5, 15
Aleksander Madry, Aleksandar Makelov, Ludwig Schmidt, Dimitris Tsipras, and Adrian Vladu.
  Towards deep learning models resistant to adversarial attacks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1706.06083,
  2017. 3
Nishant A. Mehta, Dongryeol Lee, and Alexander G. Gray. Minimax multi-task learning and
  a generalized loss-compositional paradigm for mtl. In Proceedings of the 25th International
  Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, pp. 2150–2158, 2012. 2, 3, 8, 36
Mehryar Mohri, Afshin Rostamizadeh, and Ameet Talwalkar. Foundations of Machine Learning.
 MIT press, 2018. 31
Adam Paszke, Sam Gross, Francisco Massa, Adam Lerer, James Bradbury, Gregory Chanan,
 Trevor Killeen, Zeming Lin, Natalia Gimelshein, Luca Antiga, Alban Desmaison, Andreas
  Kopf, Edward Yang, Zachary DeVito, Martin Raison, Alykhan Tejani, Sasank Chilamkurthy,
  Benoit Steiner, Lu Fang, Junjie Bai, and Soumith Chintala. Pytorch: An imperative style, high-
  performance deep learning library. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 32, pp.
  8024–8035. Curran Associates, Inc., 2019. URL http://papers.neurips.cc/paper/
  9015-pytorch-an-imperative-style-high-performance-deep-learning-library.
  pdf. 7
Aniruddh Raghu, Maithra Raghu, Samy Bengio, and Oriol Vinyals. Rapid learning or feature reuse?
  towards understanding the effectiveness of MAML. In Proceedings of International Conference
  on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2020. 8
Ali Rahimi and Benjamin Recht. Random features for large-scale kernel machines. In Proceedings
  of the 20th International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, pp. 1177–1184,
  2007. 8
Aravind Rajeswaran, Chelsea Finn, Sham M Kakade, and Sergey Levine. Meta-learning with implicit
  gradients. In Proceedings of Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), pp.
  113–124, 2019. 3
Kenan Šehić, Alexandre Gramfort, Joseph Salmon, and Luigi Nardi. Lassobench: A high-dimensional
  hyperparameter optimization benchmark suite for lasso. In Proceedings of the First Conference on
  Automated Machine Learning (Main Track), 2022. 8
Shai Shalev-Shwartz and Shai Ben-David. Understanding machine learning: From theory to
  algorithms. Cambridge university press, 2014. 31
Shai Shalev-Shwartz and Yonatan Wexler. Minimizing the maximal loss: How and why. In
  Proceedings of International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), pp. 793–801. PMLR, 2016.
  3
Ankur Sinha, Pekka Malo, and Kalyanmoy Deb. Towards understanding bilevel multi-objective
  optimization with deterministic lower level decisions. In International Conference on Evolutionary
 Multi-Criterion Optimization, pp. 426–443. Springer, 2015. 3


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Jingkang Wang, Tianyun Zhang, Sijia Liu, Pin-Yu Chen, Jiacen Xu, Makan Fardad, and Bo Li.
   Towards a unified min-max framework for adversarial exploration and robustness. arXiv preprint
   arXiv:1906.03563, 2019. 3
Nic Wilson, Abdul Razak, and Radu Marinescu. Computing possibly optimal solutions for multi-
  objective constraint optimisation with tradeoffs. AAAI Press/International Joint Conferences on
  Artificial Intelligence, 2015. 36
Han Xiao, Kashif Rasul, and Roland Vollgraf. Fashion-mnist: a novel image dataset for benchmarking
  machine learning algorithms. ArXiV, 2017. 7
Haibo Yang, Minghong Fang, and Jia Liu. Achieving linear speedup with partial worker participation
  in non-iid federated learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2101.11203, 2021. 3
Runzhe Yang, Xingyuan Sun, and Karthik Narasimhan. A generalized algorithm for multi-objective
  reinforcement learning and policy adaptation. Advances in neural information processing systems,
  32, 2019. 36
Yihua Zhang, Yuguang Yao, Parikshit Ram, Pu Zhao, Tianlong Chen, Mingyi Hong, Yanzhi Wang,
  and Sijia Liu. Advancing model pruning via bi-level optimization. In Annual Conference on
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 2022. 1
Yihua Zhang, Pranay Sharma, Parikshit Ram, Mingyi Hong, Kush R. Varshney, and Sijia Liu.
  What is missing in IRM training and evaluation? challenges and solutions. In International
  Conference on Learning Representations, 2023. URL https://openreview.net/forum?
  id=MjsDeTcDEy. 1
Pu Zhao, Parikshit Ram, Songtao Lu, Yuguang Yao, Djallel Bouneffouf, Xue Lin, and Sijia Liu.
  Learning to generate image source-agnostic universal adversarial perturbations. In International
  Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 2022. 1
Ji Zhu and Trevor Hastie. Kernel logistic regression and the import vector machine. Proceedings of
   Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 14, 2001. 8


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A     C ONVERGENCE A NALYSIS OF MORBiT
A.1    A SSUMPTIONS

First, we begin by listing the assumptions we make:
Assumption 1 (Regularity of the outer functions). For all i ∈ [n], assume that outer functions
fi (x, y) and ℓi (x) = fi (x, yi⋆ (x)) satisfy the following properties:
▶ For any x ∈ X , fi (x, ·) is Lipschitz (w.r.t. y) with constant Gf > 0.
▶ For any x ∈ X , ∇x fi (x, ·) and ∇yi fi (x, ·) are Lipschitz continuous (w.r.t. yi ) with constants
  Lfx > 0 and Lfy > 0.
▶ For any yi ∈ Rdyi , ∇yi fi (·, yi ) is Lipschitz continuous (w.r.t. x) with constant L̄fy > 0.
▶ For any x ∈ X , yi ∈ Rdyi , we have ∥∇yi fi (x, yi )∥ ≤ Cf y for Cf y > 0.
▶ The function ℓi (·) is µℓ weakly convex (in x), so that for all v, w ∈ X ,
                             ℓi (w) ≥ ℓi (v) + ⟨∇ℓi (v), w − v⟩ − µℓ ∥w − v∥2 .                           (13)

▶ For all x ∈ X , ∥ℓi (x)∥ ≤ Bℓ for Bℓ > 0.
▶ For all x ∈ X , ∥∇ℓi (x)∥ ≤ Cℓ , for Cℓ > 0.
Assumption 2 (Regularity of the inner functions). Assume that inner functions gi (x, yi ), ∀i ∈ [n]
satisfy:
▶ For any x ∈ X and yi ∈ Rdyi , gi (x, yi ) is twice continuously differentiable in (x, yi ).
▶ For any x ∈ X , ∇yi gi (x, ·) is Lipschitz continuous (w.r.t. yi ) with constant Lg .
▶ For any x ∈ X , gi (x, ·) is µg -strongly convex in yi , so that for all v, w ∈ Rdyi ,
                        gi (x, w) ≥ gi (x, v) + ⟨∇v gi (x, v), w − v⟩ + µg ∥w − v∥2 .                     (14)

▶ For any x ∈ X , ∇2xyi gi (x, ·) and ∇2yi gi (x, ·) are Lipschitz continuous (w.r.t. yi ) with constants
  Lgxy > 0 and Lgyy > 0, respectively.
▶ For any x ∈ X and yi ∈ Rdyi , we have ∥∇2xyi gi (x, yi )∥ ≤ Cgxy for some Cgxy > 0.
▶ For any yi ∈ Rdyi , ∇2xyi gi (·, yi ) and ∇2yi gi (·, yi ) are Lipschitz continuous (w.r.t. x) with constants
  L̄gxy > 0 and L̄gyy > 0, respectively.

From these assumptions, we can show a few additional regularity-type conditions. Since these
conditions can also be found in Ghadimi & Wang (2018, Lemma 2.2) and Hong et al. (2020,
Lemma 2), we state these results without proof.
Lemma 5 (Corollary of Assumptions). Under Assumptions 1 and 2 stated above, for all x, x1 , x2 ∈
X ⊆ Rdx , y ∈ Rdyi , i ∈ [n], we have
                               ∥∇x fi (x, y) − ∇ℓi (x)∥ ≤ L∥yi⋆ (x) − y∥,                               (15a)
                                   ∥yi⋆ (x1 ) − yi⋆ (x2 )∥ ≤ Gy ∥x1 − x2 ∥,                             (15b)
                                ∥∇ℓi (x1 ) − ∇ℓi (x2 )∥ ≤ Lf ∥x1 − x2 ∥,                                (15c)
where we define

                                    Lfy Cgxy     Lgxy    Lgyy Cgxy
                      L ≜ Lfx +              + Cfy    +                 ,                                (16a)
                                       µg         µg         µ2g

                                (L̄fy + L)Cgxy         L̄gxy     L̄gyy Cgxy
                     Lf ≜ Lfx +                + Cfy         +                ,                         (16b)
                                       µg               µg           µ2g
                          Cg
                     Gy ≜    .                                                                           (16c)
                          µg

                                                     14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Assumption 3 (Quality of stochastic gradient estimates). For any iteration k > 0 and all i ∈ [n],
                        (k)
the gradient estimates hi for the LL variable yi satisfy the following for some σg > 0 (Hong et al.,
2020; Lu et al., 2022):
                       (k)                      (k)
                   E[hi ] = ∇yi gi (x(k) , yi ),                                                     (17)
                       (k)                 (k)                                 (k)
                   E[∥hi − ∇yi gi (x(k) , yi )∥2 ] ≤ σg2 (1 + ∥∇yi gi (x(k) , yi )∥2 ).              (18)
                                                      (k)
For any iteration k > 0, the gradient estimate hλ for the simplex variable λ satisfies:
                                              h                                                 i⊤
          (k)                                              (k+1)
      E[hλ ] = ∇λ F (x(k) , y (k+1) , λ(k) ) = f1 (x(k) , y1     ), · · · , fn (x(k) , yn(k+1) ) .   (19)

For any k ≥ 0 and a σf > 0, we assume that there exists a non-increasing sequence {bk }k≥0 such
that
                         E[h(k)
                            x ] = ∇x F (x
                                          (k)
                                              , y (k+1) , λ(k) ) + Bk , ∥Bk ∥ ≤ bk ,                 (20)
                         E[∥h(k)    (k) 2     2
                             x − E[hx ]∥ ] ≤ σf .                                                    (21)

A.2     M AIN T HEOREM AND R EMARKS

We now state our main theorem, in full. Recall our notation from equation 9: for a fixed constant
ρ > 0, we defined the proximal map to be
                                            ρ
                            x̂(z) ≜ arg min ∥x − z∥2 + F (x, λ).                             (22)
                                      x∈X   2
We also define the Moreau envelope as
                                                          n
                                             ρ           X
                               Φ1/ρ (z) ≜ min ∥x − z∥2 +     λi ℓi (x).                              (23)
                                           x 2
                                                         i=1

                                        (k)           (k)                                             (k)
In addition, we use the notation ∆yi ≜ E[∥yi − yi⋆ (x(k−1) )∥2 ] and i(k) ≜ arg maxi∈[n] ∆yi .
Finally, we define σ̃f2 = σf2 + 3Cℓ2 (see Lemma 12). Now, we are ready to state the full version of
our main theorem:
Theorem 2 (Convergence of MORBiT). Under Assumptions 1, 2 and 3, and the terms defined in
Lemma 5, when step sizes are chosen as
                                                         K −3/5

                                                µg
                                  α = min             ν,          ,                            (24)
                                              16Gy L 4Gy L
                                                4K −2/5

                                  β = min ν,               ,                                   (25)
                                                   µg
                                              2K −3/5
                                     γ=               ,                                              (26)
                                              Bℓ n1/2
where ν = min (µg/L2g (1+σg2 ), 1/µg ), Algorithm 1 produces x̄, λ̄, ȳi , i ∈ [n] satisfying:

                       ⋆      2
      E max ∥ȳi − yi (x̄)∥ ≤ A,                                                                     (27)
          i∈[n]
                                      √     √
 max E[F (x̄, λ)] − E[F (x̄, λ̄)] ≤ 2Bℓ nK −2/5 + Gf A,                                              (28)
   λ
                                        16Φ1/ρ (x(0) )Gy L 8(b20 + L2 A) 2α(σ̃f2 + 3b20 + 3L2 A)
                 E[∥x̂(x̄) − x̄∥2 ] ≤                     +             +                        ,
                                        (−µℓ + ρ)ρK 2/5     (−µℓ + ρ)2           −µℓ + ρ
                                                                                               (29)
where
           (0)                                √                1
        ∆yi(0) /µg       16σg2 /µ2g   Gy /L 2 nBℓ Gy /L (b20 + 2 σf2 )/(L2 ) 16σg2 /µ2g
  A=                 +              +       +          +                    +           . (30)
           K 3/5          K 7/5       K 4/5     K 2/5         K 2/5           K 2/5

                                                          15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Connection of TTSA (Hong et al., 2020). As we generalize Hong et al. (2020), our proof follows a
similar structure. In particular, Lemma 6 is a generalization of Hong et al. (2020, Equation (14)),
and our Lemma 7 combines Hong et al. (2020, Lemma 3 and 4). Lemmas 8, 9, and 11 in our work
parallel Hong et al. (2020, Lemmas 6, 5, and 7), respectively. Lemma 10 in our work deals with the
maximization problem w.r.t. λ, so there is no analogue in Hong et al. (2020). However, it borrows
techniques from Collins et al. (2020, Theorem 1).
We
√ also2/5discuss the convergence rate. Note that A in equation 30 is dominated by√   the fourth term,
  n/K , so it is clear that equation 27 and equation 28 converge at a rate of O( nK −2/5 ). We
                                                            2
give special attention to equation 29). Apart from the 8b0/(−µℓ +ρ)2 term, we see that the RHS of
                                       √     −2/5
equation 29 converges at a rate of O( nK          ). To understand the convergence of this term, we
turn to (20) from Assumption 3. As discussed in section 3.2, bk can be made arbitrarily small by
                                                          (k)
running more iterations of the subroutine for estimating hx (for example utilizing the HIA sampling
scheme (Agarwal et al., 2017; Ghadimi & Wang, 2018; Hong et al., 2020)). Therefore, as long as
we run enough iterations (O(log K) for HIA) such that b2k ≤ α, (29) will also converge at a rate of
   √
O( nK −2/5 ).

A.3     P ROOF P LAN

Overall Roadmap: In what follows, we give a proof sketch of our main theorem, with constant
terms abstracted away with O notation. c1 , c2 , c3 , c4 are positive constants depending on Lf (defined
in Lemma 5), µg (the LL objective convexity defined in Assumption 2) and the learning rates α, β (in
algorithm 1).
In order to show equation 10a of Theorem 1 (the convergence of x), we will derive a descent lemma
comparing successive iterates x(k) and x(k+1) . Descent lemmas often contain a quadratic term
                                                                  (k)
∥x(k+1) − x(k) ∥2 , so it is natural that we will have to bound ∥hx ∥2 . As such, in Lemma 6, we
                                                                          (k)
bound the averaged squared norm of the stochastic gradient estimate, E[∥hx ∥2 ]:
                                                                                             (k)
Lemma 6. Under our regularity assumptions, the average squared norm of hx can be bounded as
                                                               (0)                (k)         (k+1)
follows, where the expectation is over the filtration Fi′ ≜ {yi , x(0) , · · · , yi , x(k) , yi     }:
                                              n
                                                                               !
                                                   (k)              (k+1) 2
                                            X
                       E[∥h(k)
                             x  ∥ 2
                                    ] ≤ O        λi ∥yi⋆ (x(k) ) − yi      ∥ .                         (31)
                                              i=1

                                                                                       (k)
Turning to equation 10a of Theorem 1, we’ll use a descent relation on yi − yi⋆ (x(k−1) ). While
                                                                ((k))
ideally we would obtain a descent relation purely involving yi        terms themselves, the intricate
coupling of the x and y terms result in an extra x(k−1) − x(k) term. The resulting relation is shown
                                            µ β
in Lemma 7. Here, we have that c1 = 1 − g2 , c2 = µg2β − 1, where µg β < 1.
                                                                      (k)
Lemma 7. The distance between the algorithm’s iterates yi                   and the true inner optimum yi⋆ (x(k) )
satisfies the following descent equation,
       (k+1)                                        (k)
 E[∥yi         − yi⋆ (x(k) )∥2 ] ≤ O((1 − c1 )E[∥yi       − yi⋆ (x(k−1) )∥2 ] + c2 E[∥x(k−1) − x(k) ∥2 ]). (32)

                                                      (k)
From this lemma, intuitively, we know that E[∥yi − yi⋆ (x(k−1) )∥2 ] is decreasing as k increases, as
long as the E[∥x(k−1) − x(k) ∥2 ]’s are not too large. Therefore, it is important to have another descent
relation that upper bounds this quantity, which we do next in Lemma 8. The lemma naturally involves
                                                                                     1    L
the objective L(k) = F (x(k) , λ(k) ), which will telescope. Here, we have c3 = 4α     − 2f , c4 = 4αL2 .
As k → ∞, α → 0, and c3 is positive.
                                                n
                                                    (k)
Lemma 8. Let L(k) ≜ E[F (x(k) , λ(k) )] =          λi E[ℓi (x(k) )]. Then, the L(k) satisfies the descent
                                               P
                                               i=1
equation
                                                                                  √

    (k+1)        (k)               (k+1)    (k) 2             (k+1)    ⋆ (k) 2
L           −L         ≤ O −c3 E[∥x      − x ∥ ] + c4 max E[∥yi     − yi (x )∥ ] + nγ + α .
                                                              i∈[n]
                                                                                                             (33)


                                                      16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Following the intuition previously described, we then use Lemmas 7 and 8 to show that the
                                                           (k)
E[∥x(k−1) − x(k) ∥2 ] terms are small enough and that the yi iterates converge:
Lemma 9 (Informal, see Appendix A.7 for precise statement).
                          K
                       1 X         h
                                        (k)
                                                           i      √
                             max E ∥yi − yi⋆ (x(k−1) )∥2 ≤ O( nK −2/5 ).             (34)
                      K      i∈[n]
                          k=1

Lemma 10 then leverages the convergence of yi , i ∈ [n] to bound the convergence of λ, and Lemma 11
shows the bound on x. By plugging in our step-sizes into Lemmas 9, 10, and 11, Theorem 1 directly
follows.
Lemma 10. For any λ ∈ ∆n , the iterates of Algorithm 1 satisfy
                         "K                                 #
                    1     X                                         √
                      E       F (x , λ) − F (x , λ ) ≤ O( nK −2/5 ).
                                  (k)             (k)   (k)
                                                                                               (35)
                    K
                                 k=1
Lemma 11. The iterates of Algorithm 1 satisfy
                               K
                             1 X                              √
                                 E[∥x̂(x(k) ) − x(k) ∥2 ] ≤ O( nK −2/5 ).                                               (36)
                             K
                                  k=1


A.4    P ROOF OF L EMMA 1 (L EMMA 6)

Stating Lemma 1 more precisely:
                                                                                                      (k)
Lemma 12. Under Assumptions 1, 2 and 3, the average squared norm of hx can be bounded as
follows, where σ̃f2 = σf2 + 3Cℓ2 :
                                                             n
                                                                      (k)                     (k+1) 2
                                                             X
                      E[∥h(k) 2     2     2
                          x ∥ ] ≤ σ̃f + 3bk + 3L
                                                2
                                                                   λi ∥yi⋆ (x(k) ) − yi               ∥ ,               (37)
                                                             i=1
                                                                (0)                 (k)               (k+1)
where the expectation is over the filtration Fi′ ≜ {yi , x(0) , · · · , yi , x(k) , yi                        }.
                                                       (0)                    (k)             (k+1)
Note that here the expectation is over Fi′ ≜ {yi , x(0) , · · · , yi , x(k) , yi                      }, so no expectation is
needed in the last term.

Proof. We can derive the following:

                           (1)
              E[∥h(k) 2       (k)    (k) 2        (k) 2
                  x ∥ ] = E[∥hx − E[hx ]∥ ] + ∥E[hx ]∥                                                                  (38)
                           (2)
                           = E[∥h(k)    (k) 2
                                 x − E[hx ]∥ ] + ∥∇x F (x
                                                          (k)
                                                              , y (k+1) , λ(k) ) + Bk ∥2                                (39)
                           (3)
                           ≤ σf2 + ∥∇x F (x(k) , y (k+1) , λ(k) ) + Bk ∥2                                               (40)
                                        n                                                 2
                           (4)          X      (k)                    (k+1)
                           = σf2 +            λi ∇x fi (x(k) , yi             ) + Bk                                    (41)
                                        i=1
                                                     n                                        2
                           (5)            3                 (k)              (k+1)
                                                     X
                           ≤ σf2 + 3b2k +                  λi ∇x fi (x(k) , yi     )              .                     (42)
                                               2     i=1

(1) is true because
E[∥h(k)    (k) 2        (k) 2      (k) 2       (k) 2      (k)    (k)        (k) 2
    x − E[hx ]∥ ] + ∥E[hx ]∥ = E[∥hx ∥ ] + ∥E[hx ]∥ − 2E⟨hx , E[hx ]⟩ + ∥E[hx ]∥
                                                                               (43)
                                         = E[∥h(k) 2       (k) 2      (k)     (k)        (k) 2
                                               x ∥ ] + ∥E[hx ]∥ − ⟨E[hx ], E[hx ]⟩ + ∥E[hx ]∥
                                                                                            (44)
                                         = E[∥h(k) 2
                                               x ∥ ].                                                                   (45)


                                                           17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


(2) follows from (20), (3) follows from (21), (4) follows from definition of ∇x , and (5) follows from
Young’s inequality, ∥a + b∥2 ≤ 3∥a∥2 + 23 ∥b∥2 . Next, we bound the last term in (42). We start by
using the fact that
                n                                         2
                        (k)                  (k+1)
                X
                       λi ∇x fi (x(k) , yi            )
                i=1
             (1)        n                                                             2         n                                2
                                (k)                   (k+1)                                               (k)
                        X                                                                       X
             ≤ 2               λi (∇x fi (x(k) , yi              ) − ∇ℓi (x(k) ))         +2          λi ∇ℓi (x(k) )                        (46)
                       i=1                                                                      i=1
             (2)       n                                                                     n
                               (k)                    (k+1)                                         (k)
                       X                                                                     X
             ≤ 2              λi ∥∇x fi (x(k) , yi              ) − ∇ℓi (x(k) )∥2 + 2              λi ∥∇ℓi (x(k) )∥2 ,                      (47)
                       i=1                                                                   i=1
                                                                                                          n              2       n
where (1) follows from ∥a + b∥2 ≤ 2∥a∥2 + 2∥b∥2 , and (2) follows from                                                                 pi ∥ai ∥2 .
                                                                                                          P                      P
                                                                                                                 pi ai       ≤
                                                                                                          i=1                    i=1
Next, we bound the first term in (47). From Lemma 5, we have
                                          (k+1)                                                        (k+1) 2
                         ∥∇x fi (x(k) , yi        ) − ∇ℓi (x(k) )∥2 ≤ L∥yi⋆ (x(k) ) − yi                          ∥ .                       (48)
Therefore, we can obtain
                   (1)                          n                                                  n
                                                          (k)                    (k+1) 2                    (k)
                                                X                                                  X
     E[∥h(k) 2    2     2
         x ∥ ] ≤ σf + 3bk + 3L
                              2
                                                      λi ∥yi⋆ (x(k) ) − yi                ∥ +3            λi ∥∇ℓi (x(k) )∥2                 (49)
                                                i=1                                                i=1
                   (2)                           n
                                                          (k)                    (k+1) 2
                                                X
                   ≤ σ̃f2 + 3b2k + 3L2                λi ∥yi⋆ (x(k) ) − yi                ∥ ,                                               (50)
                                                i=1

where (1) comes from plugging (48) into (47) and (47) into (42), (2) comes from the definition of σ̃f2
using ∥∇ℓi (x(k) )∥2 ≤ Cℓ2 and λ(k) ∈ ∆n .

A.5     P ROOF OF L EMMA 2 (L EMMA 7)

We state the precise version of Lemma 2 here:
Lemma 13. Under Assumptions 1, 2, and 3, when β 2 (1 + σg2 )L2g ≤ βµg and µg β < 1, the iterates
 (k)
yi     satisfy the descent equation:
             (k+1)
        E[∥yi      − yi⋆ (x(k) )∥2 ]                                                             (51)
                      µg β   (k)                       2
                ≤ 1−         ∥yi − yi⋆ (x(k−1) )∥2 +       − 1 G2y ∥x(k−1) − x(k) ∥2 + β 2 σg2 .
                         2                            µg β

                                                                                                                (1)          (k)
Proof. For a particular (fixed) realization of the iterates x(1) , · · · , x(k) , yi , · · · , yi                                    for some
i ∈ [n], we have
                        (k)      (1)      (k)              (k)                  (k)
                E[∥hi ∥2 ] = E[∥hi              − E[hi ]∥2 ] + ∥E[hi ]∥2                                                                    (52)
                                 (2)   (k)                 (k)                        (k)
                                 = E[∥hi − ∇yi gi (x(k) , yi )∥2 ] + ∥∇yi gi (x(k) , yi )∥2                                                 (53)
                                 (3)
                                                                                (k)
                                 ≤ σg2 + (1 + σg2 )∥∇yi gi (x(k) , yi )∥2                                                                   (54)
                                 (4)
                                                                                (k)
                                 ≤ σg2 + (1 + σg2 )∥∇yi gi (x(k) , yi ) − ∇yi gi (x(k) , yi⋆ (x(k) ))∥2                                     (55)
                                 (5)
                                                                   (k)
                                 ≤ σg2 + (1 + σg2 )L2g ∥yi               − yi⋆ (x(k) )∥2 ,                                                  (56)
                                                                               (k)                              (k)
where (1) follows from algebra, (2) follows from E[hi ] = ∇yi gi (x(k) , yi ) in equation 17 in
Assumption 3, (3) is from equation 18 in Assumption 3, (4) is from ∇yi gi (x(k) , yi⋆ (x(k) )) = 0 due
to the optimality of yi⋆ (x(k) ), and (5) is due to the Lg -Lipschitz continuity of ∇yi gi (x, ·).


                                                                    18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                 (k+1)
Next, we can bound the difference between yi          and yi⋆ (x(k) ) as the following, where again we
              (1)        (k) (1)         (k)
assume that x , · · · , x , y , · · · , yi is fixed and the expectation is over the stochasticity of the
gradient estimates:
         (k+1)
  E[∥yi           − yi⋆ (x(k) )∥2 ]
   (1)        (k)         (k)
   = E[∥yi          − βhi        − yi⋆ (x(k) )∥2 ]                                                                        (57)
   (2)      (k)                                   (k)                  (k)                                   (k)
   = ∥yi          − yi⋆ (x(k) )∥2 + β 2 E[∥hi ∥]2 − 2β⟨yi                    − yi⋆ (x(k) ), ∇yi gi (x(k) , yi )⟩          (58)
   (3)
                           (k)                                     (k)
   ≤ (1 − 2βµg )∥yi              − yi⋆ (x(k) )∥2 + β 2 E[∥hi ∥2 ]                                                         (59)
   (4)
                           (k)                                                              (k)
   ≤ (1 − 2βµg )∥yi              − yi⋆ (x(k) )∥2 + β 2 σg2 + β 2 (1 + σg2 )L2g ∥yi                − yi⋆ (x(k) )∥2         (60)
   (5)
                          (k)
   ≤ (1 − βµg )∥yi − yi⋆ (x(k) )∥2 + β 2 σg2                                                (61)
   (6)

                          (k)                      1
   ≤ (1 − βµg ) (1 + c)∥yi − yi⋆ (x(k−1) )∥2 + 1 +     ∥yi⋆ (x(k−1) ) − yi⋆ (x(k) )∥2 + β 2 σg2
                                                   c
                                                                                            (62)
   (7)

                          (k)                      1
   ≤ (1 − βµg ) (1 + c)∥yi − yi⋆ (x(k−1) )∥2 + 1 +     G2y ∥x(k−1) − x(k) ∥2 + β 2 σg2 , (63)
                                                   c

where (1) is true by definition, and (2) holds by direct algebra and the unbiasedness assump-
        (k)             (k) (k)
      D i ] = ∇yi gi (x , yi ) in equation
tion E[h                                E     17 in Assumption 3, (3) is from strong convex-
                            (k)       (k)                                      (k)
ity, β ∇yi gi (x(k) , yi ), yi              − yi⋆ (x(k) )       ≥ βµg ∥yi            − yi⋆ (x(k) )∥2 , (4) is from equation 56,
(5) is from the assumption β 2 (1 + σg2 )L2g ≤ βµg , (6) is from the inequality ∥a + b∥2 ≤
(1 + 1/c)∥a∥2 + (1 + c)∥b∥2 , and (7) is from the Gy -lipschitzness of yi⋆ (·) in Lemma 5.
                                  µ β
                        g
Then, we choose c = 2(1−µ g β)
                               , so that (1 − βµg )(1 + c) = 1 − βµg /2 and 1 + 1/c = µg2β − 1. We
have c > 0 because µg β < 1. Plugging these expressions into (63), we get
         (k+1)
      ∥yi      − yi⋆ (x(k) )∥2                                                                     (64)

                      µg β      (k)                      2
              ≤ 1−            ∥yi − yi⋆ (x(k−1) )∥2 +        − 1 G2y ∥x(k−1) − x(k) ∥2 + β 2 σg2 ,
                        2                               µg β

which completes the proof.

A.6      P ROOF OF L EMMA 3 (L EMMA 8)

We state the precise version of Lemma 3 here:
                                                                  n
                                                                         (k)
Lemma 14. Let L(k) ≜ E[F (x(k) , λ(k) )] =                             λi E[ℓi (x(k) )]. Under Assumptions 1, 2 and 3,
                                                                  P
                                                                 i=1
                                            (k)
assume that the iterates {x(k) , yi , i ∈ [n], λ(k) , ∀k} are generated by MORBiT, then, L(k) satisfies
the descent equation

   L(k+1) − L(k)
                                                                                                                          (65)

                   2                            Lf    1
         ≤ 4αL         max ∆(k+1)
                             yi   +                −            E[∥x(k+1) − x(k) ∥2 ] + γnBℓ2 + 4αb20 + 2ασf2 .
                       i∈[n]                     2   4α


Proof. First, since ℓi is Lf -smooth, we know that for all i ∈ [n],

                                                                                             Lf (k+1)
              ℓi (x(k+1) ) ≤ ℓi (x(k) ) + ⟨x(k+1) − x(k) , ∇ℓi (x(k) )⟩ +                       ∥x    − x(k) ∥2 .         (66)
                                                                                              2

                                                                   19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


           (k)
Taking λi         times the equation for i in (66) and summing, we can get


    n
            (k)
    X
          λi ℓi (x(k+1) )
    i=1
           n
                                        *                                n
                                                                                                +                                        (67)
           X        (k)
                                                                         X      (k)                    Lf (k+1)
       ≤           λi ℓi (x(k) ) +           x   (k+1)
                                                         −x    (k)
                                                                     ,         λi ∇ℓi (x(k) )        +    ∥x    − x(k) ∥2 .
            i=1                                                          i=1
                                                                                                        2



Therefore, we have

     n                                      n
             (k+1)                                 (k)
     X                                      X
           λi         ℓi (x(k+1) ) −              λi ℓi (x(k) )
     i=1                                    i=1
                  n                                     n                                                     n
                         (k+1)                                     (k)                                                  (k)
                  X                                     X                                                     X
            ≤           λi       ℓi (x(k+1) ) −                λi ℓi (x(k+1) ) + ⟨x(k+1) − x(k) ,                      λi ∇ℓi (x(k) )⟩
                  i=1                                    i=1                                                  i=1
                  |                               {z                                 }   |                     {z                   }
                                                 ≜(A)                                                         ≜(B)
                      Lf (k+1)
                  +      ∥x    − x(k) ∥2 .                                                                                               (68)
                       2


Next, we bound (A) and (B) respectively as follows. First, we upper bound term (A). First, from
                                                                      (k)
the non-expansiveness of projections and λ(k+1) = proj∆n (λ(k) + γhλ ), we have ∥λ(k+1) −
            (k)                                                  √
λ(k) ∥ ≤ ∥γhλ ∥. Since λ(k+1) , λ(k) ∈ ∆n , ∥λ(k+1) − λ(k) ∥ ≤ 2. Therefore, we know that
                            √        (k)
∥λ(k+1) − λ(k) ∥ ≤ Λ ≜ min{ 2, γ∥hλ ∥}. Based on these facts, we can have


                               n                                     n
                                     (k+1)                                     (k)
                               X                                     X
                   (A) =           λi        ℓi (x(k+1) ) −                λi ℓi (x(k+1) )                                               (69)
                               i=1                                   i=1
                                 n
                         (1)    X       (k+1)            (k)
                         =             λi         − λi             ℓi (x(k+1) )                                                          (70)
                               i=1
                         (2)                               h                                                 i⊤
                         ≤ λ(k+1) − λ(k)                    ℓ1 (x(k+1) ), ℓ2 (x(k+1) ), · · · , ℓn (x(k+1) )                             (71)
                         (3)  √                  (4) √         √      (k)
                                                                                                   (5) √
                                                                                                                 (k)
                         ≤ ΛBℓ n                  ≤      n min{ 2, ∥γhλ ∥}Bℓ                       ≤       nγ∥hλ ∥Bℓ ,                   (72)


where (1) is straightforward, (2) follows from Cauchy-Schwarz, (3) follows from the update rule for
λ and the fact that |ℓi (·)| ≤√Bℓ from Assumption 1, (4) is from plugging in the definition of Λ, and
(5) follows from γ∥hkλ ∥ ≤ 2.
Then, we upper bound (B). First, from the non-expansiveness of projection and the update rule
                         (k)
x(k+1) = projX (x(k) − αhx ), we know that


                                ∥x(k+1) − x(k) + αh(k) 2       (k) 2
                                                   x ∥ ≤ ∥ − αhx ∥ ,                                                                     (73)
                                        (k+1)            (k) 2                   (k+1)       (k)
                                ⇒ ∥x     − x ∥ + 2α⟨x           −x                                 , h(k)
                                                                                                      x ⟩ ≤ 0,                           (74)
                                   1
                                ⇒    ∥x(k+1) − x(k) ∥2 + ⟨x(k+1) − x(k) , h(k)
                                                                           x ⟩ ≤ 0.                                                      (75)
                                  2α


                                                                           20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Therefore, we can have


           *    n
                                        !                                +
                                                                             (1)
                                                                                   D                                    E
                       (k)
                X
(B) =                 λi ∇ℓi (x(k) )        , x   (k+1)
                                                          −x   (k)
                                                                             =      ∇x F (x(k) , λ(k) ), x(k+1) − x(k)
                i=1
                                                                                                     (76)
     (2)
           D                                                                             E
     =      ∇x F (x(k) , λ(k) ) − ∇x F (x(k) , y (k+1) , λ(k) ) − Bk , x(k+1) − x(k)
             D                                                          E
          + ∇x F (x(k) , y (k+1) , λ(k) ) + Bk , x(k+1) − x(k)                                       (77)
     (3) D                                                                               E
     ≤      ∇x F (x(k) , λ(k) ) − ∇x F (x(k) , y (k+1) , λ(k) ) − Bk , x(k+1) − x(k)                 (78)
             D                                                                 E      1
          + ∇x F (x(k) , y (k+1) , λ(k) ) + Bk − h(k)    x     , x(k+1) − x(k) −         ∥x(k+1) − x(k) ∥2
                                                                                     2α
     (4) 1                                                                 c
     ≤      ∥∇x F (x(k) , λ(k) ) − ∇x F (x(k) , y (k+1) , λ(k) ) − Bk ∥2 + ∥x(k+1) − x(k) ∥2
         2c                                                                2
              1                                                    d (k+1)
          + ∥∇x F (x(k) , y (k+1) , λ(k) ) + Bk − h(k)          2
                                                           x ∥ + ∥x          − x(k) ∥2
             2d                                                    2
              1
          −      ∥x(k+1) − x(k) ∥2                                                                   (79)
             2α
     (5) 1                                                                 c
     ≤      ∥∇x F (x(k) , λ(k) ) − ∇x F (x(k) , y (k+1) , λ(k) ) − Bk ∥2 + ∥x(k+1) − x(k) ∥2
         2c                                                                2
             σf2    d (k+1)                   1
          +      + ∥x           − x(k) ∥2 −       ∥x(k+1) − x(k) ∥2                                  (80)
             2d     2                        2α
     (6) 1
     =      ∥∇x F (x(k) , λ(k) ) − ∇x F (x(k) , y (k+1) , λ(k) ) − Bk ∥2
         2c
                                                        σf2

               c+d        1
          +           −         ∥x(k+1) − x(k) ∥2 +         ,                                        (81)
                  2      2α                             2d


where (1) is by definition   of F (x(k) , λ(k) ), (2) is from adding and subtracting
  ∇x F (x(k) , y (k+1) , λ(k) ) + Bk , x(k+1) − x(k) , (3) is from adding (75) to the previous
                                                         1
inequality, (4) is from applying the inequality ⟨a, b⟩ ≤ 2c ∥a∥2 + 2c ∥b∥2 to both inner product terms,
(5) is from equation 20 and equation 21 in Assumption 3, and (6) is from algebra.
Plugging in our expressions for (A) and (B) into (68), we get


               n                               n
                      (k+1)                           (k)
               X                               X
                     λi       ℓi (x(k+1) ) −         λi ℓi (x(k) )
               i=1                             i=1
                      (k) √         1
                 ≤ γ∥hλ ∥ nBℓ + ∥∇x F (x(k) , λ(k) ) − ∇x F (x(k) , y (k+1) , λ(k) ) − Bk ∥2
                                   2c
                                                                σf2

                         c + d + Lf     1
                     +               −      ∥x(k+1) − x(k) ∥2 +     .                                                  (82)
                              2        2α                       2d


                                                                 21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Next, we work on bounding ∥∇x F (x(k) , λ(k) ) − ∇x F (x(k) , y (k+1) , λ(k) ) − Bk ∥2 in equation 81.
Observe that

                ∥∇x F (x(k) , λ(k) ) − ∇x F (x(k) , y (k+1) , λ(k) ) − Bk ∥2
                      (1)
                         ≤ 2∥∇x F (x(k) , λ(k) ) − ∇x F (x(k) , y (k+1) , λ(k) )∥2 + 2∥Bk ∥2                      (83)
                      (2)
                         ≤ 2∥∇x F (x(k) , λ(k) ) − ∇x F (x(k) , y (k+1) , λ(k) )∥2 + 2b2k                         (84)
                                n h                                                                  2
                      (3)                                                                        i
                                           (k)                                         (k+1)
                                X
                         ≤ 2             λi          ∇ℓi (x(k) ) − ∇x fi (x(k) , yi            )         + 2b2k   (85)
                                i=1
                                   n
                                                                                !2
                      (4)
                                          (k)                (k+1)
                                   X
                         ≤ 2             λi L∥yi⋆ (x(k) ) − yi     ∥                 + 2b2k                       (86)
                                   i=1
                      (5)
                                                                (k+1) 2
                         ≤ 2L2 max ∥yi⋆ (x(k) ) − yi                      ∥ + 2b2k ,                              (87)
                                   i∈[n]


where (1) comes from ∥a + b∥2 ≤ 2∥a∥2 + 2∥b∥2 , (2) comes from ∥Bk ∥ ≤ bk in Assumption 3,
(3) is from expanding the definitions of ∇x F (·, ·) and ∇x F (·, ·, ·), (4) is from Lemma 5. Therefore,
                                                                   1
plugging in equation 87 into equation 82, using c = d = 4α            , and taking expectation over the
stochasticity of the gradient estimates, we get:
                  n                                        n
                           (k+1)                                (k)
                  X                                        X
                         λi        ℓi (x(k+1) ) −              λi ℓi (x(k) )
                   i=1                        i=1
                               √       (k)                               (k+1) 2
                          ≤        nγ∥hλ ∥Bℓ + 4αL2 max E∥yi⋆ (x(k) ) − yi    ∥
                                                    i∈[n]

                                                       Lf    1
                                   + 4αb2k +              −               E[∥x(k+1) − x(k) ∥2 ] + 2ασf2 .         (88)
                                                        2   4α

Now, observe that the LHS looks like a telescoping sum. To make this more apparent, define
       n
           (k)                  (k)       (k)
L(k) =    λi E[ℓi (x(k) )] and ∆yi = E[∥yi − yi⋆ (x(k−1) )∥2 ]. Therefore, with the assumption
       P
         i=1
that bk ≤ b0 , we have

 L(k+1) − L(k)
                                                              √


                            Lf    1                                  (k)
      ≤ 4αL2 max ∆(k+1)
                  yi    +      −      E[∥x(k+1) − x(k) ∥2 ] + nγ∥hλ ∥Bℓ + 4αb20 + 2ασf2
             i∈[n]           2   4α

                            Lf    1
      ≤ 4αL2 max ∆(k+1)
                   yi   +      −      E[∥x(k+1) − x(k) ∥2 ] + γnBℓ2 + 4αb20 + 2ασf2 .
             i∈[n]           2   4α
                                                                                      (89)



A.7    P ROOF OF L EMMA 9

We restate Lemma 9 in more general terms here:
                                                     (k)
Lemma 15. Assume that Ω(k) , Θ(k) , Υi , λi , c0 , c1 , c2 , d0 , d1 , d2 are real numbers such that for all
0 ≤ k ≤ K − 1,
                                                                                       (k+1)
                              Ω(k+1) ≤ Ω(k) − c0 Θ(k+1) + c1 max Υi                            + c2               (90)
                                                                               i∈[n]

and also for all 1 ≤ k ≤ K, 1 ≤ i ≤ N ,
                                         (k+1)                        (k)
                                    Υi           ≤ (1 − d0 )Υi              + d1 Θ(k) + d2 .                      (91)


                                                                 22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                                                                              (k)
In addition, assume that 1 − d0 > 0, d0 − d1 c1 c−1                    −1
                                                 0 > 0 and c0 − c1 d1 d0 , and that Υi , Ω
                                                                                           (k)
                                                                                               ≥0
                              (0)                (0)
for all k, i ∈ [n]. Then, if i = arg maxi∈[n] Υi , we have
                                             (0)
      K
                                                                                               !
  1 X             (k)             −1  −1
                                          Υi(0) + d1 Θ(0) + d2 + d1 c−1
                                                                      0 Ω
                                                                          (0)
                                                                                    −1
          max Υi ≤ (d0 − d1 c0 c1 )                                           + d1 c0 c2 + d2 .
  K       i∈[n]                                           K
     k=1



                                                                                                                                     (92)

                                                  (k)                        (k)                   (k)
Proof. First, let i(k) ≜ arg max Υi , so that Υi(k) = max Υi . Summing (90) from k =
                                      i∈[n]                                              i∈[n]
0, 1, · · · , K − 1, we get:
                                      K                                             K
                                                                                            (k)
                                      X                                             X
                                 c0         Θ(k) ≤ Ω(0) − Ω(k) + c1                       Υi(k) + c2 K.                              (93)
                                      k=1                                           k=1

                                                                                                 (k)         (k)
Next, we apply (91) for i = i(k+1) . Noting that 1 − d0 > 0 and Υi(k+1) ≤ Υi(k) by definition of i(k) ,
we have
                               (k+1)               (k)
                             Υi(k+1) ≤ (1 − d0 )Υi(k+1) + d1 Θ(k) + d2                           (94)
                                                                       (k)
                                 ≤ (1 − d0 )Υi(k) + d1 Θ(k) + d2 .                                                                   (95)
Then summing for k = 1 to K, we get
                                 K                                                       K
                                            (k)         (1)         (K+1)
                                 X                                                       X
                            d0          Υi(k) ≤ Υi(1) − Υi(K+1) + d1                           Θ(k) + d2 K.                          (96)
                                 k=1                                                     k=1

Now, we have
      K                                                                                          K
                                                                                                                      !
               (1)
          (k)      (1)    (K+1)                                                                         (k)
     X                                                                                           X
  d0     Υi(k) ≤ Υi(1) − Υi(K+1) + d1 c−1
                                       0                           Ω   (0)
                                                                             −Ω    (k)
                                                                                         + c1          Υi(k) + c2 K       + d2 K     (97)
       k=1                                                                                       k=1
                                                                   K
                                                                                            !
                  (2)
                     (1)                                                  (k)
                                                                   X
                  ≤ Υi(1) + d1 c−1
                                0                 Ω   (0)
                                                            + c1         Υi(k) + c2 K             + d2 K                             (98)
                                                                   k=1

                  (3)                                                    K
                           (1)                                                     (k)
                                                                         X
                  ≤ Υi(1) + d1 c−1
                                0 Ω
                                    (0)
                                        + d1 c−1
                                              0 c1                             Υi(k) + d1 c−1
                                                                                           0 c2 K + d2 K,                            (99)
                                                                         k=1
where (1) holds from plugging (93) into (96), (2) is true because Υ, Ω ≥ 0, and (3) follows from the
distributive property. We can rewrite this equation as
                            K
                                        (k)       (1)
                            X
       (d0 − d1 c−1
                 0 c1 )               Υi(k) ≤ Υi(1) + d1 c−1
                                                          0 Ω
                                                              (0)
                                                                  + d1 c−1
                                                                        0 c2 K + d2 K                                               (100)
                            k=1
                                                                       (1)
                 K
                                                                                                                          !
          1 X (k)                                                   Υi(1) + d1 c−1
                                                                                0 Ω
                                                                                    (0)
        ⇒    Υi(k) ≤ (d0 − d1 c−1
                               0 c1 )
                                     −1
                                                                                        + d1 c−1
                                                                                              0 c2 + d2                       .     (101)
          K                                                                 K
               k=1
                     (1)          (0)
By plugging in Υi(1) = Υi(0) + d1 Θ(0) + d2 into (101), we get the statement of the lemma.

Plugging the following values into Lemma 15 and utilizing Lemmas 13 and 14 and the learning rates
α, β, γ from Theorem 2, we get the result in Lemma 9 in precise terms:

                                                                                                 (k)
     Ω(k) = L(k) ,                     Θ(k) = E[∥x(k) − x(k−1) ∥2 ],                        Υi         = ∆(k)
                                                                                                          yi ,
             1     Lf
       c0 =     −     ,                  c1 = 4αL2 ,                                             c2 = γnBℓ2 + 4αb20 + 2ασf2 ,
            4α      2
                                                 2
       d0 = µg β/2,                      d1 =        − 1 G2y ,                                   d2 = β 2 σg2 .                     (102)
                                                µg β


                                                                    23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Next, recall that our step sizes were


                                                 !
                                   µg     K −3/5             4K −2/5       2K −3/5
                 α = min               ν,         , β = min ν,        ,γ =         ,                                                       (103)
                                 16Gy L 4Gy L                  µg          Bℓ n1/2


                    g   µ     1
where ν = min( L2 (1+σ 2 ) , µ ). Note that the choice of ν was motivated by the conditions of Lemma
                               g
                    g       g
                                                                                                                                           µ
5. First, observe that 1 − d0 > 0 is true because we chose β < 2/µg . Now, observe that α        g
                                                                                         β ≤ 16Gy L .
Finally, will next show that d0 − d1 c1 (c0 )−1 > 0 and c0 − c1 d1 (d0 )−1 > 0, completing the set of
conditions in Lemma 5. By direct algebraic manipulation, we have


                                                   2
                                    µg β         µg β  −  1  G2y · 4L2 α   µg β
                                                                                  2     2      2
                                                                                 µ β · Gy · 4L α
       d0 − d1 c1 (c0 )−1 =              −                               ≥      − g
                                     2                   1    Lf            2         1    Lf
                                                        4α − 2                       4α − 2

                                    µg β      8L2 G2y α    µ β  64L2 G2y α2
                                ≥        −                ≥ g −         · 2 · µg β
                                     2     βµ    1
                                                   − f
                                                       L    2     µ2g    β
                                                   g       4α            2

                                  µg β   64L G2y       2
                                                      µ2g             µg β   µg β   µg β
                                ≥      −         ·           · µg β =      −      =      .                                                 (104)
                                   2       µ2g     256G2y L2           2      4      4


Similarly, we also have


      c0 − c1 d1 (d0 )−1

                                                    2                                                                  2

                  1   Lf
                                     4L2 α ·       µg β − 1              G2y
                                                                                        1   Lf
                                                                                                          8L2 α       µg β − 1       G2y
         =          −            −                 µg β
                                                                               =          −           −
                 4α    2                                                               4α    2                        µg β
                                                    2

                                                  2

                  1   Lf
                                     8L2 α       µg β          G2y
                                                                                1   Lf

                                                                                                  16L2 αG2y α2 1
         ≥          −            −                                   ≥            −           −            · 2 ·
                 4α    2                     µg β                              4α    2               µ2g    β α
            1   16L αG2y    2
                              µ2g    1   1   1    1
         ≥    −          ·          · =    −   =     .                                                                                     (105)
           8α      µ2g     256G2y L2 α  8α 16α   16α


                                                                         24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                                                      (k)
Now, we can bound the optimality of y by bounding the maximum difference ∆yi :

         K
      1 X
          max ∆(k)
                yi
      K   i∈[n]
        k=1
                                                (0)
                                                                                                            !
        (1)                            Υi(0) + d1 Θ(0) + d2 + d1 c−1
                                                                   0 Ω
                                                                       (0)
        ≤ (d0 − d1 c−1
                    0 c1 )
                           −1
                                                                           + d1 c−1
                                                                                 0 c2 + d2                       (106)
                                                       K
                           (0)
                                                                             !
        (2)    4          Υi(0) + d1 Θ(0) + d2 + d1 c−1
                                                     0 Ω
                                                         (0)
                                                                   −1
        =                                                    + d1 c0 c2 + d2                                     (107)
              µg β                        K
                               2G2y
               
                 (0)     2 2              (0)
        (3)4  ∆yi(0) + β σg + µg β (8α)L
        ≤
          µg β              K
                                                                            !
                 2G2y
               +      (8α)(nγBℓ2 + 4αb20 + 2ασf2 ) + β 2 σg2                                                     (108)
                 µg β
              4∆(0)
                y                 σ2      64G2 α
                   i(0)
        (4)    µg β       + 4β µgg + µ2 βy2               64G2y α                        4βσg2
                                            g                                2       2
        =                                             +            nγBℓ + 4αb0 + 2ασf   +                        (109)
                              K                            µ2g β 2                        µg
              (0)
        (5) 4∆yi(0)        1   4σg2 β   64G2y α   64G2y     nα
        =                    +        +   2   2
                                                +   2
                                                        γBℓ2 2
                µg        βK   µg K      µg β K    µg       β
                     64G2y (4b20 + 2σf2 ) α2   4σg2
               +                             +      β                                                            (110)
                             µ2g          β2   µg
             (0)                                       √                1
        (6) ∆y
                 i(0)
                        /µg       16σg2 /µ2g   Gy /L 2 nBℓ Gy /L (b20 + 2 σf2 )/(L2 ) 16σg2 /µ2g
        ≤                     +              +       +          +                    +           .
                K 3/5              K 7/5       K 4/5     K 2/5         K 2/5           K 2/5
                                                                                                (111)

                                                            (k)
Here, (1) follows directly from plugging Υi from (102) into Lemma 4, (2) follows from (104), (3)
comes from plugging in the rest of (102), (4) is direct algebraic manipulation, (5) separates the step
sizes and n, K factors
                     √ from the rest of the constants, and (6) applies the definition of the step sizes.
This gives us the O( nK −2/5 ) bound in Lemma 9.


A.8    P ROOF OF L EMMA 10

We present a precise form of Lemma 10 here:
                                                                                                                (k)
Lemma 16. For any λ ∈ ∆n , under Assumptions 1, 2, and 3, assume that the iterates {x(k) , yi , i ∈
[n]λ(k) , ∀k} generated by MORBiT, then we have
                          "K                         #
                      1    X
                                 (k)         (k) (k)
                        E    F (x , λ) − F (x , λ )
                      K
                              k=1
                                                                                                                 (112)
                                                                K
                                 1   √           √         G X
                                                             f
                              ≤ √ Bℓ nK −3/5 + Bℓ nK −2/5 +        max ∆(k)
                                                                         yi .
                                  2                         K      i∈[n]
                                                               k=1


Proof. Recall that we defined
                                                      n
                                                      X                            n
                                                                                   X
                                       F (x, λ) :=          λi fi (x, yi⋆ (x)) =         λi ℓi (x).              (113)
                                                      i=1                          i=1


                                                                  25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                         (1)        (k)
For a fixed realization of x(1) , · · · , x(k) , yi , · · · , yi , i ∈ [n], we have
   F (x(k) , λ) − F (x(k) , λ(k) )
            n
      (1) X           (k)
      =       (λi − λi )fi (x(k) , yi⋆ (x(k) ))                                                                 (114)
            i=1
             n
      (2)   X                  (k)                                        (k+1)                   (k+1)
       =          (λi − λi )(fi (x(k) , yi⋆ (x(k) )) − fi (x(k) , yi              ) + fi (x(k) , yi       )))   (115)
            i=1
                           h                                                 i⊤
      (3)                               (k+1)
       =         λ − λ(k) , f1 (x(k) , y1     ), · · · , fn (x(k) , yn(k+1) )
                  n
                                     (k)                                     (k+1)
                  X
             +          (λi − λi )(fi (x(k) , yi⋆ (x(k) )) − fi (x(k) , yi            ))                        (116)
                  i=1
            D                      n
                                 E X
      (4)                    (k)            (k)                                       (k+1)
       =         λ − λ(k) , hλ +     (λi − λi )(fi (x(k) , yi⋆ (x(k) )) − fi (x(k) , yi     ))                  (117)
                                                  i=1
                      (k) 2                 (k)                       (k)
      (5) ∥λ − λ           ∥ + γ 2 ∥hλ ∥2 − ∥λ − λ(k) − γhλ ∥2
       =
                                       2γ
                  n
                                     (k)                                     (k+1)
                  X
             +          (λi − λi )(fi (x(k) , yi⋆ (x(k) )) − fi (x(k) , yi            ))                        (118)
                  i=1
      (6) ∥λ − λ(k) ∥2 + γ 2 ∥h(k) ∥2 − ∥λ − λ(k+1) ∥2
                               λ
       ≤
                                            2γ
                  n
                                                                             (k+1)
                  X
             +          (λ − λ(k) )i (fi (x(k) , yi⋆ (x(k) )) − fi (x(k) , yi         ))                        (119)
                  i=1
      (7) ∥λ − λ(k) ∥2 + γ 2 ∥h(k) ∥2 − ∥λ − λ(k+1) ∥2                        n
                                                                                       (k)                (k+1)
                                                                              X
       ≤                       λ
                                                                      + Gf      (λi − λi )(yi⋆ (x(k) ) − yi     ),
                                            2γ                                i=1
                                                                                                                (120)

where (1) comes from the definition of F , (2) follows from adding and subtracting (λi −
  (k)           (k+1)
λi )fi (x(k) , yi     ) terms, (3) follows from splitting the preceding sum and writing the first term as
                                                                           2     2        2
a dot product, (4) follows from definition of hλ , (5) uses ⟨a, b⟩ = ∥a∥ +∥b∥2 −∥a−b∥ , (6) follows
                                                  (k)

                                                (k)
from the update λ(k+1) = proj∆n (λ(k) − γhλ ) and the projection property, and (7) follows from
Lipschitzness of f .
Therefore, applying the telescoping sum by adding the preceding inequality over k = 1, 2, . . . , K,
and taking expectation, we get:
              "K                                   #
               X
            E       F (x(k) , λ) − F (x(k) , λ(k) )
                     k=1
                               K                                                    K      n
                         (1) γ X
                                              (k)       E[∥λ − λ(1) ∥2 ]      XX          (k)
                         ≤                 E∥hλ ∥2 +                     + Gf      (λi − λi )∆(k)
                                                                                              yi                (121)
                                2                            2γ                i=1
                                     k=1                                           k=1
                               K
                         (2) γ X                                K
                                              (k)       1      X
                         ≤                 E∥hλ ∥2 +      + Gf   max ∆(k)
                                                                       yi                                       (122)
                                2                       γ        i∈[n]
                                     k=1                       k=1

                         (3) nKB 2 γ                      K
                                                  1      X
                         ≤                   +      + Gf   max ∆(k)
                                                                 yi                                             (123)
                                      2           γ        i∈[n]
                                                         k=1
                           √                              K
                         (4) 2   √           √            X
                         ≤     Bℓ nK 2/5 + Bℓ nK 3/5 + Gf   max ∆(k)
                                                                  yi                                            (124)
                            2                               i∈[n]
                                                                                  k=1



                                                               26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


where (1) follows directly from (120) and the telescoping sum, (2) follows from λ ∈ ∆
                                                                                    √n
                                                                                       and ∥λ −
 (1) 2                          (k) 2       2                                        2
λ ∥ ≤ 2, (3) follows from ∥hλ ∥ ≤ nB , and (4) follows from selecting γ = Bℓ √nK 3/5 .



Therefore, we obtain
                      "K                                   #
                  1    X
                    E      F (x(k) , λ) − F (x(k) , λ(k) )
                  K
                       k=1                                                                      (125)
                          1   √                      √         √
                      ≤ √ Bℓ nK −3/5 + Bℓ nK −2/5 + Gf O( nK −2/5 ).
                           2


A.9   P ROOF OF L EMMA 11

We state Lemma 11 here in precise terms:
                                                                      (k)
Lemma 17. Under Assumptions 1, 2, and 3 with the iterates {x(k) , yi , i ∈ [n], λ(k) , ∀k} generated
by MORBiT, then we have

              K
          1 X
                E[∥x̂(x(k) ) − x(k) ∥2 ]                                                        (126)
          K
            k=1

                4       Φ1/ρ (x0 )        2
          ≤                        +            b2 +
            −µℓ + ρ       ραK          −µℓ + ρ 0
                                                      K
                                                                  !              !
                              2L2        3L2 α

                                                    1 X       (k)   α 2      2

                                     +                  max ∆yi +     σ̃ + 3b0 .
                           −µℓ + ρ         2        K   i∈[n]       2 f
                                                       k=1


Proof. Recall that we defined the Moreau envelope and proximal map as follows:

                            n                                                  n
               ρ           X                                      ρ           X
 Φ1/ρ (z) ≜ min ∥x − z∥2 +     λi ℓi (x),          x̂(z) ≜ arg min ∥x − z∥2 +     λi ℓi (x). (127)
             x 2                                              x   2
                           i=1                                                i=1



Therefore, we have

                       (1) X                         ρ
         Φ1/ρ (x(k+1) ) =       λi ℓi (x̂(x(k+1) )) + ∥x(k+1) − x̂(x(k+1) )∥2                   (128)
                            i
                                                     2
                       (2) X                       ρ
                        ≤       λi ℓi (x̂(x(k) )) + ∥x(k+1) − x̂(x(k) )∥2                       (129)
                            i
                                                   2
                       (3) X                       ρ
                        =       λi ℓi (x̂(x(k) )) + ∥x(k+1) − x(k) + x(k) − x̂(x(k) )∥2         (130)
                            i
                                                   2
                       (4) X                       ρ                   ρ
                        =       λi ℓi (x̂(x(k) )) + ∥x(k+1) − x(k) ∥2 + ∥x(k) − x̂(x(k) )∥2
                            i
                                                   2                   2
                                      D                                  E
                                + ρ x(k+1) − x(k) , x(k) − x̂(x(k) )                            (131)

where (1) is by definition of the proximal map, (2) comes from the optimality of the Moreau envelope,
(3) is by adding and subtracting x(k) , and (4) is from expanding out ∥a+b∥2 into ∥a∥2 +∥b∥2 +2⟨a, b⟩.


                                                  27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                                        (k)
Next, from the optimality condition of the update x(k+1) = proj∆n (x(k) − αhx ), we have

     ⟨x(k+1) − x̂(x(k) ), x(k+1) − x(k) + αh(k)
                                            x ⟩≤0                                                        (132)
     (1)
     ⇒ ⟨x(k+1) − x(k) + x(k) − x̂(x(k) )x(k+1) − x(k) + αh(k)
                                                          x ⟩≤0                                          (133)
     (2)
     ⇒ ⟨x(k+1) − x(k) , x(k) − x̂(x(k) )⟩
             ≤ −∥x(k+1) − x(k) ∥2 − α⟨h(k)
                                       x ,x
                                           (k+1)
                                                 − x(k) ⟩ − α⟨h(k)
                                                               x ,x
                                                                   (k)
                                                                       − x̂(x(k) )⟩                      (134)
     (3)
     ⇒ ρ⟨x(k+1) − x(k) , x(k) − x̂(x(k) )⟩
             ≤ −ρ∥x(k+1) − x(k) ∥2 − ρα⟨h(k)
                                         x ,x
                                             (k+1)
                                                   − x(k) ⟩ − ρα⟨h(k)
                                                                  x ,x
                                                                      (k)
                                                                          − x̂(x(k) )⟩                   (135)
     (4)
     ⇒ ρ⟨x(k+1) − x(k) , x(k) − x̂(x(k) )⟩
             ≤ −ρ∥x(k+1) − x(k) ∥2 + ρ⟨αh(k)
                                         x ,x
                                             (k)
                                                 − x(k+1) ⟩ + ρα⟨h(k)
                                                                  x , x̂(x
                                                                           (k)
                                                                               ) − x(k) ⟩                (136)
     (5)
     ⇒ ρ⟨x(k+1) − x(k) , x(k) − x̂(x(k) )⟩
                                        ρ
        ≤ −ρ∥x(k+1) − x(k) ∥2 +            ∥αh(k) 2
                                               x ∥ + ∥x
                                                        (k)
                                                            − x(k+1) ∥2
                                        2
             + ρα⟨h(k)
                    x    , x̂(x (k)
                                    ) − x(k) ⟩                                                           (137)
     (6)
     ⇒ ρ⟨x(k+1) − x(k) , x(k) − x̂(x(k) )⟩
                ρ                    ρα2 (k) 2
             ≤ − ∥x(k+1) − x(k) ∥2 +    ∥hx ∥ + ρα⟨h(k)
                                                    x , x̂(x
                                                             (k)
                                                                 ) − x(k) ⟩                              (138)
                2                     2
where (1) is by adding and subtracting x(k) , (2) is from distributing the inner product ⟨(x(k+1) −
                                                  (k)
x(k) ) + (x(k) − x̂(x(k) )), (x(k+1) − x(k) ) + αhx ⟩, (3) is from multiplying both sides by ρ, (4) is
                                                           2     2
from simple algebra, (5) is from rewriting ⟨a, b⟩ ≤ ∥a∥ +∥b∥ 2     , and (6) is from combining terms.
Therefore, substituting (138) into (131), we get

 Φ1/ρ (x(k+1) )
       X                     ρ                      ρα2 (k) 2
   ≤      λi ℓi (x̂(x(k) )) + ∥x(k) − x̂(x(k) )∥2 +    ∥hx ∥ + ρα⟨h(k)
                                                                   x , x̂(x
                                                                            (k)
                                                                                ) − x(k) ⟩ (139)
        i
                             2                       2
                             ρα2 (k) 2
     = Φ1/ρ (x(k) ) +           ∥hx ∥ + ρα⟨h(k)
                                            x , x̂(x
                                                     (k)
                                                         ) − x(k) ⟩                                      (140)
                              2
where the second equality is by definition of the Moreau envelope. Now, we bound the last term in
(140):

    ⟨h(k)
      x , x̂(x
               (k)
                   ) − x(k) ⟩
     (1)
         D                                                        E
      = x̂(x(k) ) − x(k) , h(k)
                              x − ∇  x F (x (k)
                                                , y (k+1)
                                                          , λ(k)
                                                                 )
             D                                                                     E
           + x̂(x(k) ) − x(k) , ∇x F (x(k) , y (k+1) , λ(k) ) − ∇x F (x(k) , λ(k) )
             D                                       E
           + x̂(x(k) ) − x(k) , ∇x F (x(k) , λ(k) )                                                      (141)
      (2)
      = ⟨x̂(x(k) ) − x(k) , Bk ⟩ + ⟨x̂(x(k) ) − x(k) , ∇x F (x(k) , y (k+1) , λ(k) ) − ∇x F (x(k) , λ(k) )⟩
        |          {z         } |                                     {z                                  }
                       (A)                                                (B)
                     (k)         (k)               (k)    (k)
           + ⟨x̂(x         )−x         , ∇x F (x         ,λ     )⟩                                       (142)
             |                          {z                       }
                                       (C)


where (1) follows from adding and subtracting ∇x F (x(k) , y (k+1) , λ(k) ), ∇x F (x(k) , λ(k) ) terms and
                                                       (k)
(2) is from splitting the inner product and applying hx − ∇x F (x(k) , y (k+1) , λ(k) ) = Bk from
equation 20 in Assumption 3. To bound (A) and (B), we simply apply ⟨a, b⟩ ≤ 4c ∥a∥2 + 1c ∥b∥2 to


                                                                     28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


both inner products:
                                       c                     1
      (A) = ⟨x̂(x(k) ) − x(k) , Bk ⟩ ≤ ∥x̂(x(k) ) − x(k) ∥2 + b2k                                    (143)
            D                          4                     c                   E
                   (k)      (k)            (k)  (k+1)
      (B) = x̂(x ) − x            , ∇x F (x , y       , λ ) − ∇x F (x(k) , λ(k) )
                                                         (k)


               1                                                         c
           ≤     ∥∇x F (x(k) , y (k+1) , λ(k) ) − ∇x F (x(k) , λ(k) )∥2 + ∥x̂(x(k) ) − x(k) ∥2 .     (144)
               c                                                         4
We proceed to bound (C). First, from weak convexity of µℓ , we have that for all i ∈ [n],
                                                                           µℓ
       ℓi (x̂(x(k) )) ≥ ℓi (x(k) ) + ⟨∇ℓ(x(k) ), x̂(x(k) ) − x(k) ⟩ − ∥x̂(x(k) ) − x(k) ∥2 .         (145)
                                                                            2
Taking λi times the ith of these equations, we get
  n                        n                     n
 X                        X                     X                                    µℓ
     λi ℓi (x̂(x(k) )) ≥      λi ℓi (x(k) ) +        ∇ℓi (x(k) ), x̂(x(k) ) − x(k) − ∥x̂(x(k) ) − x(k) ∥2 .
 i=1                      i=1                   i=1
                                                                                      2
                                                                                                     (146)
By definition of the Moreau envelope, we also have
                        n                    n
                       X                    X                        ρ
                           λi ℓi (x(k) ) ≥      λi ℓi (x̂(x(k) )) + ∥x̂(x(k) ) − x(k) ∥2 .           (147)
                       i=1                  i=1
                                                                     2
Adding (146) and (147), we have
                µℓ − ρ
                        ∥x̂(x(k) ) − x(k) ∥2 ≥ ⟨∇x F (x(k) , λ(k) ), x̂(x(k) ) − x(k) ⟩.             (148)
                   2
If we let c = −µ2ℓ +ρ in (143) and (144), we can rewrite (142) as
   ⟨h(k)
     x , x̂(x
              (k)
                  ) − x(k) ⟩
        c                        1      1
    ≤ ∥x̂(x(k) ) − x(k) ∥2 + b2k + ∥∇x F (x(k) , y (k+1) , λ(k) ) − ∇x F (x(k) , λ(k) )∥2
       2                         c      c
            −µℓ + ρ          (k)    (k) 2
          −            ∥x̂(x ) − x ∥                                                                 (149)
                  2                                                   !
                                            n
        c      (k)      (k) 2    1 2 L2 X           ⋆ (k)     (k+1) 2
    ≤ ∥x̂(x ) − x ∥ + bk +                     λi ∥yi (x ) − yi     ∥
       2                         c       c i=1
           −µℓ + ρ
          −         ∥x̂(x(k) ) − x(k) ∥2                                                      (150)
              2                                                  !
                                  n
         2              2L2      X                       (k+1) 2   −µℓ + ρ
     ≤         b2k +                  λi ∥yi⋆ (x(k) ) − yi    ∥ −          ∥x̂(x(k) ) − x(k) ∥2 .
       −µℓ + ρ       −µℓ + ρ i=1                                     4
                                                                                              (151)
                                       (0)               (k)
Taking the full expectation Fi ≜ {yi , x(0) , · · · , yi , x(k) }, we have
 E[⟨h(k)
     x , x̂(x
              (k)
                  ) − x(k) ⟩]
                                " n                             #
          2       2    2L2       X
                                          ⋆ (k)         (k+1) 2       −µℓ + ρ
      ≤         bk +          E      λi ∥yi (x ) − yi         ∥ −               ∥x̂(x(k) ) − x(k) ∥2
        −µℓ + ρ       −µℓ + ρ    i=1
                                                                          4
                                                                                                 (152)
                              " n                                 #
          2            2L2      X                        (k+1) 2       −µℓ + ρ
      =         b2k +              λi E[∥yi⋆ (x(k) ) − yi      ∥ ] −             ∥x̂(x(k) ) − x(k) ∥2
        −µℓ + ρ       −µℓ + ρ i=1                                           4
                                                                                                 (153)
                          2

          2            2L                              (k+1) 2         −µℓ + ρ
      ≤         b2 +            max E[∥yi⋆ (x(k) ) − yi       ∥ ] −              ∥x̂(x(k) ) − x(k) ∥2
        −µℓ + ρ k −µℓ + ρ i∈[n]                                            4
                                                                                                 (154)
                          2

          2            2L                       −µℓ + ρ
      =         b2 +            max ∆(k) −                 ∥x̂(x(k) ) − x(k) ∥2                  (155)
        −µℓ + ρ k −µℓ + ρ i∈[n] yi                   4


                                                    29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Therefore, rewriting everything into (146) and taking the full expectation over Fi , we have (recall
                        (k)
that the definition of ∆yi includes an expectation):
E[Φ1/ρ (x(k+1) )]
    (1)                 ρα2
    ≤ E[Φ1/ρ (x(k) )] +      E[∥h(k)    2            (k)
                                    x ∥ ] + ραE[⟨hx , x̂(x
                                                              (k)
                                                                  ) − x(k) ⟩]                        (156)
                          2
                                           2L2 ρα

    (2)                    2ρα 2                                      ρα(−µℓ + ρ)
    = E[Φ1/ρ (x(k) )] +            bk +               max ∆(k)
                                                             yi     −                E[∥x̂(x(k) ) − x(k) ∥2 ]
                        −µℓ + ρ           −µℓ + ρ i∈[n]                       4
         ρα2

                 2     2       2          (k)
       +       σ̃f + 3bk + 3L max ∆yi                                                                (157)
          2                       i∈[n]

                                             2L2 ρα      3L2 ρα2

    (3)                    2ρα 2
    = E[Φ1/ρ (x(k) )] +            bk +               +                max ∆(k) yi
                        −µℓ + ρ             −µℓ + ρ         2          i∈[n]

         ρα(µℓ − ρ)                             ρα2 2
       +             E[∥x̂(x(k) ) − x(k) ∥2 ] +      (σ̃f + 3b2k ),                                  (158)
             4                                    2
                                                                        (k)
where (1) is a copy of (140) and (2) is from (158), plugging in ∥hx ∥2 from Lemma 1, and doing
the same expectation calculation from (152) to (155). Finally, (3) is combining terms via algebra.
Summing up from k = 0, 1, · · · , K − 1, we get the following bound:
              K
          1 X
                E[∥x̂(x(k) ) − x(k) ∥2 ]
          K
            k=1

                4       Φ1/ρ (x0 )         2
          ≤                        +           b2
            −µℓ + ρ       ραK          −µℓ + ρ 0
                                                          K
                                                                        !                     !
                                2L2        3L2 α

                                                      1 X                     α 2
                                                          max ∆(k)              σ̃ + 3b20

                        +                +                      yi          +                        (159)
                              −µℓ + ρ        2        K   i∈[n]               2 f
                                                          k=1
                      
                4      Φ1/ρ (x0 )     2
          =                       +        b2
              −µℓ + ρ  ραK          −µℓ + ρ 0
                       | {z }
                           K −2/5
                                           K
                                                        !
                             2L2       1 X          (k)
                         +                    max ∆yi
                           −µℓ + ρ     K      i∈[n]
                                          k=1
                                      √
                           |             {z             }
                                        nK −2/5
                                                                   
                                                     K
                                                                 !
                                               3L2 X
                                                                   
                           α
                                σ̃f2 + 3b20 +           max ∆(k)
                                                                   
                         +                                     yi
                                                                   .                                (160)
                           2                    K        i∈[n]     
                                                    k=1            
                           |                    {z√               }
                                        K  −3/5 + nK  −1


B     G ENERALIZATION B OUNDS
In addition to convergence, we also show the generalization abilities of the bilevel optimizer. The
theorem in this section is inspired by Collins et al. (2020, Theorem 4), but our results hold for
the fully general min-max multi-objective BLO setup while Collins et al. (2020) study a min-max
multi-objective single-level problem. Assume that for a learning task i, we observe mi batches of
                   t        v
train/test data, Di,j and Di,j , j ∈ [mi ]. Assume that each train and test batch has K and J input-
                                            t     v
output pairs, respectively, so that sets Di,j , Di,j  are drawn from a common distribution Di . Also,
     ⋆      t                 1
                                 P  m i              t
let yi (x; Di ) = arg minyi mi j ′ =1 gi (x, yi , Di,j ′ ) be the value of yi that minimizes the empirical
inner loss on some dataset Dit . For outer and inner objectives fi , gi , we consider the following


                                                     30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


function class Fi , where x ∈ X is the set of optimization parameters introduced in equation 2 and
(Dit , Div ) are any train and test datasets sampled from Di :
                                 Fi = fi x, ŷi⋆ (x; Dit ), Div , x ∈ X .


We use f and g to denote the empirical function values evaluated at the points in Dit and Div , and so
                                                                                v mi
the empirical Rademacher complexity of Fi on mi samples Di ≜ {(Di,j     t
                                                                            , Di,j }j=1 ∼ (Di )mi is
                                                                                   
                                                 mi
                   i                          1  X
                                                               ⋆      t        v

                 Rmi (Fi ) = EDi Eϵj  sup           ϵj fi x, yi (x; Di,j ); Di,j  ,
                                        x∈X mi j=1


where ϵj s are Rademacher random variables (±1/2 with equal probability). The empirical loss for
                t       v
fixed samples Di,j and Di,j ,
                                             mi
                                         1 X
                                                fi x, yi⋆ (x; Di,j
                                                               t       v

                             F̂i (x) ≜                             ); Di,j   .
                                         mi j=1

Similarly, define Fi (x) ≜ EDi [F̂i (x)]. First, from classical generalization results such as Shalev-
Shwartz & Ben-David (2014, Theorem 26.5) or Mohri et al. (2018, Theorem 3.3), we directly
conclude the following proposition, which bounds the true loss of the classifier as a function of the
empirical loss.
Proposition 1. Assume the regularity assumptions considered in Appendix 3, specifically that the
function ℓ is Bℓ -bounded. Then, with probability at least 1 − δ, we have
                                                               s
                                                                  log 1/δ
                           Fi (x) ≤ F̂i (x) + 2Rimi (Fi ) + Bℓ            .               (161)
                                                                    2mi

This extends to the following in a straightforward manner, providing a guarantee for the worst-case
generalization for any learning task i:
Proposition 2. Assume the regularity assumptions given in Section 5, specifically that the function ℓ
is Bℓ -bounded. Then, with probability at least 1 − δ, we have
                                                                r
                                                                   log n/δ
                      max Fi (x) ≤ max F̂i (x) + 2Rm (F) + Bℓ               .                  (162)
                      i∈[n]          i∈[n]                            2m
Here we assume that Fi = F and mi = m for all i ∈ [n] and hence Rimi (Fi ) = Rm (F) for all
i ∈ [n].

Next, we Pproceed to bound the generalization on unseen tasks. Consider a new task with distribution
            n
Dn+1 = i=1 ai Di , for some a ∈ ∆n , meaning that the distribution of the new task is anywhere in
the convex hull of the distribution of the old tasks. We make this assumption because if the new task
is very dissimilar to the existing tasks, there is no reason to expect good generalization in the first
place. We then show the following proposition:
Proposition 3. For all x ∈ X , with probability at least 1 − δ, we have
                                                                                       s
                                                 n                       n
                                                 X
                                                           i
                                                                         X                 log(n/δ)
              Fn+1 (x) ≤ max pi F̂i (x) + 2            ai Rm   (Fi ) +         ai Bℓ                .   (163)
                           p∈∆n
                                                 i=1
                                                             i
                                                                         i=1
                                                                                             2mi

Notice that while Proposition 3 holds true for all x, the tighest upper bound is found when x minimizes
maxp∈∆n pi F̂i (x), which is precisely when x = x⋆ , the optimal solution to problem we study in
equation 2. This highlights another advantage of      Pour formulation over TTSA: when we use the
solution obtained by the single averaged objective i fi in equation 1, x⋆min-avg , we will have a looser
upper bound for Fn+1 (x⋆min-avg ) compared to Fn+1 (x⋆ ), showing that our formulation gives tighter
robust (or worst case) generalization guarantees and this behaviour has been demonstrated empirically
in section 4.


                                                       31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Proof. (of Proposition 3) First, by definition, for all x, we have that
                                                                                            
                                                            Xmi
   Fn+1 (x) = E(Dn+1,j
                    train   test
                          ,Dn+1,j
                                          ˆ x, arg min
                                  )∼Dn+1 fi
                                                                               train
                                                                 ĝi (x, yi , Di,j       test 
                                                                                   ′ ), Di,j                         (164)
                                                           yi
                                                                     j ′ =1
                                                                                                           
                   n
                   X                                                      mi
                                                                          X
               =         ai E(Dn+1,j
                               train   test
                                     ,Dn+1,j
                                                  ˆ x, arg min
                                             )∼Di fi
                                                                                                 train
                                                                                   ĝi (x, yi , Di,j       test 
                                                                                                     ′ ), Di,j       (165)
                                                                yi
                   i=1                                                    j ′ =1
                   n
                   X
               =         ai Fi (x).                                                                                  (166)
                   i=1


Therefore, for all x, using a union bound over 1 ≤ i ≤ n, we get that with probability at least 1 − nδ ′ ,
we have
                                                                                 s
                     n               n                  n                n
                    X               X                  X
                                                               i
                                                                        X          log 1/δ ′
     Fn+1 (x) =         ai Fi (x) ≤     ai F̂i (x) + 2     ai Rmi (F) +     ai B             .    (167)
                    i=1             i=1                i=1              i=1
                                                                                     2mi

Letting δ = nδ ′ in (167), we have
                                                                                             s
                                                  n                           n
                                                  X
                                                             i
                                                                              X                  log(n/δ)
                Fn+1 (x) ≤ max pi F̂i (x) + 2           a i Rm   (F) +               ai Bℓ                           (168)
                                p∈∆n
                                                  i=1
                                                               i
                                                                              i=1
                                                                                                   2mi

Therefore, plugging in x⋆ gives us
                                                                                                 s
                                                     n                             n
                     ⋆
                                                     X
                                                               i
                                                                                   X                 log(n/δ)
            Fn+1 (x ) ≤ min max pi F̂i (x) + 2             ai Rm   (F) +                 ai Bℓ                .      (169)
                              x∈X p∈∆n
                                                     i=1
                                                                 i
                                                                                   i=1
                                                                                                       2mi


C     I MPLEMENTATION DETAILS AND C OMPUTE R ESOURCES
We perform our experiments in Python 3.7.10 and PyTorch 1.8.1 with Intel(R) Core(TM) i5-8265U
CPU @ 1.60GHz. The code is available at our repository https://github.com/minimario/
bilevel. For our empirical evaluation, we first select α, β that give good performance/convergence
for the min-avg problem (the baseline). We do a hyperparameter search to choose these parame-
ters, specifically the initial learning rates. Then we fix α, β and only select γ that provides good
convergence for the min-max problem (our proposed scheme).
Hypergradient computation. We would like to note that the analysis does not require the actual
hypergradient but rather a stochastic estimate with bounded bias. The standard Hessian inverse
approximation using the Neumann series (Agarwal et al., 2017; Ghadimi & Wang, 2018; Hong
et al., 2020) is one way of computing this estimate (as we have discussed in section 3.2 preceding
Corollary 1). Since we are considering a single-loop algorithm, even a straightforward iterative
differentiation (Ji et al., 2021) can provide an sufficiently useful estimate of the hypergradient. We
utilize this for our empirical evaluations.

C.1    S INUSOID R EGRESSION TASK

We consider the sinusoid regression experiment (Finn et al., 2017), a multi-task representation
learning problem where each task Ti is a regression problem y = ti (x) = ai sin(x − ϕi ). We
uniformly sample the amplitude ai ∈ [0.1, 5], frequency and phase ϕi ∈ [0, π] for each task. We use
n = 3 training tasks and 3 testing tasks, with 2 ”easy tasks” (ai ∈ [0.1, 1.05]) and one ”hard tasks”
(ai ∈ [4.95, 5]) for each set. We use easy and hard tasks following the setup in (Collins et al., 2020).
During training, for each task i, the learner is given samples (x, y), x ∈ [−5, 5]. The goal is to learn
a function approximating ti as best as possible in the mean squared error sense.


                                                     32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


As described in Section 2, we use a neural network divided into two pieces, i.e., an embedding
network and a task-specific network. The embedding network f : R → R10 consists of two hidden
ReLU layers of size 80 and a final fully connected layer of size 10. Each task-specific network
gi : R10 → R, i ∈ [n] is a one-layer linear layer. Therefore, the loss on an input x ∈ R and
y = ti (x) for task i is (gi (f (x)) − y)2 , and the true loss of the network with parameters f, gi are
ℓi (f ; gi ) = E(x,y) [(gi (f (x)) − y)2 ]. The embedding network is as follows:

                                        Input (R)
                              Linear FC Layer (output in R80 )
                                          ReLU
                              Linear FC Layer (output in R80 )
                                          ReLU
                              Linear FC Layer (output in R10 )


Training: At each iteration, we first perform the inner loop optimization step (meta-training) by
sampling 10 shots from each of the tasks in order to update each of the task-specific network weights.
We use just 1 inner loop step. Pseudocode for the inner loop is shown below in PyTorch-style:

for task id in t a s k l i s t :
    xs , y s = s a m p l e b a t c h ( t a s k i d , n s h o t s )
    embedding = e m b e d d i n g n e t w o r k ( x s )
    for      in range ( n inner ) :
         head optimizers [ task id ] . zero grad ()
         t o t a l l o s s = g e t l o s s ( t a s k i d , xs , y s )
         t o t a l l o s s . backward ( )
         head optimizers [ task id ] . step ()

For each outer loop optimization, we run a meta-validation batch again containing 10 shots from each
of the tasks. We then take an outer-loop step, optimizing the embedding weights using the results
of the meta-validation batch. The meta-validation batch is sampled in the exact same way as the
meta-training batch shown above.
Regularization:PFirst, as in (Ji et al., 2020), we add weight regualarization during inner loop training
of the form ϵw w∈W ∥w∥, where W denotes the set of weight parameters, where ϵw = 0.01. In
PyTorch, this is expressed as

l 2 r e g c o n s t a n t = 0.01
f o r p in heads [ t a s k ] . parameters ( ) :
        l 2 r e g += p . norm ( 2 )
t o t a l l o s s += l 2 r e g * l 2 r e g c o n s t a n t

                                                                                    Pn
Next, for the inner λ updates, we add a regularization term to the overall loss, −ϵλ i=1 (λi − n1 )2 ,
where ϵλ = 3, which pulls the λs closer to uniform. In PyTorch, the λ update is expressed as

task gradient = task losses [ i ]
r e g g r a d i e n t = −mu lambda * ( l a m b d a s [ t a s k ] − 1 / n )
l a m b d a s [ t a s k ] += ( t a s k u p d a t e + r e g u p d a t e ) * gamma

Parameters: For the Task-Robust version of the algorithm, we use α = 0.007, β = 0.005, γ =
0.003. For the standard version of the algorithm, we use α = 0.007, β = 0.011, γ = 0.003.
Loss curves: To approximate the true loss for measurement purposes, we use 100 equally-spaced
samples from [−5, 5]. After each iteration, we calculated the maximum loss among all the tasks. In
1c, we show the minimum of these maximum losses up until each epoch.
Results with more tasks: Finally, we show another figure similar to Figure 1, but with 20 training
tasks and 20 test tasks. It can be observed that both the task-robust training loss and the task-robust
testing loss greatly outperform their respective standard losses.


                                                  33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 3: Comparison of standard (min-avg) training and robust (min-max) training using 20 tasks


C.2    N ONLINEAR R EPRESENTATION L EARNING

We consider binary classification tasks generated from the FashionMNIST data set where we select 8
“easy” tasks (lowest log loss ∼ 0.3 from independent training) and 2 “hard” tasks (lowest loss ∼ 0.45
from independent training). We learn a shared representation network that maps the 784 dimensional
(vectorized 28×28 images) to a 100 dimensional space. Each tasks then learns a binary classifier on
top of this representation. The task specific objective gi for task i corresponds to the cross-entropy
loss on the training set, while the upper level objective fi corresponds to the loss of the yi⋆ (x) with
the learned representation x on a validation set. We also maintain a heldout test set which we use to
evaluate the generalization of the learned representation and per-task models.
For our data, we had x ∈ R784×100 and y ∈ R100×2 . We used step sizes α = 0.01, β = 0.01, and
γ = 0.3. We used batch sizes of 8 and 128 to compute gi for each inner step and fi for each outer
iteration, respectively. In addition, we included ℓ2 -regularization of y with regularization penalty
0.0005. We used vanilla SGD with a learning rate scheduler (ReduceLROnPlateau), invoked every
100 outer iterations, with patience of 10. Each optimization was executed for 10000 outer iterations.
The results are generated by aggregation over runs with 10 different seeds.


C.3    H YPERPARAMETER OPTIMIZATION

In this application, we use learning rates α = 0.0001, β = 0.001, γ = 0.001 and 20000 outer
iterations. We use a batch size of 8 for both the inner and outer steps for each i ∈ [16] for the
initial experiment in figure 2a. The optimizer was vanilla SGD with a learning rate scheduler
(ReduceLROnPlateau), invoked every 100 outer iterations, with patience of 30. The results are
generated by aggregating over 10 runs with different seeds. For the other HPO experiments, the
number of tasks n and the batch sizes are discussed in the main text.


D     A DDITIONAL T ECHNICAL D ETAILS

Here we provide further discussion on some technical aspects of the problem we are studying in this
paper.


                                                  34
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


D.1    W EAK - CONVEXITY AND N ON - CONVEXITY

We consider weakly convex UL objective, and here we discuss how it is related to non-convexity.
Weak convexity captures a class of non-convex problems. Weakly convex functions are not convex –
note difference in the following definitions (also in Appendix A.1, Assumptions 1 and 2). For any
convex function τ , there exists a µ ≥ 0 such that, for any x, x′ (x ̸= x′ )
                          τ (x′ ) ≥ τ (x) + ⟨∇x τ (x), x′ − x⟩ + µ∥x′ − x∥2 ,                       (170)
whereas, for a weakly-convex function κ, there exists ν > 0 such that, for any x, x′ (x ̸= x′ )
                          κ(x′ ) ≥ κ(x) + ⟨∇x κ(x), x′ − x⟩ − ν∥x′ − x∥2 .                          (171)

Note the ”−ν” for a weakly-convex κ(·) instead of the ”+µ” for a convex τ (·) in the third term
on the right hand side of the above two inequalities. So κ(·) is clearly not convex. Moreover, note
that the ∥x′ − x∥2 term on the right-hand side of the inequality for the weakly-convex function is
strictly positive, implying that, for large enough ν, the inequality will be true for any function. We
provide convergence results which depend on the coefficient of weak-convexity (for our UL function
in question, it is denoted as µℓ ), with slower rates for larger coefficients.

D.2    C OMPARISON WITH H U ET AL . (2022)

Hu et al. (2022) may appear similar to our work at a glance, but we would like to clarify that the
differences are nontrivial as we are solving a different problem. We address this briefly in section 2
(Closely related and Concurrent Work), but we will elaborate further here to make the distinction
clearer.
At a high level, the problem in Hu et al. (2022) is not multi-objective: the authors explicitly call
it multi-block. They are still solving the single-objective min-max problem minx maxα f (x, α).
Hence the problem setup in Hu et al. (2022) cannot solve standard bilevel learning applications such
as representation learning and HPO; they choose AUC maximization as their motivating example
instead.
Now, we explain what may be a source of confusion: why it seems like they are solving a multi-
objective problem. Hu et al. (2022) start with the min-max problem minx maxα f (x, α) with strong
concavity in α, such as in AUC maximization. Then they make it bilevel to minx maxα f (x, y ⋆ (x), α)
subject to y ⋆ (x) = arg minyPg(x, y, α) by splitting the x variable and then further splitting into multi-
block to minx maxαi ,i∈[n] i fi (x, yi⋆ (x), αi ). Here, each fi is strongly concave in αi . This is a
different problem setup than ours and does not include our problem formulation.
Therefore, the crucial difference is this: they study a single-objective problem minx maxα f (x, α),
and we consider the robust multi-objective bilevel problem minx maxi fi (x, yi⋆ (x)). Their approach
seems similar at first glance because they are solving the single-objective problem in a bilevel,
multi-block way, but their problem class does not encompass the multi-objective one we consider.

D.3    I MPROVING THE S AMPLE C OMPLEXITY OF MORBiT

There is a potential room for improvement in the sample complexity of MORBiT. In the n = 1 case,
our algorithm builds off of TTSA (Hong et al., 2020) with a O(1/ϵ2.5 ) complexity. The only existing
work in the n = 1 case with a better sample complexity in a single-loop constrained UL case is the
extremely recent STABLE (Chen et al., 2022b), achieving O(1/ϵ2 ). STABLE, has a much more
complex LL update than TTSA using variance reduction techniques. We are optimistic that more
complex algorithms like STABLE can be extended to the robust multi-objective bilevel optimization
setting with improved sample complexity.

D.4    W HY ROBUST min max INSTEAD OF PARETO M ULTI -O BJECTIVE O PTIMIZATION ?

Bilevel optimization problems are ubiquitous in machine learning applications such as representation
learning and hyperparameter optimization, which is difficult to formulate as a single-level problem.
We consider standard stochastic bilevel problems such as these, formulating a natural robust multi-
objective version of these problems inspired by the benefits of robust multi-objective learning


                                                   35
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


highlighted in Mehta et al. (2012) and Collins et al. (2020). These papers consider the robust multi-
objective view but do not study stochastic bilevel learning problems, which we do. Existing bilevel
optimization problems, however, are all single-objective rather than multi-objective.
The advantages of taking single objective problems and formulating them as robust multi-objective
problems have been highlighted in various works – see the literature cited in section 2 (Min-max
Robust Optimization in Machine Learning). To summarize, the main advantage is that we can
get guarantees on the worst-case performance instead of the usual average case performance (see
for example our generalization guarantees in Appendix B). If we just summed the objectives and
solved a single-objective problem, we would only be able to establish guarantees for the average-case
performance: maybe we would find a solution that is good for most tasks, but might do extremely
poorly on some. Moreover, at the lower level (LL) problem, there are different objectives for the
learners as the individual problem structures and data distributions are different, again forming a
natural multi-objective optimization (MOO) problem.
Much like our motivating existing literature on robust multi-objective learning, we focus on a
single robust solution instead of a set of Pareto optimal solutions since, in various applications, we
finally need select a single solution, and the robust (min max) solution provides stronger worst-case
guarantees than any Pareto-optimal solution, which is our main motivation.
Pareto frontiers can be very useful and informative, potentially allowing us to understand the tradeoff
between the multiple objectives. However, we would like to note that there are various forms of
solutions in multi-objective optimization. There are Pareto optimal solutions, but also “possibly
optimal” solutions (Wilson et al., 2015), convex coverage set of solutions (Yang et al., 2019), and
min max robust solution (that we consider). The appropriate form of solution(s) would depend on
the application, and we are focusing on min max applications, motivated by existing work such as
Mehta et al. (2012) and Collins et al. (2020), since a min max solution can be shown to have good
generalization guarantees (as we have also shown in Appendix B).
Furthermore, while the Pareto frontier can be more informative and the Pareto curves better demon-
strate tradeoff between the objectives, it is important to note that, this curve is mostly intuitive with
obvious tradeoffs for n = 2 objectives. With n > 3 objectives, the Pareto frontier cannot even be
visualized, and one has to resort to pairwise comparisons, making it hard to reason about the tradeoffs
between objectives even for moderately high n since we will have to consider n2 such comparisons
(for example n ∼ O(10)). Therefore, given a Pareto front of solutions, it is not clear which of the
Pareto optimal solutions we should select.
One advantage of the min max formulation (equation 2) is that it tries to seek a single solution
instead of a set of solutions. This allows us to use the solution for a new related problem (like for a
new related task in representation learning application or hyperparameter optimization application
in Franceschi et al. (2018)), we can use the robust min max solution – we select the robust solution
for the shared UL variable x (the representation network or the hyperparameter configuration). With
a Pareto front, it is not clear which solution to pick for a new task since we would have a set of
solutions, without the knowledge of which one would be useful for a new task/objective.
Furthermore, while a solution on the Pareto frontier implies that there is no other solution that
“dominates” it, to the best of our knowledge, there is no guarantee that some solution on the obtained
Pareto frontier achieves the optimal value for the robust min max objective maxi minx fi (x) unless
the Pareto frontier is completely dense, which is never the case. Multi-objective optimizers can return
a set of solutions on the Pareto frontier, but even uniformly covering the Pareto frontier requires the
size of the solution set to grow exponentially in the number of objectives n.
Finally, for nonconvex objective functions, the Pareto frontier refers to the Pareto stationarity rather
than Pareto optimality. Our considered first-order stationarity condition is defined on the weighted
average of the objective value, while the classical Pareto stationarity (please see Fernando et al. (2023,
equation (2)) and references therein) is measured on the size of the weighted average of the gradients.
The weighting vector in both of these two notations is optimized over a simplex. Therefore, the
stationarity condition of our proposed min max formulation can be considered as one variant of
Pareto stationarity for nonconvex problems.


                                                   36
