Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


E PISTEMOLOGICAL B IAS A S A M EANS FOR THE AU -
TOMATED D ETECTION OF I NJUSTICES IN T EXT

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                              A BSTRACT
         Injustice occurs when someone experiences unfair treatment or their rights are vio-
         lated. The automated identification of injustice in text has received little attention,
         due in part to the fact that underlying stereotypes are rarely explicitly stated and
         that instances often occur unconsciously due to the pervasive nature of prejudice
         in society. Here, we leverage the combined use of a fine-tuned BERT-based bias
         detection model, two stereotype detection models, and a lexicon-based approach
         to show that epistemological biases (i.e., words, which presupposes, entails, as-
         serts, hedges, or boosts text to erode or assert a person’s capacity as a knower) can
         assist with the automatic detection of injustice in text. The news media has many
         instances of injustice (i.e. discriminatory narratives), thus it is our use case here.


1    I NTRODUCTION
The most basic duty of the media is knowledge sharing. Yet, the tool necessary for wide-spread
knowledge sharing is influence. With this influence, the media is able to shape how one will under-
stand the intricacy of a story-line in a news story with little effort. This often results in the use of
epistemological biases which involves propositions that are presupposed, entailed, asserted, hedged,
or boosted in text (Recasens et al., 2013) to erode or assert a person’s capacity as a knower, leading
to framing issues and injustice within the text. Particularly, some of these word choices lead to
testimonial injustice and what we define as character injustice. Character assassination is “the delib-
erate destruction of an individual’s reputation or credibility” (Icks et al., 2019). This often leads to
character injustice, which is an unjustified attack on a person’s character that results in an unfair crit-
icism or inaccurate representation of them. Testimonial injustice occurs when modified believability
is assigned to the statement of a subject based on widely known stereotypes (Fricker, 2007). Both
of these types of injustices can lead to affirming or perpetuating stereotypes concerning the subject.
Though it has always been a harsh reality with various ringing consequences, in recent years we have
publicly witnessed how the affirmation of stereotypes can lead to physical violence, prejudice, and
negative self-image [(Harrison & Esqueda, 1999), (Gover et al., 2020), (Kuykendall, 1989)]. These
experiences are harmful and dangerous, explicitly for the victims but for all members of our society.
We also consider framing injustice. According to (Entman, 2007) framing bias happens when the
use of subjective, one-sided words that reveals the stance of an author occurs. Which means that
an individual’s choice from a set of options is influenced more by how the information is worded,
rather than by the information itself. We recognise that news content can be positively or negatively
framed to influence the narratives. In this paper, we aim to show how negative cases, when it affects
particular subjects or individuals, can lead to framing injustice occurring toward those subjects.
In this work, we seek to make room for subjects of text, even in creative writing, to not have their
credibility shot or character assumed due to well-known stereotypes which are harmful and un-
founded. Our proposed framework will be used to detect character, testimonial, and framing injus-
tices. The framework includes a fine-tuned BERT model based on work from (Pryzant et al., 2020b)
to automatically tag words associated with epistemological bias from an input text, use the (Kwon &
Gopalan, 2021) CO-STAR model and (Sap et al., 2020) Social-Bias Frames to find stereotypes and
the concepts of those stereotypes associated with the input text, and show when the tagged words
(associated with some epistemological bias) or less credibility of a person are correlated with a
stereotype which causes injustice. Though we could use examples from various fields (e.g. politics,
marketing, medicine, etc...), we will use news media as a use-case throughout this work. Thus, we
present the following contributions:


                                                    1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


      1. We develop a novel framework that uses the results of 3 models to detect character, testi-
         monial, and framing injustices in News Media.
      2. We produce a fine-tuned tagger model to automatically detect epistemological bias.
      3. We develop a User-Interface for journalists and editors to submit text to and receive output
         and explanations surrounding the tagged word, referred to in this work as tagger-UI.
      4. We produce empirical evidence showing how epistemological bias can translate to injus-
         tices.

A goal of this work is to give journalists and editors a tool which will help them easily and quickly
learn to avoid character, testimonial, and framing injustices in their work. This will be accomplished
by showing users which words they use that produce epistemological bias, showing them the poten-
tial stereotype associated with the tagged words and text, offering the user explainability with the
help of the stereotype concepts as defined by (Kwon & Gopalan, 2021), and offering the user re-
sources to reference literature on the particular epistemological bias type(s) identified in their input
text.

2   BACKGROUND
Many works have established it is difficult for the common person to identify a biased word in a
sentence and establish the need for computational agents to take on this charge. Section 2.1, 4.1,
and 6.1 and Table 8 of (Pryzant et al., 2020b) shows humans have low ability to detect bias and show
humans perform worse than their detection model. Recasens et al. (2013) shows in Table 4 that the
accuracy of Humans annotators on AMT (amazon mechanical turk) was not more than 37.39% for
a single detected biased word. The difficulty arises due to us holding our own biases as facts and
lack of education on sentence construction. However, there are specific word choices which are
epistemologically biased and can lead to injustices occurring. We will focus on these word choices
throughout this work.
Great efforts have been put towards identifying potential words in text materials that could encour-
age epistemological bias [(Recasens et al., 2013), (Hube & Fetahu, 2019), (Pryzant et al., 2020b)].
Following on from the work of (Pryzant et al., 2020b) we fine-tuned their tagger model to automat-
ically tag words associated with epistemological bias from an input text. Identifying words which
cause epistemological bias is a step towards awareness of social harms. This begs the question, what
do we do with our new found knowledge and awareness? What kinds of implications does our use
of these words impact society? What communities are affected by these word choices? These are
the questions we explore in this work.
Authors Kwon & Gopalan (2021) have trained a model to detect widely-known stereotypes and the
concept of those stereotypes in text materials. We leverage the results of their CO-STAR model and
the Social Bias Frames model (Sap et al., 2020) to offer some explainability of the word choices
by the model. Associating a particular text with a stereotype and the concept of that stereotype is
a critical step towards awareness of social harms that might cause character injustice to a particular
individual or group. Lack of identifying the words in a sentence which imply and promote these
stereotypes leaves us with the undirected burden and question of: how can we address these harms?
This will be further discussed in the methods section of the paper.
Beach et al. (2021) identify words in text that cause testimonial injustice in medical records of Black
patients. Detecting such testimonial injustice is helpful in seeing the unjust realities of our society.
They conclude the testimonial injustice that persists in these medical records has a high potential of
causing disparity in the quality of health care for Black patients, which correlates with findings that
Black patients receive a worse quality of health care (Odonkor et al., 2021). Identifying testimonial
injustice in text materials is vital to creating an environment of accountability. For accountability to
be applied we must include education, which is often unexplored or left up to the user. Many users
do not know where to find resources for such things, thus we provide them in our framework.
Raza et al. (2022) developed a pipeline which takes in news articles, detects and masks words that
are biased, and suggests words with more neutral text. Whilst the pipeline and library designed by
the authors are very good and useful, they however do not consider the linguistic and epistemologi-
cal bias features as discussed in (Recasens et al., 2013) and used by (Pryzant et al., 2020b). Unlike


                                                   2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


our work discussed in this paper, their pipeline produces no way of distinguishing and highlight-
ing epistemological bias types of any identified potential biased word in the sentence. Also, their
framework does not attempt to relate potential stereotypes and stereotype concepts that might be
associated with causing injustice to a person or group.


3     M ETHODOLOGY

Hamborg et al. (2019) concluded that various forms of media bias is already analysed in the Social
Sciences field and can be implemented in an automated fashion by primarily using Natural Language
Processing (NLP) techniques. We leverage research methods using NLP and deep learning whilst
also using analysis concepts by researchers from social sciences, who have studied media bias for
decades.
We propose a novel technical framework (Figure 1) which includes NLP models for detecting po-
tential epistemological biased words and potential stereotypes along with their concepts, which we
semantically link to a given sentence, in our case, a news article headline. We do this with an aim of
showing how the automated detection of epistemological bias can help us quickly find injustices in
text. This framework is made up of, but not limited to, the attributes discussed here.


                       Figure 1: Testimonial Injustice Technical Framework

Figure 2, shows the steps required to scale the framework to analyse multiple headlines.


                        Figure 2: Process of Getting Data to the Framework



3.1   TAGGER MODEL

We leverage the detection component of the modular model as discussed in (Pryzant et al., 2020b)
and refer to this as the tagger model for the rest of this paper.
The tagger model (see Figure 6 in the Appendix) takes as input sentence(s) (e.g. a headline text,
a collection of headlines, etc...), and predicts the probability of each word in the sentence(s) been
biased (see Equation 1 and Figure 1). Then it returns the word with the highest probability as the


                                                  3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


tagged biased word.
                                     Pi = σ(bi W b + ei W e + b)                                     (1)
Where bi ∈ Rb is a word’s wis semantic meaning and ei are the experts features as proposed by
Recasens et al. (2013) and based on Equation 2.
                                      ei = Re LU (fi W in )                                (2)

The detection model itself is a BERT-based neural sequence tagging model that has been fine-tuned
to include the expert linguistic and epistemological bias features from (Recasens et al., 2013). An
example of the expert feature as listed in Table 3 of (Recasens et al., 2013) is the part of speech
(POS) tag of each word in the sentence. Another example of an expert feature from vetted experts
in linguistics is “assertive verbs”. The model leverages the semantic meaning of each word in the
given sentence via the BERT (Kenton & Toutanova, 2019) contextualised word vector. We extend
the detection model further by including a feature on whether or not the sentence contained too
much information (TMI). We hypothesised here that - the TMI information can be considered from
an English linguistic standpoint to be a sentence instance which has more than 2 describing words
(i.e. adjectives and adverbs) in it that do not add to its understanding but seeks to cloud the judgement
of the readers.We created methods in python which makes use of the core NLP dependency tree and
a tree traversal algorithm to go through sentences starting from the root node, then count the number
of adjectives and adverbs in the sentence to determine if there is ”TMI” or ”no TMI” based on the
hypothesis. TMI is not a known indicator of epistemological bias, but we acknowledge it might
contribute to causing doubt which leads to injustice. This is why we introduce this new feature to
see if it will be a contributing feature for the tagger model to detect epistemological biases. We
conducted an ablation study to see the effects of adding this feature, whilst training the tagger model
in Section 4.1.

3.2   CO-STAR M ODEL AND S OCIAL B IAS F RAMES (SBF)

The CO-STAR (COnceptualisation of Stereotypes for Analysis and Reasoning) framework allows
input from the user and generates outputs of stereotypes and stereotype concepts. The Social Bias
Frames model generates and classifies stereotypes associated with an inputted text. These outputs
are quite simple to understand but have a very complex history. The accuracy of the baseline SBF
model was analyzed by looking for the demographic group the statement targeted and the implied
stereotype from the statement. The accuracy was measured with BLEU-2 (group - 83.2%, stereotype
- 68.2%) and Rouge-L (group - 49.9%, stereotype - 43.5%). The authors of the CO-STAR model
manually evaluated their model, but did not specify the results of their evaluation. However, we
manually analyzed how each of these models performed on our sentences and found them to generate
stereotypes which are well fitted to the sentences submitted.
Since testimonial injustice occurs because of widely known stereotypes, the outputs of these models
will help us inform our users of any potential stereotypes that are exacerbated by their inputted
text. The potential stereotype can also be used to determine if a person’s character has been unjustly
targeted. This is because stereotypes are not based on the actual truth of the particular person they are
attached to and stigmatises the individual. Their presence amidst character assassination is evidence
of character injustice. Stereotype concepts will offer explainability as to why a certain word was
tagged as being epistemologically biased.
We submit news article headlines to the CO-STAR and SBF models and receive an output of 6 po-
tential stereotypes and 3 stereotype concepts the sentence is related to. Semantic similarity describes
how closely related two items (e.g. 2 words or 2 sentences) are in terms of meaning. We use se-
mantic similarity to encode the list of generated sentences and the original headline sentence, then
using distance metrics on the encoded vectors, e.g. using a cosine similarity metric from sentence
transformers, to get the distance scores. We rank the outputs based on their semantic similarity to
the headlines. The stereotype and stereotype concept most correlated with the sentence is output to
the user as the potential stereotype and concept which casts doubt on the subject of the inputted text.

3.3   L EXICON L OOKUP

Once the tagger model has returned the top tagged word, we then proceed to automatically look up
and semantically search the tagged word in the epistemological lexicons from social sciences - to


                                                   4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


discover the epistemological bias types it is associated with. These lexicons are from the collection
of datasets we discuss in the dataset section 3.5. When a tagged word is not found in the lexicons, we
lemmatize said word (considering its context) to find its base word and find the stem word (removing
the prefixes and suffixes). We then search for the lemmatized and stemmed words in the lexicons.

3.4      I NTERACTIVE I NTERFACE FOR L EARNING ABOUT B IAS

We propose the use of an interactive interface for editors of media content to learn more about and
mitigate any potential bias types and associated stereotypes, prior to them publishing it.
During the analysis, we first leverage the nltk python library to remove any stop words (i.e. a, the,
etc..). We then check the sentence length. If the sentence is less than 3 words, we determine there
is not enough context to analyze the text for potential stereotypes. However, if we have enough
context, the content is sent to the epistemological tagger model to find the word with the highest
probability of bias (see Figure 7 in the Appendix). The conditions from the framework (Figure 1)
are then implemented.


Figure 3: The interactive interface showing the tagged words, their associated probability for bias,
the potential stereotype and stereotype concept and some explainable data created from the lexicon
search.

We display the types of associated epistemological bias detected to the user and provide links to
resources which explains more on the specific types of biases as shown in Figure 3. See examples
of these outputs in table 7 and table 6 of the appendix section.

             Sentence   Headline                                                                            Subject
             No.
             1          Meghan Markle spent a staggering £38,000 on her clothes for a charity trip          Meghan
             2          Kate Middletons £100,000 Astonishing value of the dress that won a Prince’s heart   Kate
                        (and has hung in a wardrobe for eight years)
             3          Meghan Markles beloved avocado linked to human rights abuse and drought, millen-    Meghan
                        nial shame
             4          Kates morning sickness cure? Prince William gifted with an avocado for pregnant     Kate
                        Duchess


                 Table 1: Example headline sentences used. For a full list of the examples, see A


3.5      DATASET SOURCE USED

We leverage and used the bias data corpus1 as created by (Pryzant et al., 2020b). It contains a
Wikipedia neutrality corpus showing Wikipedia articles that were annotated for neutrality by editors
on Wikipedia, who adhere to NPOV (neutrality point of view) guidelines 2 .
Lexicons used in the lexicon lookup were from social science research and collated in (Pryzant et al.,
2020a). We compiled these lexicons into one large dictionary and included some metadata about the
   1
       http://nlp.stanford.edu/projects/bias/bias data.zip
   2
       https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Neutral point of view


                                                                 5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


lexicon i.e. source, creators, resources about the epistemological bias type, etc. Solely using an
epistemological lexicon look up directly to find the biased words will be limited in its performance,
for various reasons e.g. distributional shift, lexicons cannot scale well enough without requiring
regular manual auditing, updating of the lexicon databases - when newer forms of subtle biased
words arise, etc. There are various studies which show the limitations of using just a lexicon based
approach alone, for example in (Cryan et al., 2020), the authors discuss on page 8 and show in Table
5 how lexicon approaches perform less accurately than an end to end approach using BERT to detect
gender based stereotypes. Therefore, it is beneficial to not solely lean on lexicons and we include it
as a contributor in detecting injustices in our framework.
When it comes to Meghan Markle and Kate Middleton, the media depicts several aspects of their
lives which they share differently and often can be reflective of framing or character injustices3 . We
use actual headlines (as seen in Table 1) from such depictions in our comparative test to further
illustrate the detection and harms of these injustices. The results of this comparative test are further
discussed in our results section (Section 4).

4       R ESULTS AND D ISCUSSIONS

4.1       TAGGER M ODEL A BLATION S TUDY

We performed an ablation to analyse the fine-tuned tagger model performance when there is no
expert feature as proposed by Recasens et al. (2013)and when they are included. Part of the training
experiment was also to determine if there are any benefits from including the TMI feature into the
input data. We carry out the training on 23,000 training samples from the bias-data training set and
700 validation and 1,000 test samples. Training was done using 4 CPUs and 1 GPU. We used a
learning rate of 3e-5 and initially train for 10 epochs.

                                           Tagger Model Ablation Experiments
                                  Kind       Evaluation Accuracy(%)    Evaluation Loss
                                                       72.54               0.0758
                                  basic                72.39               0.0766
                                                       73.13               0.0851
                                                       75.04               0.0745
                                  + expert
                                                       74.16               0.0734
                                  features
                                                       72.83               0.0867
                                                       74.79               0.0730
                                  + tmi               *74.63              *0.0703
                                                       74.63               0.0822


Table 2: Ablation study results showing values for the first 3 epochs. Note: A high score is better for accuracy
and a lower score is better for loss. The numbers highlighted in bold are the values for when the evaluation loss
was less than the previous step.

As shown in Table 2 and Figure 4, we observe a lower training loss value between epoch 3 & 6
during the initial training using the dataset which included the TMI feature - as compared to when
we do not. TMI also gives a better evaluation accuracy and evaluation loss as compared to the
others before any overfitting is observed (which causes the evaluation loss to exponentially increase
from about epoch 3). This overfitting occurs as a result of using too many epochs during the initial
training of the tagger model. When fine-tuning a BERT model, a good practice as suggested by the
authors of Bert is to use between 2 and 4 epochs. In light of this, and from the observations made
from the initial training experiments, we save and use as the best point the tagger model after epoch
2.

4.2       C OMPARATIVE T EST

We performed a comparative test to illustrate how our framework shows injustices e.g. character
and framing injustice. Particularly, we capture the type of epistemological bias attached to the
tagged word in each entry, observe if a relevant stereotype is associated with the inputs, and observe
the depiction of different subjects. In this study, we look at Meghan Markle and Kate Middleton
    3
        https://www.buzzfeednews.com/article/ellievhall/meghan-markle-kate-middleton-double-standards-royal


                                                           6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 4: Training and Validation Results for the Tagger Model using 10 epochs. no features = the
expert features as mentioned in section 3.1 was not added, with expert features = combine the expert
features as mentioned in section 3.1 and with expert + tmi features = combine the expert features
whilst using the data samples containing TMI information class no tmi or tmi


as our subjects of interest. Meghan Markle is an American, Black woman member of the British
royal family, by marriage, who has recently resigned from her royal duties due to abuse from the
media and royal family (e.g. the Firm). Kate Middleton is a British, White woman member of
the British royal family, by marriage, who has recently been promoted to Princess of Wales. Even
before Meghan Markle had resigned from her royal duties, the media has sought to minimize her
experience and diminish her comments and character. We often see instances of Meghan as the
subject of an article and the media using sarcasm and criticism towards her. Such acts have led
readers to having tainted images of Meghan and even not believing her statements or actions, thus
testimonial injustices. We also see this leading to her character being questioned, thus character
injustice. Yet, for the same and similar topics of concern, media members speak charmingly about
Kate, thus leading to framing injustices shown. It is important to note here, that Kate Middleton
and Meghan Markle shared similar positions, interests, and abilities. With this, we see them as good
subjects to observe in our comparative test.

                  No    Subject    Tagged Bias Word   Potential Bias Type           Sentence Sentiment
                  1     Meghan     [’staggering’]     [’subjectives’]               negative
                  2     Kate       [’astonishing’]    [’positive’, ’subjectives’]   neutral
                  3     Meghan     [’beloved’]        [’positive’, ’subjectives’]   negative
                  4     Kate       [’gifted’]         [’positive’, ’subjectives’]   neutral


  Table 3: A subset of output result. (It shows the words tagged as potentially biased, the lexicon that type of
bias is associated with, and the overall sentence sentiment for each headline sentence depicted in table 5 & full
          list of the output results see table 6). For a full list of columns, please refer to the appendix A

In Figure 5, we plotted results of an experiment where we ran 10 article headlines of Meghan Markle
and 10 articles of Kate Middleton through our framework. Each article was chosen because it dis-
cusses a topic which is common between each of the two subjects and allows us to see the differences
in how the two subjects are spoken about concerning that topic. It has been acknowledged by several
outlets that these particular articles which we have mentioned are unjust3 . Majority of these articles
are seen in the aforementioned articles to show these comparisons, but also a few additional articles
were hand chosen by our team. You can see the headlines for each subject in Table 1. The complete
result output and table column descriptions are given in Appendix A. In this plot, we capture the
subject of the headline (Meghan/Kate), sentiment of the entire headline sentence, and the associated
epistemological bias types for each headline as shown in table 3. The light blue circles represent
the overall sentiment of each headline, we will refer to them as the sentiment headline level. We
use the 3 categories of positive, neutral, and negative sentiments. Within each sentiment headline
level, we capture the subject of the headline, we will call this the subject level. Note that in Figure
5, Kate takes up the entire positive sentiment space, there were no examples that were detected to
have positive sentiments for Meghan. Within each subject level, we capture the epistemological bias
types associated with the tagged words in the headlines for each subject; we will refer to this as the
bias-type level. This illustration shows us how much space is filled by each subject.


                                                        7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                       Figure 5: Epistemological Bias Types - Comparative Test


From this plot, we can see the headline sentiment level, the negative sentiment circle is mostly filled
with articles about Meghan and the most common bias type is positively subjective. The intuition
here is that many articles about Meghan contain sarcasm, though this is not the only indicator. There
was one article about Kate which had negative sentiment and each of the bias types in her circle
were identified in the headline, this is why they are all equal in size. In looking at the headline
sentiment level, the positive sentiment circle is completely filled with articles about Kate and the
most common bias type is implicatives. The intuition here is that, in articles which have common
topics between Meghan and Kate, only Kate is talked about in a suggestively positive way. In
looking at the headline sentiment level, the neutral sentiment circle is mostly filled with articles
about Kate and the most common bias type is positively subjective and regular. Recall, regular is
the epistemological bias type assigned to detected words which do not appear, nor do similar words
appear in the lexicon lookup. We can also observe, the articles which appear for Meghan with
neutral sentiment are negatively subjective in nature, informing us they likely are not sarcastic but
have negative suggestions. For Kate, she is talked about in a suggestively positive way, even in the
neutral sentiments. It is clear from this experiment when there is a topic that Meghan and Kate share
- the media uses words for Meghan which are sarcastic and cause framing and character injustices
to her as a subject. Both of which can contribute to someone taking Meghan less seriously, thus
causing testimonial injustice.

 No.   Subject   Stereotype(S)                           Distance(S)   Stereotype Concept(SC)                  Distance(CS)
 1     Meghan    personal spending habits                0.3457        women should spend money on clothes     0.4914
 2     Kate      women should be dressed like brides     0.3259        women are property                      0.2278
 3     Meghan    feminism                                0.3663        sexism                                  0.2523
 6     Meghan    family law                              0.3244        arab folks are not protected            0.2951
 10    Kate      women should wear dresses               0.3131        women should wear dresses               0.3131
 18    Meghan    royalty housekeeping are gold diggers   0.3741        royalty house queens are gold diggers   0.3657
 20    Meghan    women should dress modestly             0.3840        women should wear dresses that cover    0.4047
                                                                       themselves


Table 4: Table showing the potential top ranked stereotype and stereotype concept (only those with
 a semantic distance > 0.3 to the headline are shown in this table. The No. column represents the
        headline number from Table 5). For a full list of result see Table 7 in Appendix A.

Looking at the potential stereotypes generated with a semantic similarity distance greater than 0.3
to the headline, as shown in table 4 (see appendix table 7 for the full table), we observe that 5 out of
7 of such entries related to Meghan as the subject and only 2 related to Kate. More interestingly, we


                                                            8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


observed that one of the potential stereotypes relating to Meghan (personal spending habits) aimed
at a personal attribute. Which can be seen as an indication of a potential character assassination,
thus character injustice.

4.3   P OTENTIAL ISSUES ELEVATED DUE TO THE PROPOSAL AND MEANS TO RESOLVE THEM

A critical area for bias in systems and models’ design often stem from a given human’s intrinsic
biases. They are usually a reflection of ourselves. One possible solution to this problem is to ensure
that a diverse group of individuals are involved from the inception of the solutions design to the
testing phase of such technical solutions—this is one reason why we gathered a diverse group of
authors to be involved in the discussions presented in this paper.
A second area for bias surrounds the definition of terms and assumptions biases. A way we attempt
to resolve this is by considering the existing consensus definitions of epistemological bias from the
social sciences, where media bias has been studied for decades.
A third potential area for bias can occur in the training and validation datasets, as well as in the
models used for implementing the proposed solution. For example, the sourced datasets do not
contain enough semantic information that is very reflective of the injustices considered. One possible
way to combat this is to investigate ways to build more robust training datasets or leverage models
that do not require lots of training examples to generalise properly.
Broader problems may arise in any situation where technology is naively applied to solve a societal
issue. As envisaged, our framework should be applied as a means to help people working in the
media improve their output with respect to bias and injustices. However, as warned by Goodhart’s
law (Manheim & Garrabrant, 2018), if the measures and metrics suggested here become targets,
they will cease to be useful. For example, in situations where experts deliberately bias their content
the tool can become beneficial to the readers instead, so that they are aware of potential biases when
reading an article. However, a main purpose of our proposed tool and concept is to help journalists
who are aware that they might use biased terms but do so unintentionally. On the other hand, we
cannot control the adoption of our tool. It will help the editors who are checking for bias using
manual means to quickly detect such biases.

5     C ONCLUSIONS
We propose a framework which uses an epistemological tagging model, a stereotype detection model
and social bias frame model, combined with semantic searching and lexicon lookup of epistemolog-
ical biased word to detect character, testimonial, and framing injustice. These forms of injustices
are often subtle and hard to quickly detect or be aware of. We also provide empirical evidence as a
justification for using this framework in media settings to detect such injustices. Further, we propose
an interactive interface which can aide editors and journalists of news text content by automatically
detecting and explaining potential bias types and injustices that might be present in their content.
We anticipate this interactive interface will encourage them to take necessary, preventative steps in
avoiding unjust acts before their content is released.

6     F UTURE W ORK
       • More Comparative Test data:- Our goal was to conduct an empirical qualitative research
         study which shows the framework (see Figure 1) can be implemented to detect injustices.
         However, we recognise that a limitation of the comparative test in this paper is in using
         only 20 headlines, and we hope to show the scalability of the work in future studies.
       • Learning Better Patterns for Testimonial injustice:- Identifying a single word which poten-
         tially cause bias in a given sentence is only a start. We acknowledge that multiple words
         or phrases in a given sentence might be the culprit and the ability to tag multiple words or
         phrases will take this work further.
       • Veridicality Assessment:- We intend to incorporate veridicality assessment in our frame-
         work to assess if a statement is actually factual, which will allow for a more accurate
         analysis.


                                                  9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


7   R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT
We discuss how we leverage the models, our framework and the outputs of the interactive interface
of this work in section 3. To access the CO-STAR and SBF models discussed in this work we
direct you to the GitHub repository (Kwon & Gopalan, 2021) have created https://github.
com/kwonathan/CO-STAR. The datasets used in our work are discussed in section 3.5. Each
dataset is publicly available, except one which is proprietary and used to tune the tagger model.
However, the tagger model can be fine-tuned to a dataset which is relevant, ethically gathered, and
appropriately constructed.

R EFERENCES
Mary Catherine Beach, Somnath Saha, Jenny Park, Janiece Taylor, Paul Drew, Eve Plank, Lisa A
 Cooper, and Brant Chee. Testimonial injustice: linguistic bias in the medical records of black
 patients and women. Journal of general internal medicine, 36(6):1708–1714, 2021.
Jenna Cryan, Shiliang Tang, Xinyi Zhang, Miriam Metzger, Haitao Zheng, and Ben Y. Zhao. De-
  tecting gender stereotypes: Lexicon vs. supervised learning methods. In Proceedings of the 2020
  CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, pp. 1–11. Association for Comput-
  ing Machinery, 2020. doi: 10.1145/3313831.3376488. URL https://doi.org/10.1145/
  3313831.3376488.
Robert M Entman. Framing bias: Media in the distribution of power. Journal of communication, 57
  (1):163–173, 2007.
Miranda Fricker. Epistemic injustice: Power and the ethics of knowing. Oxford University Press,
 2007.
Angela R Gover, Shannon B Harper, and Lynn Langton. Anti-asian hate crime during the covid-19
  pandemic: Exploring the reproduction of inequality. American journal of criminal justice, 45(4):
  647–667, 2020.
Felix Hamborg, Karsten Donnay, and Bela Gipp. Automated identification of media bias in news
  articles: an interdisciplinary literature review. International Journal on Digital Libraries, 20(4):
  391–415, 2019.
Lisa A Harrison and Cynthia Willis Esqueda. Myths and stereotypes of actors involved in domestic
  violence: Implications for domestic violence culpability attributions. Aggression and Violent
  Behavior, 4(2):129–138, 1999.
Christoph Hube and Besnik Fetahu. Neural based statement classification for biased language. In
  Proceedings of the Twelfth ACM International Conference on Web Search and Data Mining, pp.
  195–203. Association for Computing Machinery, 2019. doi: 10.1145/3289600.3291018.
Martijn Icks, Eric Shiraev, Jennifer Keohane, and Sergei A Samoilenko. Character assassination:
 Theoretical framework. In Routledge handbook of character assassination and reputation man-
 agement, pp. 11–24. Routledge, 2019.
Jacob Devlin Ming-Wei Chang Kenton and Lee Kristina Toutanova. Bert: Pre-training of deep
  bidirectional transformers for language understanding. In Proceedings of naacL-HLT, pp. 4171–
  4186, 2019.
Crystal Kuykendall. Improving black student achievement by enhancing students’ self-image. 1989.
Teyun Kwon and Anandha Gopalan. Co-star: Conceptualisation of stereotypes for analysis and
  reasoning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.00819, 2021.
David Manheim and Scott Garrabrant. Categorizing variants of goodhart’s law. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1803.04585, 2018.
Charles A Odonkor, Rachel Esparza, Laura E Flores, Monica Verduzco-Gutierrez, Miguel X
  Escalon, Ryan Solinsky, and Julie K Silver. Disparities in health care for black patients in physical
  medicine and rehabilitation in the united states: a narrative review. PM&R, 13(2):180–203, 2021.


                                                  10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Reid Pryzant, Richard Diehl Martinez, Nathan Dass, Sadao Kurohashi, Dan Jurafsky, and
  Diyi Yang. Neutralizing biased text lexicons. https://github.com/rpryzant/
  neutralizing-bias/tree/master/src, 2020a. Accessed: 2022-06-20.
Reid Pryzant, Richard Diehl Martinez, Nathan Dass, Sadao Kurohashi, Dan Jurafsky, and Diyi
  Yang. Automatically neutralizing subjective bias in text. In Proceedings of the aaai conference
  on artificial intelligence, volume 34, pp. 480–489, 2020b.
Shaina Raza, Deepak John Reji, and Chen Ding. Dbias: Detecting biases and ensuring fairness in
  news articles. International Journal of Data Science and Analytics, 2022.
Marta Recasens, Cristian Danescu-Niculescu-Mizil, and Dan Jurafsky. Linguistic models for analyz-
 ing and detecting biased language. In Proceedings of the 51st Annual Meeting of the Association
 for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 1650–1659, 2013.
Maarten Sap, Saadia Gabriel, Lianhui Qin, Dan Jurafsky, Noah A. Smith, and Yejin Choi. Social bias
 frames: Reasoning about social and power implications of language. In Proceedings of the 58th
 Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 5477–5490. Association
 for Computational Linguistics, 2020.


A    A PPENDIX
In Figure 6, we have a diagram showing how the tagger model computes logits yi using discrete
feature fi and BERT embedding bi Pryzant et al. (2020b).


 Figure 6: The tagger model computes logits yi using discrete feature fi and BERT embedding bi


In Figure 7 we have a screenshot of the UI showing immediately after a user has submitted a text
for analyzing. The word suspected of causing injustice is highlighted with the certainty score, an
explanation of why the word was tagged. When the user clicks Show Details they will see more
details as displayed in Figure 3


Figure 7: The interactive interface showing the highlighted tagged word and associated information
for a sentence.


In Table 5, we have all the headlines used in the comparative study between Meghan Markle and
Kate Middleton. Several news outlets have also noted that these articles are used unjustly to depict
one person differently than the other on a shared topic, playing on stereotypes about the person.


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


 Sentence Headline                                                                                Subject
 No.
 1         Meghan Markle spent a staggering £38,000 on her clothes for a charity trip             Meghan
 2         Kate Middletons £100,000 Astonishing value of the dress that won a Prince’s            Kate
           heart (and has hung in a wardrobe for eight years)
 3         Meghan Markles beloved avocado linked to human rights abuse and drought,               Meghan
           millennial shame
 4         Kates morning sickness cure? Prince William gifted with an avocado for preg-           Kate
           nant Duchess
 5         Kate and William ’packed up the kids’ in search of ’privacy’ at new Windsor            Kate
           estate
 6         Why Prince Harry and Meghan Markle’s Potential Plan to Protect Their Family            Meghan
           is Incredibly Unfair to Archie
 7         Prince Harry and Duchess Meghan Think Moving to Canada Will Give Archie                Meghan
           a Normal Upbringing
 8         Not long to go! Pregnant Kate tenderly cradles her baby bump while wrapping            Kate
           up her royal duties ahead of maternity leave - and William confirms she’s due
           ’any minute now’
 9         Why can’t Meghan Markle keep her hands off her bump? Experts tackle the                Meghan
           question that has got the nation talking: Is it pride, vanity, acting - or a new age
           bonding technique?
 10        Kate Middleton Wore a Bardot Dress to the ’Top Gun’ Premiere                           Kate
 11        Kate Middleton’s homegrown bouquet of lily of the valley follows royal code            Kate
 12        Royal wedding: How Meghan Markles flowers may have put Princess Charlottes             Meghan
           life at risk
 13        Duchess Kate reveals her favourite photo of son Prince Louis                           Kate
 14        How Meghan and Harry Ripped Up Royal Tradition on Birthday Photos of                   Meghan
           Archie
 15        Kate Middleton Debuts New Sapphire Earrings That Belonged to Princess Diana            Kate
           and Debunks a Rumor!
 16        Meghan Markle Just Casually Rewore Her $16,500 Royal Wedding Earrings in               Meghan
           NYC
 17        Kate and Wills Inc: Duke and Duchess secretly set up companies to protect their        Kate
           brand - just like the Beckhams
 18        A right royal cash in! How Prince Harry and Meghan Markle trademarked over             Meghan
           100 items from hoodies to socks SIX MONTHS before split with monarchy -
           with new empire worth up to £400m
 19        Kate Middleton deviated from royal ’cleavage protocol’ with daring neckline            Kate
 20        Meghan Markle Just Wore a Plunging Gown With a Thigh-High Slit on the Red              Meghan
           Carpet

                             Table 5: Comparative Headline Sentences Used


                                                   12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Table 6 in this section shows the full output of tagging each headline sentence used in the compara-
tive test. The No. column corresponds to the sentence number as shown in table 1, Subject refers
to the person subject the headline relates to, Taggerout Bias represents the tagged word from
the sentence that could potentially be biased, Taggerout Prob refers to the probability of the
tagged word been biased, Taggerout in lexicon refers to the results of checking whether the
corresponding tagged word is observed in the lexicon of associated epistemological biased words.
This offers some explanability for the potentially biased word. A True value for this column indi-
cates that the word is indeed in the lexicon, whilst a False value indicates otherwise. Bias Type
indicates what kind of epistemological bias type is associated with the tagged word. A regular bias
type word indicates that the tagged word was not found in the epistemological bias lexicon. The
Sentence Sentiment columns represents the overall sentiment associated with the headline
sentence (which can be obtained using any NLP processing tool e.g. spacy).

 No. Subject     Taggerout         Taggerout   Taggerout Bias Type                                       Sentence
                 Bias              Prob        in Lexi-                                                  Sentiment
                                               con
 1      Meghan   [’staggering’]    0.999498    True         [’subjectives’]                              negative
 2      Kate     [’astonishing’]   0.999342    True         [’positive’, ’subjectives’]                  neutral
 3      Meghan   [’beloved’]       0.997946    True         [’positive’, ’subjectives’]                  negative
 4      Kate     [’gifted’]        0.877285    True         [’positive’, ’subjectives’]                  neutral
 5      Kate     [’packed’]        0.478948    False        [’regular’]                                  neutral
 6      Meghan   [’incredibly’]    0.998493    True         [’positive’, ’subjectives’]                  negative
 7      Meghan   [’normal’]        0.689049    True         [’subjectives’]                              neutral
 8      Kate     [’confirms’]      0.997673    True         [’entailments’, ’report’]                    negative
 9      Meghan   [’vanity’]        0.599388    True         [’negative’, ’subjectives’]                  negative
 10     Kate     [’top’]           0.933422    True         [’entailments’, ’positive’, ’subjectives’]   neutral
 11     Kate     [’homegr’]        0.820782    False        [’regular’]                                  neutral
 12     Meghan   [’royal’]         0.551708    False        [’regular’]                                  neutral
 13     Kate     [’favourite’]     0.838293    False        [’regular’]                                  neutral
 14     Meghan   [’ripped’]        0.890869    True         [’negative’]                                 neutral
 15     Kate     [’bunks’]         0.758531    True         [’negative’, ’subjectives’]                  negative
 16     Meghan   [’casually’]      0.967407    False        [’regular’]                                  neutral
 17     Kate     [’just’]          0.645452    True         [’subjectives’]                              negative
 18     Meghan   [’markle’]        0.583964    False        [’regular’]                                  neutral
 19     Kate     [’daring’]        0.856008    True         [’entailments’, ’implicatives’, ’posi-       positive
                                                            tive’, ’subjectives’]
 20     Meghan   [’just’]          0.565576    True         [’subjectives’]                              neutral

      Table 6: Table showing the output of passing each headline through the model that tags the
                           potentially biased word in the given sentence.

In Table 7, the Stereotype (S) column refers to the closest potentially associated stereotype.
After passing each headline through the CO-STAR and Social Bias Frame models as discussed in
section 3.2, we semantically ranked the list of potential stereotype to the headline sentence, and
then selected the top ranked potential stereotype and stereotype concept - as seen in the column
Stereotype Concept(SC). The S Distance and SC distance columns shows the se-
mantic similarity distance of the stereotype and stereotype concepts to the headline sentence.


                                                       13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


 No. Stereotype (S)                                Distance(S) Stereotype Concept(SC)           Distance(SC)
 1    personal spending habits                     0.3457     women should spend money on       0.4914
                                                              clothes
 2    women should be dressed like brides          0.3259     women are property                0.2278
 3    feminism                                     0.3663     sexism                            0.2523
 4    british women are marginalized for a         0.2083     pregnancy                         0.3918
      joke
 5    N/A                                          N/A        N/A                               N/A
 6    family law                                   0.3244     arab folks are not protected      0.2951
 7    arab folks should live in a constant state   0.1618     racial hierarchy                  0.0999
      of worry
 8    gender hierarchy                             0.1178     women are often subjected to      0.2632
                                                              terms like ”babies” and ”preg-
                                                              nant”
 9    women are sexual objects                     0.2602     misogyny                          0.2574
 10   women should wear dresses                    0.3131     women should wear dresses         0.3131
 11   women are property of men                    0.1226     women are property                0.1494
 12   women are sex objects                        0.1676     women are vulnerable              0.2495
 13   sexual abuse                                 0.0746     saudi arabians are pedophiles     0.1226
 14   sexual assault                               0.2091     royalty house guests are pae-     0.4691
                                                              dophiles
 15 women are sex objects                          0.1637     women are property                0.1504
 16 black folks want to marry rich people          0.2266     racial marriage                   0.0869
 17 women are property                             0.2026     women are secret business part-   0.3732
                                                              ners
 18 royalty housekeeping are gold diggers          0.3741     royalty house queens are gold     0.3657
                                                              diggers
 19 sexism                                         0.1927     gender hierarchy                  0.2284
 20 women should dress modestly                    0.3840     women should wear dresses that    0.4047
                                                              cover themselves

Table 7: Table showing the potential top ranked stereotype and stereotype concept. We passed each
sentence through the CO-STAR and social bias frames model. After which the potential stereotype
             and stereotype concepts where semantically ranked to the sentence itself


                                                       14
