Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


S YSTEMATIC G ENERALIZATION AND E MERGENT
S TRUCTURES IN T RANSFORMERS T RAINED ON
S TRUCTURED TASKS
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT

         Transformer networks have seen great success in natural language processing and
         machine vision, where task objectives such as next word prediction and image
         classification benefit from nuanced context sensitivity across high-dimensional
         inputs. However, there is an ongoing debate about how and when transformers can
         acquire highly structured behavior and achieve systematic generalization. Here,
         we explore how well a causal transformer can perform a set of algorithmic tasks,
         including copying, sorting, and hierarchical compositions of these operations. We
         demonstrate strong generalization to sequences longer than those used in training
         by replacing the standard positional encoding typically used in transformers with
         labels arbitrarily paired with items in the sequence. We search for the layer and
         head configuration sufficient to solve these tasks, then probe for signs of systematic
         processing in latent representations and attention patterns. We show that two-layer
         transformers learn generalizable solutions to multi-level problems, develop signs
         of systematic task decomposition, and exploit shared computation across related
         tasks. These results provide key insights into how stacks of attention layers support
         structured computation both within task and across tasks.


1    I NTRODUCTION

Since their introduction (Vaswani et al., 2017), transformer-based models have become the new norm
of natural language modeling (Brown et al., 2020; Devlin et al., 2018) and are being leveraged for
machine vision tasks as well as in reinforcement learning contexts (Chen et al., 2021; Dosovitskiy
et al., 2020; Janner et al., 2021; Ramesh et al., 2021). Transformers trained on large amounts of data
under simple self-supervised, sequence modeling objectives are capable of subsequent generalization
to a wide variety of tasks, making them an appealing option for building multi-modal, multi-task,
generalist agents (Bommasani et al., 2021; Reed et al., 2022).
Central to this success is the ability to represent each part of the input in the context of other parts
through the self-attention mechanism. This may be especially important for task objectives such
as next word prediction and image classification at scale with naturalistic data, which benefit from
nuanced context sensitivity across high-dimensional inputs. Interestingly, transformer-based language
models seem to also acquire structured knowledge without being explicitly trained to do so and
display few-shot learning capabilities (Brown et al., 2020; Linzen & Baroni, 2021; Manning et al.,
2020). These insights have led to ongoing work exploring these models’ potential to develop more
broad reasoning capabilities (Binz & Schulz, 2022; Dasgupta et al., 2022).
Despite success in learning large-scale, naturalistic data and signs of acquisition of structured
knowledge or generalizable behavior, how transformer models support systematic generalization
remains to be better understood. Recent work demonstrated that large language models struggle at
longer problems and fail to robustly reason beyond the training data (Anil et al., 2022; Razeghi et al.,
2022). Different architectural variations have been proposed to improve length generalization in
transformers, highlighting the role of variants of position-based encodings (Csordás et al., 2021a;b;
Ontanón et al., 2021; Press et al., 2021). Indeed, whether neural networks will ever be capable of
systematic generalization without building in explicit symbolic components remains an open question
(Fodor & Pylyshyn, 1988; Smolensky et al., 2022).


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Here, we approach this question by training a causal transformer model to perform a set of algorithmic
operations, including copy, reverse, and hierarchical group or sort tasks. We explicitly sought the
minimal transformer that would reliably solve these simple tasks and thoroughly analyze such minimal
solution through attention ablation and representation analysis. Exploring how a transformer with no
predefined task-aligned structure could adapt to structures in these algorithmic tasks provides a starting
point for understanding how self-attention can tune to structures in more complex problems, e.g.,
those with the kinds of exceptions and partial regularities of natural datasets, where the exploitation
of task structures may occur in a more approximate, graded manner. Our main contributions are:

          1. We present a set of two-layer causal transformers that are capable of learning multiple
             algorithmic operations, and show that putting more attention heads at deeper layers has
             advantages for learning multi-level tasks.
          2. We show that the attention layers in these models reveal signs of systematic decomposition
             within tasks and exploitation of shared structures across tasks.
          3. We highlight a simple label-based order encoding method in place of the positional encoding
             methods typically used in transformers, and show that it helps to achieve strong length
             generalization performance.

2       M ETHOD

A                                                   B                                                                   item head    label head

    input sequence:
                                                                                                     add & norm

         task             output sequence                                                            feed forward

         copy                                           causal transformer            2x             add & norm

       reverse                                                                                  masked multi-head
                                                                                                    attention

    group: [shape]

     group: [color]                                   task       item        label   item       label                      item        label
                                                     embed      embed   + embed embed + embed                             embed     + embed
         sort:
[shape, color, texture]
                                                     task                     2                  9          ……            <eos>       <eos>
          sort:
[color, shape, texture]                                  |                     input sequence                       |        query for 1st
                                                                                                                             output token


                                            Figure 1: Task and model design.

Dataset. We created an item pool covering all combinations of 5 shapes, 5 colors, and 5 textures, and
generated a sequence dataset by sampling 100k sequences of 5–50 items randomly selected from
the item pool. The tasks we used to train the models are shown in Fig 1A. Each task corresponds to
one of the following rules, which relies on item feature and/or item order information to rearrange
an input sequence (grouping or sorting items by a particular feature is with respect to a pre-defined
feature sort order, e.g., circles < squares < pentagons, or red < purple < blue):

 COPY (C): copy the input sequence.
 REVERSE (R): reverse the input sequence.
 GROUP [ SHAPE ] (G[ S ]): group the items by shape, preserve the input order within each shape group.
 GROUP [ COLOR ] (G[ C ]): group the items by color, preserve the input order within each color group.
 SORT [ SHAPE , COLOR , TEXTURE ] (S[ S ]): sort the items first by shape, then by color, then by texture.
 SORT [ COLOR , SHAPE , TEXTURE ] (S[ C ]): sort the items first by color, then by shape, then by texture.

We instantiated the token vocabularies as onehot or multihot vectors. The task tokens were onehot
vectors with the corresponding task category set to one, with one additional task dimension corre-
sponding to the end-of-sequence (EOS) token. The item tokens were multihot vectors whose units
indicated its value in each feature dimension (equivalent to concatenated onehot feature vectors). As
such, the model receives disentangled feature information in the input, though in principle it can learn
to disentangle feature information given onehot encodings for each unique item.
Label-based order encoding. Using position-based order encodings (whether absolute or relative),
models trained with sequences up to length L encounter an out-of-distribution problem when tested


                                                               2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


on longer sequences, as position encodings beyond L are unfamiliar to the model. We thus introduce
label encoding, which allows longer sequences of items to be encoded with familiar labels. Instead
of using item positions, we paired items in each sequence with ascending random integer labels to
communicate order information (Fig 1B). The sampled labels were represented as onehot vectors
which the models then embed with learnable label weights. In all reported results, we pre-generated
item labels sampled from a range up to the maximum generalization length (50) for all sequences in
the dataset, and these labels were shared across training steps and model seeds. In practice, the labels
for each sequence can be sampled online and from a larger range to accommodate generalization to
even longer sequences. We contrast our random label encoding scheme with sinusoidal and learnable
encodings based on position indexes.
Model. The main model architecture is shown in Fig 1B. Each input sequence consisted of a task
token and the paired item and label tokens, with the EOS token serving as the first query for tokens
in the output sequence. The input tokens were first embedded to the model’s latent representational
space through a set of embedding layers depending on the token type (task, item, or label). The item
and label embeddings were then added to form a composite item embedding. These embedded tokens
were fed into a causal transformer, which contained one or two layers of alternating future-masked
attention sublayers and MLP sublayers. Residual connections and layer normalization were applied
after each sublayer as in Vaswani et al. (2017). We tested architectural variations in the number of
attention heads in different layers of the model while controlling for the total number of learnable
parameters (see detailed hyperparameters in Appendix B). The state of the query token at the output
of the causal transformer was passed through two linear heads to predict the next output token (the
task token, or an item and its associated label).
Training and evaluation. The models were trained using full teacher forcing (where we always feed
the model the correct input tokens) on all sequences of lengths 5 to 25 in the dataset (∼46k) and
evaluated for length generalization on sequences of lengths 26 to 50 (∼54k). We trained models in
both single-task and multi-task settings. In both cases, the output sequence consisted of the correctly
ordered items and their labels given the task being trained, followed by an EOS token. In single-task
learning, we did not include the task token in training or evaluation. In multi-task learning, the
task token was used and the models were trained to first output the task token before predicting the
output sequence. The training sequences used in multi-task learning remained the same ones between
lengths 5–25, but each sequence corresponded to a different output sequence under different tasks.
The models were trained using softmax cross-entropy loss on the prediction of feature classes, labels,
and task/EOS categories for tokens in the output sequence. Item predictions were treated as average
feature prediction accuracy, i.e., if the model predicted 2/3 features correct, its token-level item
accuracy is 2/3. Training stopped at 32k gradient updates for single-task models and 38k gradient
updates for multi-task models. Below, we report both token-level and sequence-level accuracy, under
both teacher forcing and top1 rollout (i.e., greedy decoding). Results were aggregated over four
random seeds for each task type × architecture pair. Unless otherwise specified, results were taken
from the checkpoint with the highest generalization accuracy within each seed. Error shades and
error bars indicate standard error of the mean across models.


3     R ESULTS

3.1   S INGLE - TASK LEARNING

Two-layer models with label encoding learn the SORT task and generalize to longer sequences.
We first trained the model with the SORT [ SHAPE , COLOR , TEXTURE ] task. Using our label encoding
method, models with two single-headed layers (indicated as [1,1]) were able to achieve near-ceiling
accuracy on training sequences and generalize to longer sequences (Fig 2; also see quantitative
results in Appendix C). The predictions of the EOS token were also highly accurate in these models
(see Fig S1A in Appendix A.1). Item prediction was more accurate than label prediction in this
task, reflecting that the models represented item feature information more accurately in order to
sort the input tokens. The two-layer models showed some degradation in sequence-level accuracy
as a function of sequence length, but the failures on longer sequences were not catastrophic, as
these models scored very well on longer sequences when up to 5% prediction errors were allowed
(Fig 2D; also see Fig S1B, and Fig S2 for accuracy under rollout in Appendix A.1). In contrast,


                                                   3
 Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


    A                                                                                         B                  item prediction            label prediction
                                                                                                                                                                                      D                     item prediction                             label prediction
                               training (length 5-25)         generalization (length 26-50)


                                                                                                                                                                                   seq-level acc (=1.0)
token-level item acc


                                                                                              token-level acc
                                                                                                                 sequence length            sequence length
                                                                                              C


                                                                                                                                                                                   seq-level acc (>=0.95)
token-level label acc


                                                                                              token-level acc
                                                                                                                item prediction             label prediction

                                  training step                       training step
                                                                                                                sequence position           sequence position                                               sequence length                             sequence length



Figure 2: Token- and sequence-level accuracy for single-task models. A. Token-level accuracy on
training and generalization sequences over learning. B. Token-level accuracy over sequence length. C.
Token-level accuracy over sequence positions. D. Proportion of sequences that the model predicted
100% tokens correct (upper) or predicted greater than 95% tokens correct (lower). In B, C, and D,
results were taken from 5k training sequences (in B and D) and 5k generalization sequences (B, C,
and D). Legends indicate the number of attention heads in each layer and the order encoding used (in
A). Gray shades indicate the sequences used in training.


 two-layer models trained with sinusoidal or learnable position embeddings performed worse across
 both training and generalization sequences (Fig 2A).
The two-layer models were also much better than single-layer models with either one or two attention
heads. While these single-layer models were able to exploit some correlations between items and
output positions (e.g., item [0,0,0] always came first, and item [4,4,4] always came last), they failed
to sort items in the middle positions (Fig 2C). In contrast, a single-layer, single-headed model was
sufficient to learn the COPY or the REVERSE task (see Fig S3A in Appendix A.1), suggesting that
multiple layers strongly benefit successful learning of multi-level problems.

  A                                                                                                                                                      B                                                                    C
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   s1

                                                            layer=0 head=0                                                layer=1 head=0
                                                                                                                                                         item index within shape


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   s2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              attention to <eos>
queries


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   s3



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   s4



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   s5

                        ｜ reordered input sequence｜｜        output sequence     ｜ ｜reordered input sequence｜
                                                                                                           ｜              output sequence      ｜                                        item index within shape
                                                  sources                                                       sources                                                                                                                            item index within shape



 Figure 3: Attention patterns in two-layer models. A. Attention maps for an example generalization
 sequence. Items in the input sequence were reordered to match their output order for visualization
 purposes. Numbers 1-5 mark the beginning of each shape group. Label e indicates the EOS token. B.
 First-layer attention from query items to input items within shape groups. C. Attention to EOS as a
 function of item index within each shape group (indicated by labels s1-s5). Results in B and C were
 aggregated across 1k generalization sequences and across seeds.

Distinct two-stage processing across attention layers. The attention weights in the two-layer
models revealed signs of task decomposition (Fig 3A). The attention head in the first layer tended
to distribute attention to the unsorted items that share the same shape as the current query item.
The attention head in the second layer then almost exclusively attended to the next output token
in preparation for feature and label readout. This pattern appeared robustly across sequences and
across different seeds (Fig 3B). Interestingly, there was an increase in the attention weights to the EOS
token as the model received query items towards the end of each shape group. This attention to EOS
increased to similar degrees in early or late shape groups (Fig 3C), again suggesting that the model
learned to systematically process items within each shape group, even though generating the EOS
token was only relevant after sorting all items. We also found similar attention patterns in two-layer,
single-headed models learning the GROUP [ SHAPE ] task (see Fig S3B in Appendix A.1).


                                                                                                                            4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


The single-layer models displayed some attention to subsequent items in the output sequence but
lacked consistent structures across different shape groups (see Fig S4 in Appendix A.1). This could
be due to the burden for the attention head(s) within a single layer to implement a mixture of item
contextualization and readout of the correct item or label, and reflects an advantage of the two-layer
models in injecting an inductive bias for a multi-stage solution.
Acquisition of within-feature order information. To solve the sort task accurately, the models
needed to learn the invariant sort order within each feature. We tested if the learned order information
can be parsed out from the input embeddings. We found that the embedding weights associated with
shape and color feature units reflected within-feature order similarities, with weights associated with
different features appearing mostly orthogonal (Fig 4A). The weaker structure and smaller magnitude
associated with texture weights may be due to lower demand in sorting multiple texture values, as
texture was the third-level sort feature and thus had fewer consecutive values in a single output
sequence under limited sequence length.
                A                            B


Figure 4: Input item embeddings capture information about feature sort order. A. Dot product
similarity measure of item embedding weights. B. Fitting Gaussian representations to track learned
feature sort order in the input embeddings. Left, fit objective (mean L2 loss) over pairwise similarities
of feature embeddings. Right, best-fitting Gaussian spread parameter for each feature.

We quantitatively tracked how information about feature sort order was acquired in the input embed-
dings over learning, using an L2 loss over the difference in the pairwise similarities from synthetic
Gaussian feature representations and that from the models’ feature embeddings. This analysis sug-
gested that the two-layer models initially began to acquire feature sort order information concurrently
in all three features (Fig 4B, left panel). In later stages during learning, the sort order informa-
tion in color embeddings more quickly and better corresponded to similarities between Gaussian
representations, with shape embeddings deviating from Gaussian-like, monotonic order similarities.

3.2   M ULTI - TASK LEARNING

Multi-task learning and length generalization in two-layer, multi-headed models. To explore
the ability for the causal transformer to simultaneously learn multiple algorithmic tasks, we trained
models to predict different output sequences on the same input sequence conditioned on a task
token. The two-layer, single-headed model used in single-task learning was unable to learn all six
tasks, while two-layer, multi-headed models achieved good training and generalization performance
(Fig 5A, also see quantitative performance in Appendix C). Increasing the number of attention heads
in the model did not lead to drastically different learning curves under teacher forcing, but more
attention heads supported much better performance under top1 rollout (Fig 5B).
We tested whether multi-headed attention served for better learning when it occurred in the first
layer (attention-frontload) or the second layer (attention-backload). Attention-backload models
generally achieved higher accuracy across all tasks compared to their attention-frontload counterparts
(Fig 5C and 5D). Performance of the attention-backload models was even comparable with their
attention-balanced counterparts, which signals that a bottlenecked architecture may be particularly
suited for multi-task learning in our setting, considering that some tasks in the task suite share the
first-level grouping feature.
Consistent with the single-task model, six-task models demonstrated strong generalization to longer
sequences (Fig 6A). Even though sequence-level accuracy degraded as sequence length increased,
the models only made less than 5% prediction errors for long extrapolation sequences (Fig 6C).
Token-level accuracy among generalization sequences was also relatively stable until the last few


                                                   5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


output positions (Fig 6B). We also observed that accurately predicting item features in long sequences
was easier in the SORT tasks but harder in the COPY, REVERSE, and GROUP tasks (Fig 6A and 6C).
This echos results from the single-task models and again suggests that the models more accurately
represented information directly used for sorting the items in each task. See additional results on EOS
prediction and accuracy under rollout in Appendix A.2.
A                                         B


C   attention frontload                             D      attention backload


Figure 5: Token-level item and label accuracy in multi-task models. Legends indicate the number
of attention heads in the two layers. A. Accuracy across all tasks over learning. B, C, and D. Top1
rollout accuracy for models with attention-balanced, attention-frontload, and attention-backload
architectures. In A, results were taken from 75k generalization sequences (12.5k per task). In B, C,
and D, results were taken from 1.2k generalization sequences (200 per task).

A                                                      C


B


Figure 6: Length generalization across tasks. A and B. Token-level item and label accuracy over
sequence length and sequence position. C. Proportion of sequences that the model predicted 100%
tokens correct (upper) or predicted greater than 95% tokens correct (lower). Results were taken
from 1k training sequences (in A and C) and 1k generalization sequences (in A, B, and C) for each
task. Performances were aggregated across the five top-performing runs. Gray shades indicate the
sequences used in training.

Learned task embeddings recover task similarity. We examined the input task embeddings to
understand the basis of task-shared and task-specific computation in the model. Fig 7A shows that
similarities among the learned task embeddings reflected shared computation across tasks. For
example, the COPY task was recognized to be similar to the REVERSE task and the two GROUP tasks,
potentially reflecting the shared stronger attention to label information in order to accurately sort the
input items. Representations for the two SORT tasks were also highly similar, as they both rely on
item features to sort the input items. The models also recovered similarities between the pairs of
GROUP and SORT tasks that share the same first-level grouping feature.

Task-shared and task-dependent computation across attention layers. Structures in the task
embedding similarities and strong performance from models with fewer attention heads than there


                                                   6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A                                                                                               B ablation by head                                                         C allow attention to tokens
                                                                                                          (teacher-forced)    (teacher-forced)                (rollout)


D
                | output sequence | input sequence |


                                                                                task: G[s]                       task: G[s]                      task: G[c]               task: S[s]                     task: S[c]
          reordered


                                                                                   L0-H0                              L1-H1                         L1-H1                    L1-H1                          L1-H1
queries


                                                              reordered
                                                       |                  | output sequence |
                                                           input sequence
                                                                      sources



Figure 7: A. Pairwise similarities of task embeddings. B. Token-level accuracy from ablating single
attention heads. C. Token-level accuracy from preserving attention to certain tokens across attention
heads. D. Attention maps from selected attention heads in an example generalization sequence (see
Fig S7 for all attention maps). Items corresponding to the input sequence were reordered to match
their output order for visualization purposes. Numbers 1-5 mark the beginning of each first-level
feature group (shape or color). Label t indicates the task token. Label e indicates the EOS token. In B,
C, and D, results were taken from the top-performing model (architecture: [1,4]).



are tasks already hinted that the model could be exploiting shared processing across tasks. Because
task-conditioned computation can only occur across the attention layers, we next sought to understand
the role of multi-headed attention in implementing such shared computation. We performed two
ablation experiments: ablating a single attention head entirely and preserving attention in all other
heads, or preserving attention to certain tokens across all attention heads. Attention weights were
ablated by masking the attention weights as zero after softmax.
Fig 7B and C show the ablation results for the top-performing model with one attention head in the
first layer and four attention heads in the second layer. The attention heads did not exhibit strong
selectivity for single tasks as they usually contributed to multiple tasks, and they also showed equal
contribution to item and label prediction (Fig 7B, also see results from other models in Fig S8 in
Appendix A.2). One attention head appeared redundant as ablating it resulted in little impact on the
performance of any task under teacher forcing, but it significantly improved accuracy under top1
rollout.
Ablating attention to certain items in the sequence further indicated that the models were heavily
relying on the learnable task embedding to contextualize items under different tasks (Fig 7C, also see
Fig S8). When the models were only allowed to attend to the task token in the first layer and the next
output token in the second layer, performance was largely preserved in the GROUP tasks and the SORT
tasks (ablation type “taskL0+nextL1”). This is different from the two-layer single-task models, whose
first layer relied on attention to other items in the first-level feature group to cross-contextualize items.
However, there were still some signs of task decomposition in the multi-task model. For example,
one attention head in the second layer of the top-performing model consistently attended to the first
item in the next feature group across all multi-level tasks (Fig 7D; see detailed attention maps in
Fig S7 in Appendix A.2), which proved useful for accurate predictions across multi-level tasks under
both teacher forcing and rollout (Fig 7B).
Task-conditioned item encoding. To better understand the effect of task-conditioned computation on
encoded item representations, we analyzed how the items were represented under different tasks after
each layer. We computed average item representations of all 25 shape × color feature pairs in each
task, aggregating across texture and label values in 200 generalization sequences. Projecting these
task-conditioned item representations to lower dimensions revealed different embedding structures
across the two layers (Fig 8). For the two GROUP tasks, representations in the first layer encoded
all items by their relevant first-level grouping feature (shape or color). The item representations


                                                                                                                                    7
    shape and color orders:

                                          layer 0
                                         encoding
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023
                                                                                                             3a20ni9q


                                input
                               embed      layer 1
                                         encoding


did not consistently encode other feature information across both layers, presumably because label
information became more relevant for sorting items within each feature group.
     shape and color orders:

                                           layer 0
                                          encoding


                                                                                                               3cyk4n4w


                                 input
                                embed      layer 1
                                          encoding


Figure 8: Task-conditioned encoding of the same sequence of items from the top-performing model.
PCA was performed for average item representations across 200 generalization sequences within
each layer × task pair. The legend indicates the sort order of the shape and color features.

Interestingly, for the two SORT tasks, the encoded representations after the first layer also showed a
high degree of clustering in the corresponding first-level grouping feature, with the secondary sort
feature represented in a ring structure. The subsequent layer then expanded the item representations
along the secondary feature in a way that was consistent across all first-level feature groups. Notably,
the clustering effect and the ring structure in the first-layer representations in the SORT tasks were
more strongly observed in the attention-backload models (see Fig S8 in Appendix A.2). This could
suggest that room for flexible multi-headed transformation downstream can relax first-layer encoding,
enabling a more consistent solution to emerge across the GROUP and SORT tasks.

4      R ELATED W ORK
There is a growing interest in analyzing small models to better understand the capabilities and detailed
computations in transformers in more controlled settings. For example, Power et al. (2022) explored
learning and generalization dynamics in two-layer causal transformers, and Elhage et al. (2021)
explored mechanistic interpretability in one- and two-layer transformers without MLP sublayers. Our
work contributes to these efforts in beginning to shape some understanding of the computation and
representation dynamics in small-scale transformers.
Ablation experiments and a variety of representation analyses have been applied to understand the
role of the attention mechanism in NLP tasks as well as in transformer-based vision models (Chefer
et al., 2021; Manning et al., 2020; Michel et al., 2019; Voita et al., 2019). However, it is often debated
to what extent attention weights afford model interpretability in these settings (Jain & Wallace, 2019;
Wiegreffe & Pinter, 2019; Vashishth et al., 2019), especially considering head redundancy and the
difficulty in correctly attributing relevance over high-dimensional inputs. We show that at least in
simple settings, the attention heads can exhibit some level of interpretability consistent with known
task structures. Similar methods have also been applied to understand unit-level and layer-level
dynamics that support multi-task computation in small-scale RNNs (Driscoll et al., 2022; Yang et al.,
2019), which revealed some patterns that are consistent with our findings here, as we discuss below.
Recent work examining systematic generalization in transformers or pre-trained language models
highlighted that length generalization remains a challenge and observed that positional encoding
can have a significant impact on the models’ ability to systematically generalize (Anil et al., 2022;
Csordás et al., 2021a; Delétang et al., 2022; Ontanón et al., 2021). A concurrent work explored
the randomized position encoding method (equivalent to our label-based encoding method) and
showed that it outperforms a variety of sequence order encodings (Anonymous, 2022). Other types
of architectural modifications have also been proposed to help transformers achieve better length
generalization (e.g. Csordás et al., 2021b; Dehghani et al., 2018; Press et al., 2021; Su et al., 2021).
Our work adds to the continued effort to enable better length generalization in transformers by
demonstrating the potential in formulating sequence modeling tasks with a more general item-label
binding approach rather than item-position binding.
Outside of the context of transformers and language models, the use of synthetic, algorithmic tasks
has enabled much understanding of the core capabilities of many models (e.g. Graves et al., 2014).
There has also been some interest in performing algorithmic reasoning with neural networks for its


                                                     8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


own sake (Veličković & Blundell, 2021). Correspondingly, Veličković et al. (2022) recently proposed
a benchmark for algorithmic reasoning, and evaluated a variety of graph neural network architectures,
all of which struggled to extrapolate algorithms to longer or larger inputs.


5   D ISCUSSION


We sought to understand how transformers can solve a set of highly-structured tasks and systematically
generalize. We presented two-layer causal transformers that can learn copying, reversing, and
hierarchical sorting operations and generalize to sequences longer than seen during training. We
found that these models learned to exploit shared task structures and exhibited interesting signatures
of task decomposition. The first layer tended to contextualize the input items with the task token or
with other items in a feature group, and the subsequent layer was more responsible for within-group
or task-specific processing.
Our findings on the contributions of individual attention heads in a multi-headed layer in solving
these algorithmic tasks echo results from analyses of language models. For example, single attention
heads are rarely responsible for a particular task or syntactic relationship and can often appear
redundant (Manning et al., 2020; Michel et al., 2019; Voita et al., 2019). We do see some degree
of selectivity, with conceptually distinct task components shared across a subset of attention heads.
Recent work studying multi-task computation in RNNs has similarly found that multi-task learning
led to the exploitation of reusable computation across related tasks (Driscoll et al., 2022; Yang et al.,
2019). Interestingly, these recurrent models also exhibited high degrees of task-selectivity at the
level of individual units in the hidden layer. The degree of task-selectivity in different architectural
components may vary depending on the inductive biases of different model families and the tasks
being learned. Future work is needed to fully characterize the degree of computational modularity in
multi-headed attention in relation to task structures.
We highlight that the label-based order encoding method was key to enabling our models to generalize
the learned tasks to longer sequences. The key insight is to sample random labels to communicate
sequence order information instead of relying on sequence positions. This simple extension exposes
models to a large range of possible labels evenly during training so they can learn to encode
items in longer sequences with familiar labels. Compared to this approach, learnable position
embedding leaves untrained embedding weights in unseen positions and thus would result in poor
length generalization. However, learnable position encoding also resulted in slower learning on the
training sequences in our tasks – potentially because the models had fewer sequences to learn to
encode later positions compared to early ones. Sinusoidal position embeddings have been noted to
have limited length generalization capabilities (Ontanón et al., 2021; Csordás et al., 2021a). In our
setting, it may have additionally suffered from the demand to read out the absolute item positions,
which is not common across NLP tasks. A concurrent work similarly noted the out-of-distribution
problem with position-based encoding and demonstrated the superiority of the randomized position
approach (equivalent to our label encoding method) for length generalization in a range of different
algorithmic tasks (Anonymous, 2022). Although label-based encoding alone would fail to represent
true item distance information, in light of recent work showing that transformers can learn positional
information without explicit positional encodings (Haviv et al., 2022), it is promising that the
advantages of label-based encoding may transfer to natural language inputs.
The flexibility to learn and perform multiple tasks is a key desired capability for machine learning.
Our work provides insights into the possible structures of within-task and cross-task computations
that stacks of attention layers can afford through a thorough analysis of the dynamics in a simple
transformer on a set of highly-structured tasks. Recent work has explored multi-task learning in
transformers at scale and achieved impressive results (Lee et al., 2022; Reed et al., 2022). As
transformers are increasingly being leveraged for multi-task or multi-modal learning in domains
with richer, more complex task structures, it is possible that these models may implicitly learn to
decompose complex decisions into reusable, multi-level policies. In future work, we hope to explore
these learning and generalization dynamics in transformer-based agents to understand the acquisition
of task-conditioned, multi-level behavioral policies in structured environments.


                                                   9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


R EFERENCES
Cem Anil, Yuhuai Wu, Anders Andreassen, Aitor Lewkowycz, Vedant Misra, Vinay Ramasesh,
  Ambrose Slone, Guy Gur-Ari, Ethan Dyer, and Behnam Neyshabur. Exploring length generalization
  in large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.04901, 2022.

Anonymous. Randomized positional encodings boost length generalization of transformers.
  https://openreview.net/forum?id=nMYj4argap, 2022.

Marcel Binz and Eric Schulz. Using cognitive psychology to understand gpt-3. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2206.14576, 2022.

Rishi Bommasani, Drew A Hudson, Ehsan Adeli, Russ Altman, Simran Arora, Sydney von Arx,
  Michael S Bernstein, Jeannette Bohg, Antoine Bosselut, Emma Brunskill, et al. On the opportuni-
  ties and risks of foundation models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.07258, 2021.

Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
  Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. Language models are
  few-shot learners. Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:1877–1901, 2020.

Hila Chefer, Shir Gur, and Lior Wolf. Transformer interpretability beyond attention visualization.
  In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp.
  782–791, 2021.

Lili Chen, Kevin Lu, Aravind Rajeswaran, Kimin Lee, Aditya Grover, Misha Laskin, Pieter Abbeel,
  Aravind Srinivas, and Igor Mordatch. Decision transformer: Reinforcement learning via sequence
  modeling. Advances in neural information processing systems, 34:15084–15097, 2021.

Róbert Csordás, Kazuki Irie, and Jürgen Schmidhuber. The devil is in the detail: Simple tricks
  improve systematic generalization of transformers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.12284, 2021a.

Róbert Csordás, Kazuki Irie, and Jürgen Schmidhuber. The neural data router: Adaptive control flow
  in transformers improves systematic generalization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.07732, 2021b.

Ishita Dasgupta, Andrew K Lampinen, Stephanie CY Chan, Antonia Creswell, Dharshan Kumaran,
   James L McClelland, and Felix Hill. Language models show human-like content effects on
   reasoning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.07051, 2022.

Mostafa Dehghani, Stephan Gouws, Oriol Vinyals, Jakob Uszkoreit, and Łukasz Kaiser. Universal
 transformers. arXiv preprint arXiv:1807.03819, 2018.

Grégoire Delétang, Anian Ruoss, Jordi Grau-Moya, Tim Genewein, Li Kevin Wenliang, Elliot Catt,
  Marcus Hutter, Shane Legg, and Pedro A Ortega. Neural networks and the chomsky hierarchy.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.02098, 2022.

Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. BERT: Pre-training of deep
  bidirectional transformers for language understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.04805, 2018.

Alexey Dosovitskiy, Lucas Beyer, Alexander Kolesnikov, Dirk Weissenborn, Xiaohua Zhai, Thomas
  Unterthiner, Mostafa Dehghani, Matthias Minderer, Georg Heigold, Sylvain Gelly, et al. An
  image is worth 16x16 words: Transformers for image recognition at scale. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2010.11929, 2020.

Laura Driscoll, Krishna Shenoy, and David Sussillo. Flexible multitask computation in recurrent
  networks utilizes shared dynamical motifs. bioRxiv, 2022.

Nelson Elhage, Neel Nanda, Catherine Olsson, Tom Henighan, Nicholas Joseph, Ben Mann, Amanda
  Askell, Yuntao Bai, Anna Chen, Tom Conerly, Nova DasSarma, Dawn Drain, Deep Ganguli,
  Zac Hatfield-Dodds, Danny Hernandez, Andy Jones, Jackson Kernion, Liane Lovitt, Kamal
  Ndousse, Dario Amodei, Tom Brown, Jack Clark, Jared Kaplan, Sam McCandlish, and Chris
  Olah. A mathematical framework for transformer circuits. Transformer Circuits Thread, 2021.
  https://transformer-circuits.pub/2021/framework/index.html.


                                                 10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Jerry A Fodor and Zenon W Pylyshyn. Connectionism and cognitive architecture: A critical analysis.
  Cognition, 28(1-2):3–71, 1988.
Alex Graves, Greg Wayne, and Ivo Danihelka.            Neural turing machines.      arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1410.5401, 2014.
Adi Haviv, Ori Ram, Ofir Press, Peter Izsak, and Omer Levy. Transformer language models without
  positional encodings still learn positional information. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.16634, 2022.
Sarthak Jain and Byron C Wallace. Attention is not explanation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1902.10186,
  2019.
Michael Janner, Qiyang Li, and Sergey Levine. Reinforcement learning as one big sequence modeling
 problem. In ICML 2021 Workshop on Unsupervised Reinforcement Learning, 2021.
Kuang-Huei Lee, Ofir Nachum, Mengjiao Yang, Lisa Lee, Daniel Freeman, Winnie Xu, Sergio
  Guadarrama, Ian Fischer, Eric Jang, Henryk Michalewski, et al. Multi-game decision transformers.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.15241, 2022.
Tal Linzen and Marco Baroni. Syntactic structure from deep learning. Annual Review of Linguistics,
  7:195–212, 2021.
Christopher D Manning, Kevin Clark, John Hewitt, Urvashi Khandelwal, and Omer Levy. Emergent
  linguistic structure in artificial neural networks trained by self-supervision. Proceedings of the
  National Academy of Sciences, 117(48):30046–30054, 2020.
Paul Michel, Omer Levy, and Graham Neubig. Are sixteen heads really better than one? Advances in
  neural information processing systems, 32, 2019.
Santiago Ontanón, Joshua Ainslie, Vaclav Cvicek, and Zachary Fisher. Making transformers solve
  compositional tasks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.04378, 2021.
Alethea Power, Yuri Burda, Harri Edwards, Igor Babuschkin, and Vedant Misra. Grokking: Gen-
  eralization beyond overfitting on small algorithmic datasets. arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.02177,
  2022.
Ofir Press, Noah A Smith, and Mike Lewis. Train short, test long: Attention with linear biases
  enables input length extrapolation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.12409, 2021.
Aditya Ramesh, Mikhail Pavlov, Gabriel Goh, Scott Gray, Chelsea Voss, Alec Radford, Mark Chen,
  and Ilya Sutskever. Zero-shot text-to-image generation. In International Conference on Machine
  Learning, pp. 8821–8831. PMLR, 2021.
Yasaman Razeghi, Robert L Logan IV, Matt Gardner, and Sameer Singh. Impact of pretraining term
  frequencies on few-shot reasoning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.07206, 2022.
Scott Reed, Konrad Zolna, Emilio Parisotto, Sergio Gomez Colmenarejo, Alexander Novikov, Gabriel
  Barth-Maron, Mai Gimenez, Yury Sulsky, Jackie Kay, Jost Tobias Springenberg, et al. A generalist
  agent. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.06175, 2022.
Paul Smolensky, Richard Thomas McCoy, Roland Fernandez, Matthew Goldrick, and Jianfeng Gao.
  Neurocompositional computing: From the central paradox of cognition to a new generation of ai
  systems. AI Magazine, 2022.
Jianlin Su, Yu Lu, Shengfeng Pan, Bo Wen, and Yunfeng Liu. Roformer: Enhanced transformer with
   rotary position embedding. arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.09864, 2021.
Shikhar Vashishth, Shyam Upadhyay, Gaurav Singh Tomar, and Manaal Faruqui. Attention inter-
  pretability across NLP tasks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.11218, 2019.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez, Łukasz
  Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. Advances in neural information processing
  systems, 30, 2017.
Petar Veličković and Charles Blundell. Neural algorithmic reasoning. Patterns, 2(7):100273, 2021.


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Petar Veličković, Adrià Puigdomènech Badia, David Budden, Razvan Pascanu, Andrea Banino, Misha
  Dashevskiy, Raia Hadsell, and Charles Blundell. The CLRS algorithmic reasoning benchmark.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.15659, 2022.
Elena Voita, David Talbot, Fedor Moiseev, Rico Sennrich, and Ivan Titov. Analyzing multi-head
  self-attention: Specialized heads do the heavy lifting, the rest can be pruned. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1905.09418, 2019.
Sarah Wiegreffe and Yuval Pinter. Attention is not not explanation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1908.04626,
  2019.
Guangyu Robert Yang, Madhura R Joglekar, H Francis Song, William T Newsome, and Xiao-Jing
 Wang. Task representations in neural networks trained to perform many cognitive tasks. Nature
  neuroscience, 22(2):297–306, 2019.


                                                12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A     A DDITIONAL R ESULTS
A.1   S INGLE - TASK LEARNING

              A                               B


Figure S1: Additional teacher forcing accuracy. A. Single-task models predict EOS token near
perfectly. B. Sequence-level accuracy when up to 10% errors were allowed. Results were taken from
5k training sequences (in B) and 5k generalization sequences (in A and B).

              A                                      B


Figure S2: Top1 rollout accuracy for two-layer models. A. Token-level (upper) and sequence-level
(lower) accuracy across sequence length. B. Token-level accuracy across sequence positions. Results
were taken from 5k training sequences (in A) and 5k length generalization sequences (in A and B).

       A                                                 B


Figure S3: Learning other tasks in the single-task setting. A. Single-layer, single-headed models
can learn the COPY task and the REVERSE task, while two-layer, single-headed models learn the
GROUP [ SHAPE ] task. B. The attention maps from the GROUP [ SHAPE ] model resemble that from the
SORT [ SHAPE ] model (visualization as in Fig 3A).


                                                13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A                                  B


Figure S4: Attention maps from single-layer models in an example generalization sequence. A.
Single-layer, single-headed model. B. Single-layer, two-headed model.


A.2   M ULTI - TASK LEARNING

A                                                  C


B


Figure S5: Visualization as in Fig 6, but item and label predictions were obtained using top1 rollout.

                  A                                   B


Figure S6: A. Six-task models predict the EOS token perfectly under teacher forcing. B. Prediction of
the EOS token deteriorates under top1 rollout in six-task models. Results were taken from 1k training
sequences and 1k length generalization sequences across the five top-performing runs.


                                                 14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                               L0-H0                    L1-H0    L1-H1   L1-H2   L1-H3

                                                        task: copy


                                                   task: reverse


                                             task: group[shape]


                                              task: group[color]


                                                task: sort[shape]
          | input sequence |


                                                 task: sort[color]
               reordered
queries

          sequence
           output
                  |


                                      reordered
                               |                  | output sequence |
                                   input sequence
                                              sources



Figure S7: Attention maps for an example generalization sequence (for the top-performing multi-task
model with [1,4] architecture). Each row shows the attention maps for one task, and each column
corresponds to a single attention head denoted by the layer and head index. Tokens corresponding
to the input sequence were reorderd to match their order in the output sequence for visualization
purposes. Label t indicates the task token. Label e indicates the EOS token. In the bottom four rows,
number labels ranging from 1-5 mark the beginning of the items in each first-level feature group.


                                                                                15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                     architecture: [4,4]                                                                                           architecture: [1,6]
                  ablation by head                    allow attention to token                                                                                       allow attention to token
                                                                                                                                ablation by head



                                                                                 token-level label acc


                                                                                                                                                                                                token-level label acc
                                     architecture: [6,6]                                                                                            architecture: [4,4]

layer0 encoding                                                                                               layer0 encoding


layer1 encoding                                                                                               layer1 encoding


                                     architecture: [1,6]                                                                                            architecture: [1,4]

layer0 encoding                                                                                               layer0 encoding


layer1 encoding                                                                                               layer1 encoding


Figure S8: Attention ablation and task-conditioned item representations in other top-performing
models. Visualization as in Fig 7B and Fig 8.


                                                                                                         16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


B    H YPERPARAMETERS

                        Table S1: Model and experiment hyperparameters.

         Hyperparameter                      Single-task learning             Six-task learning
         Number of layers                            1 or 2                           2
     Number of attention heads                               (see paper)
       Embedding dimension            128 (two-layer) or 184 (single-layer)         192
       MLP hidden layer size                                      64
        Activation function                                     ReLU
             Batch size                                          128
    Training teacher forcing rate                                1.0
             Optimizer                                          Adam
           Learning rate                             10−4                         5 · 10−4


C    Q UANTITATIVE P ERFORMANCE

Table S2: Token-level item and label accuracy across 54k generalization sequences in single-task
models learning the SORT [ SHAPE , COLOR , TEXTURE ] task. Mean and standard deviation across four
random seeds are shown for each architecture.

          task     architecture     position encoding   item prediction   label prediction
           C           [1]                 label          99.03±0.41       100.00±0.00
           R           [1]                 label          99.75±0.21       100.00±0.00
          S[ S ]       [1]                 label          76.49±2.99        51.75±5.35
          S[ S ]       [2]                 label          91.01±2.76        78.02±5.89
          S[ S ]      [1,1]                label          99.60±0.07        98.41±0.23
          G[ S ]      [1,1]                label          98.41±0.32        99.31±0.16
          S[ S ]      [1,1]             sinusoidal       57.04±10.75        16.50±6.52
          S[ S ]      [1,1]              learnable       73.15±11.65       40.51±14.28


                                                 17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Table S3: Token-level prediction accuracy across 75k generalization sequences in six-task models
(including 500 unique sequences for each length evaluated within each task). Mean and standard
deviation across four random seeds are shown for each architecture. Model architectures are denoted
by [# heads in first layer, # heads in second layer].

                                   (a) Attention-balanced models.
         Tasks           [1,1]          [2,2]            [3,3]          [4,4]        [6,6]
             item    83.38±13.05     97.04±0.88       98.55±0.46     98.79±0.94   99.11±0.32
      all
             label   87.21±7.86      96.46±1.24       97.98±0.42     98.68±0.84   99.17±0.32
             item    89.28±14.44     97.57±1.19       98.81±0.77     98.98±0.95   99.13±0.97
      C
             label   97.39±0.84      98.59±0.99       99.46±0.39     99.64±0.34   99.79±0.17
             item    64.30±24.46     96.95±1.21       98.95±0.45     98.69±0.94   99.20±0.60
      R
             label   94.56±8.26      98.53±0.80       99.64±0.16     99.39±0.29   99.73±0.19
             item    86.47±13.51     96.51±0.93       98.42±0.66     98.52±1.15   98.54±0.47
     G[ S ]
             label   91.54±8.30      97.83±1.07       99.07±0.33     99.23±0.52   99.05±0.30
             item    86.30±13.39     96.72±0.80       98.28±0.65     98.45±1.13   98.62±0.47
     G[ C ]
             label   91.69±7.79      97.93±1.06       98.98±0.19     99.21±0.46   99.22±0.24
             item    86.97±8.80      97.28±1.00       98.48±0.29     99.01±0.82   99.59±0.25
     S[ S ]
             label   74.75±11.47     93.21±2.23       95.53±1.01     97.09±1.99   98.62±0.82
             item    86.77±8.63      97.20±0.95       98.37±0.33     99.08±0.70   99.62±0.13
     S[ C ]
             label   73.57±10.59     92.73±2.05       95.23±0.90     97.53±1.71   98.65±0.54

                                   (b) Attention-frontload models.
               Tasks             [2,1]         [3,1]             [4,1]         [6,1]
                   item      69.45±17.65   68.05±19.27       77.86±22.15    97.76±0.16
            all
                   label     79.95±8.53    78.35±11.60       86.53±11.67    97.52±0.31
                   item      57.93±27.09   54.07±30.36       72.01±30.48    98.50±0.81
            C
                   label     97.66±1.64     95.18±3.28        98.48±1.10    99.61±0.22
                   item      57.97±26.94   55.33±29.52       70.49±32.68    98.78±0.46
            R
                   label     95.74±3.34     94.90±3.50        97.97±2.17    99.56±0.23
                   item      70.16±16.79   71.29±16.08       79.20±19.34    96.85±0.23
           G[ S ]
                   label     80.56±11.79   79.37±12.51       87.82±12.52    98.96±0.26
                   item      70.33±16.54   70.99±16.21       78.86±19.18    96.50±0.47
           G[ C ]
                   label     79.18±12.71   78.71±12.82       87.28±12.69    98.82±0.32
                   item      79.94±11.69   78.00±12.49       83.99±15.22    98.03±0.23
           S[ S ]
                   label     62.76±13.85   61.17±19.50       76.69±18.13    94.17±0.74
                   item      80.03±11.15   78.22±12.21       82.46±16.50    97.95±0.29
           S[ C ]
                   label     64.28±12.87   61.27±18.82       71.27±24.19    94.08±0.82

                                   (c) Attention-backload models.
                 Tasks           [1,2]         [1,3]            [1,4]         [1,6]
                     item     96.06±0.24    98.65±0.80       99.40±0.29    99.29±0.17
              all
                     label    95.48±0.30    97.37±0.89       99.21±0.43    99.12±0.36
                     item     96.86±0.57    99.10±0.74       99.46±0.34    99.22±0.52
              C
                     label    97.78±0.71    99.62±0.24       99.85±0.08    99.59±0.55
                     item     95.99±0.59    98.82±1.08       99.47±0.37    99.56±0.14
              R
                     label    98.09±0.52    99.55±0.39       99.83±0.04    99.82±0.09
                     item     96.12±0.38    98.28±1.00       98.98±0.43    98.96±0.16
             G[ S ]
                     label    97.70±0.42    98.77±0.66       99.29±0.27    99.25±0.07
                     item     95.82±0.72    98.53±0.76       99.17±0.34    98.78±0.40
             G[ C ]
                     label    97.51±0.51    99.06±0.42       99.51±0.18    99.13±0.32
                     item     95.86±0.77    98.51±0.72       99.68±0.26    99.59±0.13
             S[ S ]
                     label    91.12±0.83    93.54±2.44       98.40±1.16    98.41±0.89
                     item     95.72±0.54    98.70±0.71       99.64±0.28    99.63±0.29
             S[ C ]
                     label    90.74±0.66    93.76±2.15       98.36±1.05    98.54±1.10



                                                 18
