Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


N EURAL G ROUNDPLANS : P ERSISTENT N EURAL S CENE
R EPRESENTATIONS FROM A S INGLE I MAGE
    Prafull Sharma1∗                             Ayush Tewari1                               Yilun Du1

 Sergey Zakharov4                               Rares Ambrus4                          Adrien Gaidon4

 William T. Freeman1,5            Frédo Durand1      Joshua B. Tenenbaum1,2,3       Vincent Sitzmann1
                  1
                   MIT CSAIL 2 MIT BCS 3 MIT CBMM 4 Toyota Research Institute
              5
                  The NSF AI Institute for Artificial Intelligence and Fundamental Interactions
                           prafullsharma.net/neural_groundplans


                                                 A BSTRACT
            We present a method to map 2D image observations of a scene to a persistent 3D
            scene representation, enabling novel view synthesis and disentangled representation
            of the movable and immovable components of the scene. Motivated by the bird’s-
            eye-view (BEV) representation commonly used in vision and robotics, we propose
            conditional neural groundplans, ground-aligned 2D feature grids, as persistent
            and memory-efficient scene representations. Our method is trained self-supervised
            from unlabeled multi-view observations using differentiable rendering, and learns
            to complete geometry and appearance of occluded regions. In addition, we show
            that we can leverage multi-view videos at training time to learn to separately
            reconstruct static and movable components of the scene from a single image at test
            time. The ability to separately reconstruct movable objects enables a variety of
            downstream tasks using simple heuristics, such as extraction of object-centric 3D
            representations, novel view synthesis, instance-level segmentation, 3D bounding
            box prediction, and scene editing. This highlights the value of neural groundplans
            as a backbone for efficient 3D scene understanding models.


1       I NTRODUCTION
We study the problem of inferring a persistent 3D scene representation given a few image observations,
while disentangling static scene components from movable objects (referred to as dynamic). Recent
works in differentiable rendering have made significant progress in the long-standing problem of
3D reconstruction from small sets of image observations (Yu et al., 2020; Sitzmann et al., 2019b;
Sajjadi et al., 2021). Approaches based on pixel-aligned features (Yu et al., 2020; Trevithick &
Yang, 2021; Henzler et al., 2021) have achieved plausible novel view synthesis of scenes composed
of independent objects from single images. However, these methods do not produce persistent
3D scene representations that can be directly processed in 3D, for instance, via 3D convolutions.
Instead, all processing has to be performed in image space. In contrast, some methods infer 3D
voxel grids, enabling processing such as geometry and appearance completion via shift-equivariant
3D convolutions (Lal et al., 2021; Guo et al., 2022), which is however expensive both in terms of
computation and memory. Meanwhile, bird’s-eye-view (BEV) representations, 2D grids aligned with
the ground plane of a scene, have been fruitfully deployed as state representations for navigation,
layout generation, and future frame prediction (Saha et al., 2022; Philion & Fidler, 2020; Roddick
et al., 2019; Jeong et al., 2022; Mani et al., 2020). While they compress the height axis and are thus
not a full 3D representation, 2D convolutions on top of BEVs retain shift-equivariance in the ground
plane and are, in contrast to image-space convolutions, free of perspective camera distortions.
Inspired by BEV representations, we propose conditional neural groundplans, 2D grids of learned
features aligned with the ground plane of a 3D scene, as a persistent 3D scene representation
    ∗
        Email: prafull@mit.edu, sitzmann@mit.edu


                                                       1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                          Instance-level Bounding box Bird’s-eye
    Input     Reconstruction   Static   Dynamic   Depth   segmentation segmentation      view      Novel views


Figure 1: Given a single image, our model infers separate 3D representations for static and dynamic
scene elements, enabling high-quality novel view synthesis with plausible completion, unsupervised
instance-level segmentation, 3D bounding box prediction, 3D scene editing, and extraction of object-
centric 3D representations. Our model is trained self-supervised using unlabeled multi-view videos.

reconstructed in a feed-forward manner. Neural groundplans are a hybrid discrete-continuous 3D
neural scene representation (Chan et al., 2022; Peng et al., 2020; Philion & Fidler, 2020; Roddick
et al., 2019; Mani et al., 2020) and enable 3D queries by projecting a 3D point onto the groundplan,
retrieving the respective feature, and decoding it via an MLP into a full 3D scene. This enables
self-supervised training via differentiable volume rendering. By compactifying 3D space with a
nonlinear mapping, neural groundplans can encode unbounded 3D scenes in a bounded region. We
further propose to reconstruct separate neural groundplans for 3D regions of a scene that are movable
and 3D regions of a scene that are static given a single input image. This requires that objects are
moving in the training data, enabling us to learn a prior to predict which parts of a scene are movable
and static from a single image at test time. We achieve this additional factorization by training on
multi-view videos, such as those available from cameras at traffic intersections or sports game footage.
Our model is trained self-supervised via neural rendering without pseudo-ground truth, bounding
boxes, or any instance labels. We demonstrate that separate reconstruction of movable objects enables
instance-level segmentation, recovery of 3D object-centric representations, and 3D bounding box
prediction via a simple heuristic leveraging that connected regions of 3D space that move together
belong to the same object. This further enables intuitive 3D editing of the scene.
Since neural groundplans are 2D grids of features without perspective camera distortion, shift-
equivariant processing using inexpensive 2D CNNs effectively completes occluded regions. Our
model thus outperforms prior pixel-aligned approaches in the synthesis of novel views that observe
3D regions that are occluded in the input view. We further show that by leveraging motion cues at
training time, our method outperforms prior work on the self-supervised discovery of 3D objects.
In summary, our contributions are:

            • We introduce self-supervised training of conditional neural groundplans, a hybrid discrete-
              continuous 3D neural scene representation that can be reconstructed from a single image,
              enabling efficient processing of scene appearance and geometry directly in 3D.
            • We leverage object motion as a cue for disentangling static background and movable
              foreground objects given only a single input image.
            • Using the 3D geometry encoded in the dynamic groundplan, we demonstrate single-image
              3D instance segmentation and 3D bounding box prediction, as well as 3D scene editing.


2     R ELATED W ORK

Neural Scene Representation and Rendering. Several works have explored learning neural scene
representations for downstream tasks in 3D. Emerging neural scene representations enable recon-
struction of geometry and appearance from images as well as high-quality novel view synthesis via
differentiable rendering. A large part of recent work focuses on the case of reconstructing a single
3D scene given dense observations (Cheng et al., 2018; Tung et al., 2019; Sitzmann et al., 2019a;
Lombardi et al., 2019; Mildenhall et al., 2020; Yariv et al., 2020; Tewari et al., 2021). Alternatively,
differentiable rendering may be used to supervise encoders to reconstruct scenes from a single or few
images in a feedforward manner. Pixel-aligned conditioning enables reconstruction of compositional
scenes (Yu et al., 2020; Trevithick & Yang, 2021), but does not infer a compact 3D representation.
Methods with a single latent code per scene do, but do not generalize to compositional scenes (Sitz-
mann et al., 2019c; Jang & Agapito, 2021; Niemeyer et al., 2020; Sitzmann et al., 2021; Kosiorek


                                                          2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


et al., 2021). Voxel grid based approaches offer both benefits, but are computationally costly(Lal
et al., 2021; Sajjadi et al., 2021; Dupont et al., 2020). Hybrid discrete-continuous neural scene
representations offer a compromise by factorizing a dense 3D field into several lower-dimensional
representations that are used to condition an MLP (Chan et al., 2022; Chen et al., 2022a). In particular,
neural groundplans and axis-aligned 2D grids enable high-quality unconditional generation of 3D
scenes (DeVries et al., 2021; Chan et al., 2022) as well as reconstruction of 3D geometry from
pointclouds (Peng et al., 2020). We similarly use axis-aligned 2D grids of features for self-supervised
scene representation via neural rendering, but reconstruct them directly from few or a single 2D
image observations.
Bird’s-Eye View Representations. Bird’s-eye view has been explored as a 3D representation in
vision and robotics, particularly for autonomous driving applications. Prior work uses ground-plane
2D grids as representations for object detection and segmentation (Saha et al., 2022; Harley et al.,
2022; Philion & Fidler, 2020; Reiher et al., 2020; Roddick et al., 2019), layout generation and
completion (Cao & de Charette, 2022; Jeong et al., 2022; Mani et al., 2020; Yang et al., 2021b),
and next-frame prediction (Hu et al., 2021; Zi˛eba et al., 2020). The bird’s-eye view is generated
either directly without 3D inductive biases (Mani et al., 2020), or similar to our proposed approach,
by using 3D geometry-driven inductive biases such as unprojection into a volume (Harley et al.,
2022; Chen et al., 2022b; Roddick et al., 2019), or by generating a 3D point cloud (Philion & Fidler,
2020; Hu et al., 2021). However, prior approaches are supervised, using ground truth bounding
boxes or semantic segmentation as supervision. In contrast, we present a self-supervised conditional
groundplan representation, learned only from images via neural rendering. While we show that our
self-supervised representation can be used for rich inference tasks using simple heuristics, our method
may be extended for more challenging tasks using the techniques developed in prior work.
Dynamic-Static Disentanglement. Our work is related to prior work on learning to disentangle
dynamic objects and static background. Some prior work leverages object motion across video
frames to learn separate representations for movable foreground and static background in 2D (Kasten
et al., 2021; Ye et al., 2022; Bao et al., 2022), while other recent work can also learn 3D representa-
tions (Yuan et al., 2021; Tschernezki et al., 2021). Our approach is similar in using object motion as
cue for disentanglement and multi-view as cue for 3D reconstruction, but uses it as supervision to train
an encoder-based approach that enables reconstruction from a single image instead of scene-specific
disentanglement from multiple video frames.
Object-centric Scene Representations. Prior work has aimed to infer object-centric representations
directly from images, with objects either represented as localized object-centric patches (Lin et al.,
2020; Eslami et al., 2016; Crawford & Pineau, 2019; Kosiorek et al., 2018; Jiang et al., 2019) or
scene mixture components (Engelcke et al., 2020; Burgess et al., 2019; Greff et al., 2019; 2016;
2017; Du et al., 2021a), with the slot attention module (Locatello et al., 2020) increasingly driving
object-centric inference. Resulting object representations may be decoded into object-centric 3D
representations and composed for novel view synthesis (Yu et al., 2022; Smith et al., 2022; Elich et al.,
2022; Chen et al., 2021; Bear et al., 2020; Zakharov et al., 2020; 2021; Beker et al., 2020; Du et al.,
2021b). BlockGAN and GIRAFFE (Nguyen-Phuoc et al., 2020; Niemeyer & Geiger, 2021) build
unconditional generative models for compositions of 3D-structured representations, but are restricted
to only generation. Some methods rely on annotations such as bounding boxes, object classes,
3D object models, or instance segmentation to recover object-centric neural radiance fields (Ost
et al., 2021; Yang et al., 2021a; Guo et al., 2020; Yang et al., 2022). Several scene reconstruction
methods (Zakharov et al., 2020; 2021; Beker et al., 2020; Nie et al., 2020) use direct supervision
to train an object representation and detector to infer an editable 3D scene from a single frame
observation. Kipf et al. (2021) leverage motion as a cue for self-supervised object disentanglement,
but do not reconstruct 3D and require additional conditioning in the form of bounding boxes. In
this work, we demonstrate that a representation factorized into static and movable 3D regions can
serve as a powerful backbone for object discovery. While not explored in this work, slot attention
and related object-centric algorithms could be run on our already sparse groundplan of movable 3D
regions, faced with a dramatically easier task than when run on images directly.


                                                   3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023

    3D Scene                                 Pillar Aggregation             Static-Dynamic Disentanglement
                                                                  softmax
                                                    MLP            scores


                                                                                            Static ground plan
                                                                               2D CNN


 Input          CNN                Entangled
Camera         Features        Neural Ground Plan                                          Dynamic ground plan

Figure 2: Groundplan inference. Given a context image, we first extract a set of CNN features. We
unproject the features into 3D and re-sample them at “pillars” on top of the location of groundplan
vertices. Pillars are aggregated into groundplan features using a softmax-weighted sum. The resulting
2D grid of features is decomposed into separate dynamic and static groundplans by a 2D CNN. The
coordinate-encoding MLP is not visualized in this figure. Please refer to Sec. 3 for details.

3     C ONDITIONAL N EURAL GROUNDPLANS

In this section, we describe the process of inferring a neural ground plan given one or several image
observations in a feed-forward manner, as well as subsequent novel view synthesis. The method will
be trained on a dataset of multi-view videos with calibrated cameras with wide baselines. Please see
Fig. 2 for an overview.
Compactified neural groundplans for unbounded scene representations. A neural groundplan
is a 2D grid of features aligned with the ground plane of the 3D scene, which we define to be
the xz−plane. A 3D point is decoded by projecting it onto the groundplan and retrieving the
corresponding feature vector using bilinear interpolation. This feature is then concatenated with the
vertical y-coordinate of the query point and decoded into radiance and density values via a fully
connected network, enabling novel view synthesis using volume rendering (Mildenhall et al., 2020).
In this definition, however, it is only possible to decode 3D points that lie within the boundaries of the
neural groundplan, which precludes reconstruction and representation of unbounded scenes. We thus
compactify R3 by implementing a non-linear coordinate re-mapping as proposed by Barron et al.
(2021). Points x within a radius rinner around the groundplan origin remain unaffected, but points
outside this radius are contracted. For any 3D point x, the contracted 3D coordinate can be computed
as x′ = C(x) = ((1 + k) − k/||u||)(u/||u||)rinner , where u = x/rinner , and k is a hyperparameter
which controls the size of the contracted region. Note that C is invertible, such that x = C −1 (x′ ) is
a function that takes a 3D point in contracted space x′ to the original 3D point x in linear space.
Reconstructing neural groundplans from images. Inferring a neural groundplan from one or
several images proceeds in three steps: (1) feature extraction, (2) feature unprojection, (3) pillar
aggregation. Given a single image I, we first extract per-pixel features via a CNN encoder to yield
a feature tensor F. We define the camera as the world origin and center the neural groundplan
accordingly, approximately aligned with the ground level. The image features are unprojected to a
3D feature volume v in contracted world space using the inverse of the contract function defined
earlier. We extract the feature at a contracted 3D point x′ in v as v(x′ ) = F[π(C −1 (x′ ))], where
C −1 (x′ ) first maps the contracted point to linear world space and π(·) projects it onto the image
plane of the context view using camera extrinsics and intrinsics. At any vertex of the groundplan, the
discretized y-coordinates of the volume form a “pillar”. Next, we aggregate each pillar into a point to
create the 2D groundplan. We first use a coordinate-encoding MLP D(·) to transform the volume as
f (x′ ) = D(v(x′ ), xc , d), where xc denotes the 3D point in linear camera coordinates of the context
camera, and d denotes the ray direction from the camera center to that point. Since all features along
a camera ray are identical in v, coordinate encoding is used to add the depth information to the
features. In the case of multi-view input images, the volumes corresponding to each input view are
mean pooled. Associated to each 2D vertex of the groundplan is now a set of features {fi }N i=1 , where
N is the number of samples along the y-dimension. We use a “pillar-aggregation” MLP to compute
softmax scores as αi = P (fi , xi ), where P (·) denotes the MLP and xi is the linear coordinate of the
i-th point on theP pillar. Finally, the features are aggregated by computing the weighted sum of the
features, g = i αi fi .
Differentiable Rendering. We can render images from novel camera views via differentiable volume
rendering (DeVries et al., 2021; Lombardi et al., 2019; Mildenhall et al., 2020). To resolve points
closer to the camera more finely, we adopt logarithmic sampling of points along the ray with more


                                                    4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023

    Context        Per-timestep Ground Plan Inference       Compositing & Rendering                   Loss
    Frames
                                                   Pool


                                      Static Ground Plan
                           Static
                                                              MLP        Composite
                                                                                          Reconstruction Losses

                       Dynamic


                                    Dynamic Ground Plans                                 Dynamic Sparsity Loss


Figure 3: Learning Static-Dynamic Disentanglement. Given multiple frames of a video, we extract
per-frame, compactified, static and dynamic groundplans according to Fig. 2. Static groundplans
are pooled into a time-invariant groundplan. We then composite per-frame dynamic and static
time-invariant groundplans via differentiable volume rendering. Our model is supervised only via a
re-rendering loss on video frames. We encourage the model to explain as much of the scene density
as possible with the static groundplan via a sparsity loss on per-frame dynamic volume rendering
densities. The surface loss is not visualized here.
samples close to the camera (Neff et al., 2021). For each sampled point x on the camera ray, we need
to compute its density and color for volume rendering. This is accomplished using a rendering MLP,
as (cx , σx ) = R(gx , yx ), where R(·) denotes the MLP, gx are the groundplan features for the point
x computed by projecting the query 3D coordinates onto the groundplane and bilinearly interpolating
the nearest grid points, and yx is the y value of the sampled point x.

4     L EARNING S TATIC -DYNAMIC D ISENTANGLEMENT
We now describe training on multi-view video to learn to disentangle static and dynamic compo-
nents of the scene. Furthermore, we describe a method for performing self-supervised 3D object
discovery and 3D bounding box prediction using the geometry encoded in the dynamic groundplan
representation. Please see Fig. 3 for an overview of the multi-frame training for static-dynamic
disentanglement.
Disentangling static and dynamic neural groundplans. We leverage the fact that objects move in
the given multi-view videos as the training signal. We pick two random frames of a video. For each
frame, we infer an entangled neural groundplan as described in the previous section. Features in this
entangled neural groundplan parameterize both static and dynamic features of the scene, for instance,
a car as well as the road below it. We feed this groundplan into a fully convolutional 2D network,
which disentangles it into two separate groundplans containing static and dynamic features. The
per-frame static groundplans are mean-pooled to obtain a single, time-independent static groundplan.
Compositing groundplans. To render a scene using the disentangled static and dynamic groundplans,
we first decode query points using both groundplans, yielding two sets of (density, color) values
for each point. We use the compositing operation proposed by Yuan et al. (2021) to compose the
contribution from static and dynamic components along the ray. Given the color and density for static
(cS , σ S ) and dynamic (cD , σ D ) parts, the density of the combined scene is calculated as σ S +σ D . The
color at the sampled point is computed as a weighted linear combination wS cS +wD cD , where wS =
(1 − exp(−δσ S ))/(1 − exp(−δ(σ S + σ D )), wD = (1 − exp(−δσ D ))/(1 − exp(−δ(σ S + σ D )),
and δ is the distance between adjacent samples on the camera ray.
Losses and Training. We train our model on multi-view video, where multi-view information is
used to learn the 3D structure, while motion is used to disentangle the static and dynamic components
in the scene. During training, we sample two time-steps per video. For each time-step, we sample
multiple images from different camera views; some of the views are used as input to the method while
others are used to compute the loss function. We use the input images to infer static and dynamic
groundplans, and use them to render out per-frame query views. Our per-frame loss consists of an
image reconstruction term, a hard surface constraint, and a sparsity term.
                                                            X                        X
          L = ||R − I||22 + λLPIPS LLPIPS (R, I) − λsurface    log(P(wi )) + λsparse    |σiD | .  (1)
               |              {z               }
                                                            i                         i
                              Limg                 |          {z          } |        {z     }
                                                              Lsurface                Ldyn_sparsity



                                                        5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023



                    CLEVR (1 view)               CoSY (1 view)             CoSY (5 views)
                 PSNR↑ SSIM↑ LPIPS↓          PSNR↑ SSIM↑ LPIPS↓         PSNR↑ SSIM↑ LPIPS↓
    Ours           34.5    0.956    0.15      15.71    0.43    0.53      18.29    0.57     0.43
    PixelNeRF     33.98    0.945   0.200      14.61    0.34    0.64      17.31    0.49     0.50
    uORF          29.35    0.898   0.151       —        —       —         —        —        —

Table 1: Quantitative baseline comparison of novel view synthesis results. We outperform Pixel-
NeRF (Yu et al., 2020) and uORF (Yu et al., 2022) in terms of PSNR, SSIM, and LPIPS on both
CLEVR and CoSY datasets.


Limg measures the difference between the rendered and ground truth images, R and I respectively,
using a combination of ℓ2 and patch-based LPIPS perceptual loss. Lsurface encourages both static and
dynamic weight values (the weight for each sample in the rendering equation) wi for all samples
along the rendered rays to be either 0 or 1, encouraging hard surfaces (Rebain et al., 2022). Here,
P(wi ) = exp(−|wi |) + exp(−|1 − wi |). The sparsity term Ldyn_sparsity takes as input densities
decoded from the dynamic groundplan for all the rendered rays, and encourages the values to be
sparse. This forces the model to explain most of the non-empty 3D structure as possible via the static
groundplan and only expressing the moving objects using the dynamic groundplan, leading to reliable
static-dynamic disentanglement. Without this loss, the model could explain the entire scene with just
the dynamic component. The loss functions are weighed using the hyperparameters λLPIPS , λsurface ,
and λsparse . While we describe the loss functions for a single sample of ground-truth and rendered
image, in practice, we construct mini-batches by randomly choosing multiple views of a scene at
different time steps, and evaluate the loss function on each sample.
Unsupervised object detection and extracting object-centric 3D representations. Our formulation
yields a model that maps a single image to two radiance fields, parameterizing static and dynamic
3D regions respectively. Please see Fig. 1 for an example. We now perform a search for connected
components in the dynamic neural groundplan to perform 3D instance-level segmentation, monocular
3D bounding box prediction, and the extraction of object-centric 3D representations. Specifically,
given a dynamic groundplan, we first sample points in a 3D grid around the groundplan origin
and decode their densities. We now perform conventional connected-component labeling in the
groundplan space using accumulated density values, identifying the disconnected dynamic objects.
We perform 2D instance-level segmentation for a queried viewpoint using volume rendering based on
the densities expressed by the dynamic groundplan and assigning a color to the points corresponding
to each of the identified objects, see Fig. 1 for an example. Furthermore, we compute the smallest
box that contains the connected component to get a 3D bounding box for each identified object.
Finally, we crop tiles of the dynamic groundplan that belong to a given object instance to obtain
object-centric 3D representations, enabling editing of 3D scenes such as deletion, insertion, and
rigid-body transformation of objects. This approach is not limited to a fixed number of objects during
training or at test time. As we will show, this simple method is at par with the state of the art on
self-supervised learning of object-centric 3D representations, uORF (Yu et al., 2022). Note that our
approach is compatible with prior work leveraging slot attention (Locatello et al., 2020; Kipf et al.,
2021) and other inference modules, which can be run on the disentangled dynamic groundplan which,
in contrast to image space, enables shift-equivariant processing free from perspective distortion and
encodes 3D structure. For implementation details, refer to Appendix A.


5   R ESULTS
We demonstrate that our method infers a 3D scene representation from a single image while disentan-
gling static and dynamic components of the scene into static and dynamic groundplans respectively.
We then show that connected components analysis suffices to leverage the densities in the dynamic
groundplan for instance-level segmentation, bounding box prediction, and scene editing.
Datasets. Our method is trained on multi-view observations of dynamic scenes. We present
results on the moving CLEVR dataset (Yu et al., 2022), commonly used for self-supervised object
discovery benchmarks (Yu et al., 2022), and the procedurally generated autonomous driving dataset
CoSY (Bhandari, 2018). CoSY enables generation of a high-quality, path-traced dataset of multi-view
videos with large camera baselines. We rendered multi-view observations of 9000 scenes with moving
cars, sampled using 15 background city models and 95 car models. We train on 8000 scenes, and


                                                  6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023

                           CLEVR                                               CoSY
        Input      GT      pixelNeRF uORF         Ours       Input        GT     pixelNeRF    Ours


Figure 4: Qualitative comparisons. Comparison for novel-view synthesis given a single context
view with PixelNeRF (Yu et al., 2020) and uORF (Yu et al., 2022).
     Input      Reconstruction     Static         Object          Depth               Novel views


Figure 5: Single-image reconstruction, disentanglement of static and dynamic objects, and novel
view synthesis. Given a single input image, our method can disentangle the observed scene into static
and object components based on what the model observed as not-moving and moving in the training
data. In these examples, the cars are isolated in the object component as the model was training on
video data of cars moving on the road.

evenly split the rest into validation and test sets. Further details about dataset generation are presented
in the Appendix A.6. Datasets and code will be made publicly available.
Novel View Synthesis and Scene Completion. We present novel views rendered from groundplans
inferred from a single image from CLEVR and CoSY. For single-shot 3D reconstruction and novel
view synthesis, we compare against PixelNeRF (Yu et al., 2020), a state-of-the-art single-image
3D reconstruction method, and uORF (Yu et al., 2022), state-of-the-art unsupervised object-centric
3D reconstruction method. We train PixelNeRF models on our datasets using publicly available
code. We finetune the uORF model pretrained on CLEVR on our CLEVR renderings, and train it
from scratch on CoSY using publicly available code. Fig. 4 provides a qualitative comparison to
PixelNeRF and uORF in terms of single-image 3D novel view synthesis on both CoSY and CLEVR.
Note that our model produces novel views with plausible completions of parts of the scene that are
unobserved in the context image such as the back-side of objects. As expected from a non-generative
method, regions that are entirely unconstrained such as occluded parts of the background (such as
buildings) are blurry. While PixelNeRF succeeds in novel view synthesis on CLEVR, renderings
on the complex CoSY dataset show significant artifacts, possibly caused by the linear sampling
employed by PixelNeRF. uORF does not synthesize realistic images when trained on CoSY. Please
refer to the supplemental webpage for results of uORF on the CoSY (Appendix B.5). On CLEVR,
uORF generally produces high-quality renderings, but lacks high-frequency detail. In contrast to


                                                    7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023

                                                                 Birds-eye view   Instance level   3D Bounding-box
      Input            Reconstruction   Birds-eye view            localization    segmentation       segmentation


Figure 6: Object Localization. Given a single input image, we can use our inferred 3D representation
of the scene to compute (a) bird’s-eye view rendering, (b) object localization in the bird’s-eye view
space, (c) instance-level segmentation, and (d) 3D bounding box prediction.
  Input           GT   uORF     Ours    Input           GT       uORF    Ours
                                                                                           ARI↑     NV-ARI↑
          RGB


                                                RGB


                                                                                  Ours      0.84       0.84
                                                                                  uORF      0.83       0.82
          Masks


                                                Masks


                                                                   Table 2: Quantitative segmen-
                                                                   tation accuracy evaluation on
Figure 7: Qualitative Comparison for instance-level segmenta- CLEVR using ARI and NV-
tion. Qualitative comparison of instance-level segmentation result ARI metrics.
with uORF (Yu et al., 2022).

these methods, our method reliably synthesizes novel views with high-frequency detail for both
datasets. Quantitatively, we outperform both methods on novel-view synthesis in terms of PSNR,
SSIM, and LPIPS metrics on both datasets (refer to Table 1). Note that qualitatively, the performance
gap to baseline methods is significantly larger than quantitative results would suggest. This is due to
the fact that much of the pixels used to compute PSNR are observing scene regions far outside the
frustum of the input view. Here, all methods fail to reconstruct the true 3D appearance and geometry,
as it is completely uncertain given the context view, resulting in low PSNR numbers for all methods
(refer to Appendix B.1). As can be seen in the qualitative results, our method achieves significantly
better reconstruction quality in parts of the 3D scene that lie in the frustum of the input camera, even
if these areas are occluded in the input view. Our method further succeeds at fusing information
across multiple context views, increasing the quality of the renderings with an increasing number of
context views from varied viewpoints (refer to Appendix B.2).
Static-Dynamic Disentanglement. Given only a single image, our method computes separate static
and dynamic groundplans that can be used to individually render the static and movable parts of the
scene respectively. Fig. 5 shows results on single-image reconstruction of static and movable scene
elements. Note that cars are reliably encoded by the dynamic groundplan, and our method inpaints
regions occluded in the input view.
Instance-level Segmentation and Bounding Box prediction. The separate reconstruction of
movable scene components in the dynamic groundplan enables object detection via instance-level
segmentation and bounding box prediction. Fig. 6 presents the instance-level segmentation and
3D bounding box prediction results of the proposed 3D object discovery via connected component
discovery using the density inferred using the dynamic groundplan from the bird’s-eye view. Fig. 7
provides a qualitative comparison of object discovery with uORF on CLEVR dataset. While uORF
succeeds at segmenting CLEVR scenes with fidelity comparable to ours, it fails to provide reconstruc-
tion and instance-level segmentation for our diverse and visually complex street-scale CoSY dataset.


                                                             8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023

    Input     Reconstruction        Individual Objects         Deletion      Addition    Rearrangement


Figure 8: Object-centric representations and scene editing. The proposed static-dynamic neural
groundplans enables object discovery using connected components labeling on the density of objects
encoded in the dynamic groundplan (left). This enables straight-forward scene editing such as
deletion, addition, or rigid-body transformation via directly editing the neural groundplan (right).


Our method reliably segments separate car instances and predicts the 3D bounding boxes, including
for cars that are only partially observed. Table 2 quantitatively compares the computed segmentation
maps on CLEVR to uORF. We use the Adjusted Rand Index (ARI) metrics following uORF. We
evaluate this metric in the input view (ARI), as well as in a novel view (NV-ARI). We perform at par
with uORF on both of these metrics, demonstrating that our 3D ground plan representation reaches
state of the art results with simple heuristics. Please refer to the supplemental webpage for video
results (Appendix B.5). In addition, as mentioned before, we achieve higher-quality novel-view
synthesis results, and also achieve significantly better results on the challenging CoSY dataset. Since
uORF is based on slot attention, it can only attend to a finite number of objects, whereas groundplans
can support any number of objects and require a single forward pass to render all objects.
Scene Editing. Instance-level segmentation, dynamic-static disentanglement, and 3D bounding
boxes enable straight-forward 3D editing, such as translation, rotation, deletion, and insertion
of individual objects in the scene. Objects can be rotated by arbitrary angles by simple bilinear
interpolation of the groundplan features (refer to Appendix B.3). As the dynamic groundplan does
not encode static scene regions such as the street below cars, cars can easily be moved from one scene
to another. Fig. 8 provides scene editing results of our method. Note that such editing is difficult with
methods that lack a persistent 3D representation, such as PixelNeRF.



6   D ISCUSSION

Limitations and Future Work. Although our method achieves high-quality novel view synthesis
from a single image, generated views are not photorealistic, and unobserved scene parts are blurry
commensurate with the amount of uncertainty. Future work may explore plausible hallucinations of
unobserved scene parts. Future work may further explore the use of more sophisticated downstream
processing of the groundplan to enable, for instance, prior-based inference of object-centric repre-
sentations (Locatello et al., 2020). Finally, we plan to investigate the combination of the proposed
approach with flow-based dynamics reasoning, which would negate the need for multi-view video.
Conclusion. Our paper demonstrates self-supervised learning of 3D scene representations that are
disentangled into movable and immovable scene elements. By leveraging multi-view video at training
time, we can reconstruct disentangled 3D representations from a single image observation at test
time. We show the potential of neural ground plans as a representation that may enable data-efficient
solutions to downstream processing of the 3D scene, such as completion, instance-level segmentation,
3D bounding box prediction, and 3D scene editing. We hope that our paper will inspire future work
on the use of self-supervised neural scene representations for general scene understanding tasks.


                                                   9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


7    ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS AND D ISCLOSURE OF F UNDING

This work is in part supported by DARPA under CW3031624 (Transfer, Augmentation and Automatic
Learning with Less Labels) and the Machine Common Sense program, Singapore DSTA under
DST00OECI20300823 (New Representations for Vision), NSF CCRI # 2120095, NSF RI #2211259
the National Science Foundation under Cooperative Agreement PHY-2019786 (The NSF AI Institute
for Artificial Intelligence and Fundamental Interactions, http://iaifi.org/), Stanford Institute for Human-
Centered Artificial Intelligence (HAI), Stanford Center for Integrated Facility Engineering (CIFE),
Qualcomm Innovation Fellowship (QIF), Samsung, Ford, Amazon, and Meta. The Toyota Research
Institute also partially supported this work. This article solely reflects the opinions and conclusions
of its authors and not other entity.

R EFERENCES
Zhipeng Bao, Pavel Tokmakov, Allan Jabri, Yu-Xiong Wang, Adrien Gaidon, and Martial Hebert.
  Discovering objects that can move. In Proc. CVPR, pp. 11789–11798, 2022.

Jonathan T Barron, Ben Mildenhall, Dor Verbin, Pratul P Srinivasan, and Peter Hedman. Mip-nerf
  360: Unbounded anti-aliased neural radiance fields. Proc. CVPR, 2021.

Daniel Bear, Chaofei Fan, Damian Mrowca, Yunzhu Li, Seth Alter, Aran Nayebi, Jeremy Schwartz,
  Li F Fei-Fei, Jiajun Wu, Josh Tenenbaum, et al. Learning physical graph representations from
  visual scenes. Proc. NeurIPS, 33, 2020.

Deniz Beker, Hiroharu Kato, Mihai Adrian Morariu, Takahiro Ando, Toru Matsuoka, Wadim Kehl,
  and Adrien Gaidon. Monocular differentiable rendering for self-supervised 3d object detection. In
  Proc. ECCV, pp. 514–529. Springer, 2020.

Nishchal Bhandari. Procedural synthetic data for self-driving cars using 3D graphics. PhD thesis,
  Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 2018.

Christopher P Burgess, Loic Matthey, Nicholas Watters, Rishabh Kabra, Irina Higgins, Matt Botvinick,
  and Alexander Lerchner. Monet: Unsupervised scene decomposition and representation. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1901.11390, 2019.

Anh-Quan Cao and Raoul de Charette. Monoscene: Monocular 3d semantic scene completion. In
 Proc. CVPR, pp. 3991–4001, 2022.

Eric R Chan, Connor Z Lin, Matthew A Chan, Koki Nagano, Boxiao Pan, Shalini De Mello, Orazio
  Gallo, Leonidas J Guibas, Jonathan Tremblay, Sameh Khamis, et al. Efficient geometry-aware 3d
  generative adversarial networks. In Proc. CVPR, pp. 16123–16133, 2022.

Anpei Chen, Zexiang Xu, Andreas Geiger, Jingyi Yu, and Hao Su. Tensorf: Tensorial radiance fields.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.09517, 2022a.

Chang Chen, Fei Deng, and Sungjin Ahn. Roots: Object-centric representation and rendering of 3d
  scenes. JMLR, 22:259–1, 2021.

Shaoyu Chen, Tianheng Cheng, Xinggang Wang, Wenming Meng, Qian Zhang, and Wenyu Liu.
  Efficient and robust 2d-to-bev representation learning via geometry-guided kernel transformer.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.04584, 2022b.

Ricson Cheng, Ziyan Wang, and Katerina Fragkiadaki. Geometry-aware recurrent neural networks
  for active visual recognition. Proc. NeurIPS, 31, 2018.

Eric Crawford and Joelle Pineau. Spatially invariant unsupervised object detection with convolutional
  neural networks. In Proc. AAAI, 2019.

Terrance DeVries, Miguel Angel Bautista, Nitish Srivastava, Graham W. Taylor, and Joshua M.
  Susskind. Unconstrained scene generation with locally conditioned radiance fields. Proc. ICCV,
  2021.


                                                   10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Yilun Du, Shuang Li, Yash Sharma, B. Joshua Tenenbaum, and Igor Mordatch. Unsupervised learning
  of compositional energy concepts. In Proc. NeurIPS, 2021a.

Yilun Du, Kevin Smith, Tomer Ulman, Joshua B Tenenbaum, and Jiajun Wu. Unsupervised discovery
  of 3d physical objects from video. In Proc. ICLR, 2021b.

Emilien Dupont, Miguel Bautista Martin, Alex Colburn, Aditya Sankar, Josh Susskind, and Qi Shan.
  Equivariant neural rendering. In Proc. ICML, pp. 2761–2770. PMLR, 2020.

Cathrin Elich, Martin R. Oswald, Marc Pollefeys, and Joerg Stueckler. Weakly supervised learn-
  ing of multi-object 3d scene decompositions using deep shape priors. Computer Vision and
  Image Understanding, 220:103440, 2022. ISSN 1077-3142. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cviu.
  2022.103440. URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
  S1077314222000583.

Martin Engelcke, Adam R. Kosiorek, Oiwi Parker Jones, and Ingmar Posner. Genesis: Generative
 scene inference and sampling with object-centric latent representations. In Proc. ICLR, 2020. URL
 https://openreview.net/forum?id=BkxfaTVFwH.

SM Eslami, Nicolas Heess, Theophane Weber, Yuval Tassa, David Szepesvari, Geoffrey E Hinton,
 et al. Attend, infer, repeat: Fast scene understanding with generative models. Proc. NeurIPS, 29,
 2016.

SM Ali Eslami, Danilo Jimenez Rezende, Frederic Besse, Fabio Viola, Ari S Morcos, Marta Gar-
 nelo, Avraham Ruderman, Andrei A Rusu, Ivo Danihelka, Karol Gregor, et al. Neural scene
 representation and rendering. Science, 360(6394):1204–1210, 2018.

Klaus Greff, Antti Rasmus, Mathias Berglund, Tele Hao, Harri Valpola, and Jürgen Schmidhuber.
  Tagger: Deep unsupervised perceptual grouping. Proc. NeurIPS, 29, 2016.

Klaus Greff, Sjoerd Van Steenkiste, and Jürgen Schmidhuber. Neural expectation maximization.
  Proc. NeurIPS, 30, 2017.

Klaus Greff, Raphaël Lopez Kaufman, Rishabh Kabra, Nick Watters, Christopher Burgess, Daniel
  Zoran, Loic Matthey, Matthew Botvinick, and Alexander Lerchner. Multi-object representation
  learning with iterative variational inference. In International Conference on Machine Learning,
  2019.

Michelle Guo, Alireza Fathi, Jiajun Wu, and Thomas Funkhouser. Object-centric neural scene
 rendering. arXiv preprint arXiv:2012.08503, 2020.

Pengsheng Guo, Miguel Angel Bautista, Alex Colburn, Liang Yang, Daniel Ulbricht, Joshua M.
  Susskind, and Qi Shan. Fast and explicit neural view synthesis. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
  Winter Conference on Applications of Computer Vision (WACV), pp. 3791–3800, January 2022.

Adam W Harley, Zhaoyuan Fang, Jie Li, Rares Ambrus, and Katerina Fragkiadaki. A simple baseline
  for bev perception without lidar. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.07959, 2022.

Philipp Henzler, Jeremy Reizenstein, Patrick Labatut, Roman Shapovalov, Tobias Ritschel, Andrea
  Vedaldi, and David Novotny. Unsupervised learning of 3d object categories from videos in the
  wild. In Proc. CVPR, pp. 4700–4709, 2021.

Anthony Hu, Zak Murez, Nikhil Mohan, Sofía Dudas, Jeffrey Hawke, Vijay Badrinarayanan, Roberto
  Cipolla, and Alex Kendall. Fiery: Future instance prediction in bird’s-eye view from surround
  monocular cameras. In Proc. CVPR, pp. 15273–15282, 2021.

Zhewei Huang, Tianyuan Zhang, Wen Heng, Boxin Shi, and Shuchang Zhou. Rife: Real-time
  intermediate flow estimation for video frame interpolation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2011.06294,
  2020.

Wonbong Jang and Lourdes Agapito. Codenerf: Disentangled neural radiance fields for object
 categories. In Proc. ICCV, pp. 12949–12958, October 2021.


                                               11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Jaebong Jeong, Janghun Jo, Sunghyun Cho, and Jaesik Park. 3d scene painting via semantic image
  synthesis. In Proc. CVPR, pp. 2262–2272, June 2022.
Jindong Jiang, Sepehr Janghorbani, Gerard de Melo, and Sungjin Ahn. Scalable object-oriented
   sequential generative models. Unknown Journal, 2019.
Justin Johnson, Bharath Hariharan, Laurens Van Der Maaten, Li Fei-Fei, C Lawrence Zitnick, and
  Ross Girshick. Clevr: A diagnostic dataset for compositional language and elementary visual
  reasoning. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
  pp. 2901–2910, 2017.
Yoni Kasten, Dolev Ofri, Oliver Wang, and Tali Dekel. Layered neural atlases for consistent video
  editing. Proc. TOG, 40(6):1–12, 2021.
Diederik P Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1412.6980, 2014.
Thomas Kipf, Gamaleldin F Elsayed, Aravindh Mahendran, Austin Stone, Sara Sabour, Georg
  Heigold, Rico Jonschkowski, Alexey Dosovitskiy, and Klaus Greff. Conditional object-centric
  learning from video. arXiv preprint arXiv:2111.12594, 2021.
Adam Kosiorek, Hyunjik Kim, Yee Whye Teh, and Ingmar Posner. Sequential attend, infer, repeat:
  Generative modelling of moving objects. Proc. NeurIPS, 31, 2018.
Adam R Kosiorek, Heiko Strathmann, Daniel Zoran, Pol Moreno, Rosalia Schneider, Soňa Mokrá,
  and Danilo J Rezende. Nerf-vae: A geometry aware 3d scene generative model. Proc. ICML, 2021.
Shamit Lal, Mihir Prabhudesai, Ishita Mediratta, Adam W Harley, and Katerina Fragkiadaki. Co-
  conets: Continuous contrastive 3d scene representations. In Proc. CVPR, pp. 12487–12496,
  2021.
Zhixuan Lin, Yi-Fu Wu, Skand Vishwanath Peri, Weihao Sun, Gautam Singh, Fei Deng, Jindong Jiang,
  and Sungjin Ahn. Space: Unsupervised object-oriented scene representation via spatial attention
  and decomposition. In Proc. ICLR, 2020. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=
  rkl03ySYDH.
Francesco Locatello, Dirk Weissenborn, Thomas Unterthiner, Aravindh Mahendran, Georg Heigold,
  Jakob Uszkoreit, Alexey Dosovitskiy, and Thomas Kipf. Object-centric learning with slot attention.
  Proc. NeurIPS, 33:11525–11538, 2020.
Stephen Lombardi, Tomas Simon, Jason Saragih, Gabriel Schwartz, Andreas Lehrmann, and Yaser
  Sheikh. Neural volumes: Learning dynamic renderable volumes from images. Proc. SIGGRAPH,
  2019.
Kaustubh Mani, Swapnil Daga, Shubhika Garg, Sai Shankar Narasimhan, Madhava Krishna, and
  Krishna Murthy Jatavallabhula. Monolayout: Amodal scene layout from a single image. In Proc.
  CVPR, pp. 1689–1697, 2020.
Ben Mildenhall, Pratul P Srinivasan, Matthew Tancik, Jonathan T Barron, Ravi Ramamoorthi, and
  Ren Ng. Nerf: Representing scenes as neural radiance fields for view synthesis. In Proc. ECCV,
  2020.
Thomas Neff, Pascal Stadlbauer, Mathias Parger, Andreas Kurz, Joerg H Mueller, Chakravarty R Alla
  Chaitanya, Anton Kaplanyan, and Markus Steinberger. Donerf: Towards real-time rendering of
  compact neural radiance fields using depth oracle networks. In Computer Graphics Forum. Wiley
  Online Library, 2021.
Thu H Nguyen-Phuoc, Christian Richardt, Long Mai, Yongliang Yang, and Niloy Mitra. Blockgan:
  Learning 3d object-aware scene representations from unlabelled images. Proc. NeurIPS, 33:
  6767–6778, 2020.
Yinyu Nie, Xiaoguang Han, Shihui Guo, Yujian Zheng, Jian Chang, and Jian Jun Zhang. To-
  tal3dunderstanding: Joint layout, object pose and mesh reconstruction for indoor scenes from a
  single image. In Proc. CVPR, pp. 55–64, 2020.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Michael Niemeyer and Andreas Geiger. Giraffe: Representing scenes as compositional generative
 neural feature fields. In Proc. CVPR, pp. 11453–11464, 2021.
Michael Niemeyer, Lars Mescheder, Michael Oechsle, and Andreas Geiger. Differentiable volumetric
 rendering: Learning implicit 3d representations without 3d supervision. In Proc. CVPR, pp.
 3504–3515, 2020.
Julian Ost, Fahim Mannan, Nils Thuerey, Julian Knodt, and Felix Heide. Neural scene graphs for
  dynamic scenes. In Proc. CVPR, 2021.
Fabian Pedregosa, Gaël Varoquaux, Alexandre Gramfort, Vincent Michel, Bertrand Thirion, Olivier
  Grisel, Mathieu Blondel, Peter Prettenhofer, Ron Weiss, Vincent Dubourg, et al. Scikit-learn:
  Machine learning in python. the Journal of machine Learning research, 12:2825–2830, 2011.
Songyou Peng, Michael Niemeyer, Lars Mescheder, Marc Pollefeys, and Andreas Geiger. Convolu-
  tional occupancy networks. In Proc. ECCV, 2020.
Jonah Philion and Sanja Fidler. Lift, splat, shoot: Encoding images from arbitrary camera rigs by
  implicitly unprojecting to 3d. In Proc. ECCV, pp. 194–210. Springer, 2020.
Daniel Rebain, Mark Matthews, Kwang Moo Yi, Dmitry Lagun, and Andrea Tagliasacchi. Lolnerf:
  Learn from one look. In Proc. CVPR, pp. 1558–1567, 2022.
Lennart Reiher, Bastian Lampe, and Lutz Eckstein. A sim2real deep learning approach for the
  transformation of images from multiple vehicle-mounted cameras to a semantically segmented
  image in bird’s eye view. In 2020 IEEE 23rd International Conference on Intelligent Transportation
  Systems (ITSC), pp. 1–7. IEEE, 2020.
Thomas Roddick, Alex Kendall, and Roberto Cipolla. Orthographic feature transform for monocular
  3d object detection. In BMVC, 2019.
Avishkar Saha, Oscar Mendez, Chris Russell, and Richard Bowden. Translating images into
  maps. In Proc. ICRA, 2022. URL https://www.amazon.science/publications/
  translating-images-into-maps.
Mehdi SM Sajjadi, Henning Meyer, Etienne Pot, Urs Bergmann, Klaus Greff, Noha Radwan, Suhani
 Vora, Mario Lucic, Daniel Duckworth, Alexey Dosovitskiy, et al. Scene representation transformer:
 Geometry-free novel view synthesis through set-latent scene representations. Proc. CVPR, 2021.
Vincent Sitzmann, Justus Thies, Felix Heide, Matthias Nießner, Gordon Wetzstein, and Michael
  Zollhöfer. Deepvoxels: Learning persistent 3d feature embeddings. In Proc. CVPR, 2019a.
Vincent Sitzmann, Michael Zollhöfer, and Gordon Wetzstein. Scene representation networks: Con-
  tinuous 3d-structure-aware neural scene representations. In Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, pp. 1121–1132, 2019b.
Vincent Sitzmann, Michael Zollhöfer, and Gordon Wetzstein. Scene representation networks: Contin-
  uous 3d-structure-aware neural scene representations. In Proc. NeurIPS 2019, 2019c.
Vincent Sitzmann, Semon Rezchikov, William T. Freeman, Joshua B. Tenenbaum, and Fredo Durand.
  Light field networks: Neural scene representations with single-evaluation rendering. In Proc.
  NeurIPS, 2021.
Cameron Smith, Hong-Xing Yu, Sergey Zakharov, Fredo Durand, Joshua B Tenenbaum, Jiajun Wu,
  and Vincent Sitzmann. Unsupervised discovery and composition of object light fields. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2205.03923, 2022.
Ayush Tewari, Justus Thies, Ben Mildenhall, Pratul Srinivasan, Edgar Tretschk, Yifan Wang,
  Christoph Lassner, Vincent Sitzmann, Ricardo Martin-Brualla, Stephen Lombardi, et al. Ad-
  vances in neural rendering. Proc. Eurographics STAR, 2021.
Alex Trevithick and Bo Yang. Grf: Learning a general radiance field for 3d representation and
  rendering. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV),
  pp. 15182–15192, October 2021.


                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Vadim Tschernezki, Diane Larlus, and Andrea Vedaldi. Neuraldiff: Segmenting 3d objects that move
  in egocentric videos. In Proc. 3DV, pp. 910–919. IEEE, 2021.
Hsiao-Yu Fish Tung, Ricson Cheng, and Katerina Fragkiadaki. Learning spatial common sense with
  geometry-aware recurrent networks. In Proc. CVPR, pp. 2595–2603, 2019.
Bangbang Yang, Yinda Zhang, Yinghao Xu, Yijin Li, Han Zhou, Hujun Bao, Guofeng Zhang, and
  Zhaopeng Cui. Learning object-compositional neural radiance field for editable scene rendering.
  In Proc. ICCV, pp. 13779–13788, October 2021a.
Bangbang Yang, Yinda Zhang, Yijin Li, Zhaopeng Cui, Sean Fanello, Hujun Bao, and Guofeng
  Zhang. Neural rendering in a room: Amodal 3d understanding and free-viewpoint rendering for
  the closed scene composed of pre-captured objects. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.02714, 2022.
Weixiang Yang, Qi Li, Wenxi Liu, Yuanlong Yu, Yuexin Ma, Shengfeng He, and Jia Pan. Projecting
 your view attentively: Monocular road scene layout estimation via cross-view transformation. In
 Proc. CVPR, pp. 15536–15545, 2021b.
Lior Yariv, Yoni Kasten, Dror Moran, Meirav Galun, Matan Atzmon, Basri Ronen, and Yaron Lipman.
  Multiview neural surface reconstruction by disentangling geometry and appearance. Proc. NeurIPS,
  2020.
Vickie Ye, Zhengqi Li, Richard Tucker, Angjoo Kanazawa, and Noah Snavely. Deformable sprites
  for unsupervised video decomposition. In Proc. CVPR, pp. 2657–2666, 2022.
Alex Yu, Vickie Ye, Matthew Tancik, and Angjoo Kanazawa. pixelnerf: Neural radiance fields from
  one or few images. Proc. CVPR, 2020.
Hong-Xing Yu, Leonidas J Guibas, and Jiajun Wu. Unsupervised discovery of object radiance fields.
  Proc. ICLR, 2022.
Wentao Yuan, Zhaoyang Lv, Tanner Schmidt, and Steven Lovegrove. Star: Self-supervised tracking
 and reconstruction of rigid objects in motion with neural rendering. In Proc. CVPR, pp. 13144–
 13152, 2021.
Sergey Zakharov, Wadim Kehl, Arjun Bhargava, and Adrien Gaidon. Autolabeling 3d objects with
  differentiable rendering of sdf shape priors. In Proc. CVPR, 2020.
Sergey Zakharov, Rares Andrei Ambrus, Vitor Campagnolo Guizilini, Dennis Park, Wadim Kehl,
  Fredo Durand, Joshua B Tenenbaum, Vincent Sitzmann, Jiajun Wu, and Adrien Gaidon. Single-shot
  scene reconstruction. In Proc. CORL, 2021.
Maciej Zi˛eba, Marcin Przewi˛eźlikowski, Marek Śmieja, Jacek Tabor, Tomasz Trzcinski, and Prze-
 mysław Spurek. Regflow: Probabilistic flow-based regression for future prediction. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2011.14620, 2020.


A     I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS

In this section, we provide more training details of our method to enable reproducibility.

A.1    N ETWORK A RCHITECTURES

CNN Encoder. Following PixelNeRF, we use the first 4 convolutional blocks of the ResNet34
architecture to create a feature grid. For a 128 × 128 resolution image, this results in a feature grid of
64 × 64 resolution with 512 features per point. We further use a shallow CNN to reduce the number
of feature channels, and to aggregate information along the y-axis. This step helps us reduce the
memory footprint for further processing in 3D. This feature aggregation CNN has two convolutional
hidden layers with 256 hidden units and a stride of 2 along the height of the feature tensor. The
output is a 16 × 64 resolution feature grid with 128 features per point. We use ReLU as the activation
function for all layers in the encoder.


                                                   14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Unprojection. We populate a coarse 3D feature volume of shape 64 × 16 × 64 with 128-dimensional
latents for points in the camera frustum by bilinearly sampling the aggregated encoder feature tensor.
This volume is processed as explained in the main paper: a coordinate encoding MLP transforms
each feature into a new 128 dimensional feature vector. This MLP has two hidden layers with 128
hidden units each and a ReLU activation after each hidden layer.
Multi-view input. In case of multi-view inputs, we average the unprojected latents for all 3D points
in the canonical 3D coordinate system for all views. This results, like in the monocular case, in a 3D
volume of 128 × 64 × 16 × 64 (CH × X × Y × Z).
Aggregation along the height. To construct an entangled groundplan, we aggregate the 3D feature
volume into a 2D groundplan using a pillar aggregation MLP. Consider a pillar of features orthogonal
to the groundplane for a particular point (x, z), in our case that is 128 × 16. The MLP takes in each
latent with its corresponding 3D coordinate in the world coordinate system. It outputs the softmax
scores for each of these latents which can be used to sum these latents along the pillar into a single
128-dimensional latent, as explained in the main paper.
Disentanglement CNN. We use a shallow CNN with 4 hidden convolutional layers to disentangle
the entangled groundplan of shape 128 × 64 × 64. The first two convolutional layers have 128 hidden
units with kernel size of 3, stride of 1, and reflection padding of 1.
The last two convolutional layers comprise of 256 hidden units with the same configuration for
other parameters. These are alsso followed by a 2× bilinear upsampling layers. This shallow CNN
outputs groundplan of shape 256 × 256 × 256, in which the first 128 channels of the feature tensor
are attributed as the static groundplan and the rest of the 128 channels are used as the dynamic
groundplan for that timestep.
Projections. Our method performs project of a 3D point on the image plane to get the corresponding
feature tensor. This is performed using the intrinsic matrix of the camera. For a given 3D point
in camera coordinates xc and intrinsic matrix K, the resulting 2D point on the image plane is
computed as Kx. For projecting a 3D query point x on the groundplan, we use grid sample using
(x, z)-coordinates of the 3D query points x.
Neural renderer. Similar to PixelNeRF, we use a MLP as a renderer with 4 hidden layers that have
128 hidden units. Our renderer and the input latent are significantly smaller than the ones used in
PixelNeRF, making our rendering cheaper.
We use two rendering MLPs, for coarse and fine sampling with 256 samples for the coarse MLP and
128 samples for the fine rendering along with 32 samples at the predicted depth based on the coarse
renderings.
Initialization. We use the kaiming normal initialization for initializing all the weights. All biases
were initialized with uniform distribution in [−1e−3 , 1e−3 ].

A.2   H YPERPARAMETERS

We use Adam Kingma & Ba (2014) with a learning rate of 3e−4 to train our pipeline with the image
reconstruction loss (L2), hard surfaces loss, and the alpha sparsity loss for 200 epochs. The losses
were weighted by λimg = 1, λHSL = 0.1, and λsparse = 0.01. The model was then further finetuned by
adding the LPIPS loss weighted by λlpips = 0.5. We found that using LPIPS loss from the beginning
of the training process made the training unstable. We sampled 1e4 rays to compute the loss for
each training sample in the input batch in the initial phase. During the first phase of training, the
rays are sampled randomly and in the second phase when LPIPS loss is applied to the training, we
sample rays to render image patches of 16 × 16. LPIPS loss using VGG is applied to these patches
by normalizing the range of the output RGB values to be between [−1, 1]. The model was trained on
a single 32G V100 GPU with a batch of 4 input samples with 2 timesteps for N views (N=5).

A.3   C URRICULUM TRAINING

Our model supports multi-view, as well as monocular reconstruction. We start our training only using
multi-view reconstruction with 5 input views for the first 200 epochs, and then switch to a variable
mode where the model is given a varying number of input views ranging between 1-5 views. This


                                                 15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


curriculum approach helps the network to first learn the relevant scene priors, before learning to
complete the 3D structure of the scene.

A.4      H EURISTICS FOR LOCALIZATION

For localization of objects, we consider the dynamic groundplan and render it from an orthographic
bird’s-eye view. Along with the bird’s-eye view RGB image, we also generate the occupancy map
(per-pixel accumulated alpha) as shown in the manuscript in Fig. 5. Since the groundplans have
a spatial extent of 256 × 256, the pphic occupancy map is rendered at the same resolution. The
hard-surfaces loss encourages densities to be close to either 0 or 1. Thus, we threshold the density
map with a threshold of 0.9. We find the regions of the map with connected components in the
thresholded density map using label and regionsprop functions from the sklearn Pedregosa
et al. (2011). To remove any remaining artifacts, we only keep the regions which have an area
larger than 6 in the pixel space of the groundplan. This is a hyperparameter based on the size of
the objects in the scene. Given the localization in the orthographic bird’s-eye view, we can find the
height of the objects by computing the depth within each region. This information gives us a 3D
bounding box around each of the localized object. The instance level segmentation is produced via
volume rendering, by overriding the RGB values within the detected region to a chosen color for
the object. These predictions can be made more accurate, for example, by (1) further tuning these
hyperparameters, (2) sampling the orthographic density map at a higher resolution, (3) increasing the
resolution of the groundplans at training time, and (4) training with more samples per camera ray.

A.5      S CENE E DITING

Scene editing is performed by editing the dynamic groundplan. Once the different objects have been
localized in the dynamic groundplan, we can edit the dynamic groundplan to carry out object deletion,
insertion, and rearrangement. Localizing an object gives us its features in the spatial region of the
groundplan used for rendering. To delete the object, we replace the features in this regions with
features from the dynamic groundplan that encode zero density. For inserting an object at a given
location, we find the corresponding (x, z) location in the dynamic groundplan and set the features at
that location to the features corresponding to the object. Rearrangement of objects can be seen as
a combination of deletion and insertion where we first delete the object from the existing location,
followed by inserting the object at the new location in a possibly new orientation. To perform rotation
of an object, we rotate the patch of features that correspond to the object to be rotated.

A.6      DATASETS

CLEVR. We generate scenes using the default configuration from (Johnson et al., 2017) (BSD
License1 ), using the rubber material and default object sizes. We render the scene with 6 different
cameras, all at the same fixed distance from the origin as the camera used in CLEVR, but with
azimuth angles increasing at 60 degree increments. Objects in the CLEVR dataset are captured at 2
timesteps, and are simulated to move a distance of 0.25 to 0.75 meters between the two timesteps.
Images were rendered across 6 different cameras, with resolution of 128 × 128 using CYCLES
renderer with 512 samples per pixel. Our dataset consists of 1500 samples, divided into 1000 train
and 500 test samples.
CoSY. We develop this dataset using the city generation code provided by Bhandari (2018). We
generate 15 different configurations of the city using CityEngine, with variations in building shapes,
heights, and materials. This city layout is further processed in Blender using Python to add cameras,
trees, bus stops, and moving cars. Cameras are sampled on hemispheres of radii in range [4-6m] a
maximum height of 4m viewing the center of the circular base of the hemisphere located at randomly
chosen points. We sample 15 cameras for each of the randomly chosen centers, with the varying
radius of the hemisphere for each camera. The field-of-view for all sampled cameras is 60 degrees,
with a symmetric sensor size of 32mm, resulting in a focal length of 110.85 in pixel space. Note
that we never sample any bird’s-eye view as the maximum height of the camera is clipped at 4m.
We choose 50-100 cars to be spawned in different locations of the generated city. We use a fixed
environment map with diffused white light. In addition to the rendering capabilities of CoSY, we add
   1
       https://github.com/facebookresearch/clevr-dataset-gen/blob/main/LICENSE


                                                     16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                    Figure 9: Visual quality of views for a given input image.

the ability to move cars over timesteps. Given the location and direction of the movement (direction
where the car is facing), we change the location of the car over 10 timesteps to a sampled total
translation from range 2-4 m. For each sampled camera, we render the 10 frames with a resolution of
128 × 128 using CYCLES renderer with 512 samples per pixel. Our dataset has 9000 such samples,
which are further divided into 8000 train, 500 validation, and 400 test samples. Thus each sample has
images, poses, focal length, and principal point for 15 cameras. The dataset will be publicly released
for further research in this direction.

B     A DDITIONAL R ESULTS

B.1   V ISUALIZATION OF V IEWS O UTSIDE THE O BSERVED V IEW

Fig. 9 presents the output renderings for various target camera viewpoints for the given input image.
We observe that as the target view shifts away from the context view, our method renders the geometry
with appropriate texture of the car in the view, but outputs a blurry background as expected from a
non-generative model.

B.2   U NCERTAINTY WITH RESPECT TO THE NUMBER OF INPUT VIEWS

Fig. 10 provides results of street-scale scenes reconstructed using an increasing number of input
images from different camera viewpoints. Our method successfully integrates information across
observations into a single, multi-view consistent representation. The background reconstructions
improve with more input views, as a result of less uncertainty for the occluded regions.


                                                 17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                  Input context views
                        1                2                 3               4               5


                                                      Reconstructions
   Groud truth          1               1,2               1,2,3         1,2,3,4         1,2,3,4,5


                                                  Input context views
                        1                2                 3              4                5


                                                      Reconstructions
   Groud truth          1               1,2               1,2,3         1,2,3,4         1,2,3,4,5


Figure 10: Resolving uncertainty with increasing number of context views Our model can take a
variable number of viewpoints of a scene as input. We find that the model gets a good prior on the
object from a single view but struggles to reconstruct high-quality details in the unobserved regions
of the background. This uncertainty gets resolved with more input views.


                                                 18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 11: Scene editing with rotated objects. We present images of scenes with edited groundplans
where cars are rotated at various angles in the ground plane.

Apart from effect of uncertainty in the unobserved regions on the visual quality, there are two
factors that contribute to blurriness in the results. First, our method is in the regime of prior-based
reconstruction from a few images. This is in contrast to the regime of single-scene overfitting (e.g.
NeRF) in which prior work has demonstrated photo-realistic results. In our task setup of prior based
reconstruction, a certain degree of uncertainty exists. For instance, there is uncertainty about the
exact depth and geometry of the 3D scene given the input images. In these cases, the model will
learn to blur proportionate to the amount of uncertainty. We note that this is not a limitation of our
method specifically - all prior-based 3D reconstruction methods share this property. We outperform
pixelNeRF, a strong baseline in this regime of 3D reconstruction from few images, both quantitatively
and qualitatively. Second, our rendering quality is limited by computational cost. In contrast to
single-scene methods, our method needs to fit not only the differentiable rendering in GPU memory,
but also the whole inference pipeline - CNNs, 3D lifting, groundplans, etc. This limits the resolution
of the groundplans (a car is expressed by ∼ 6 latents) as well as the number of volume rendering
samples. Increasing computational budget would lead to better renderings.

B.3   ROTATING OBJECTS

Fig. 11 provides rendered images from edited groundplans where the cars are rotated at different
angles. Note that the representation only allows for rotations in the xz-plane.

B.4   M OTION I NTERPOLATION

The dynamic groundplan can be further used to perform motion interpolation in 3D, using optical
flow for groundplan interpolation prediction using off-the-shelf, state-of-the-art optical flow and
frame interpolation methods. To demonstrate the efficacy of the groundplans for frame interpolation,
we trained RIFE Huang et al. (2020) on our model trained on the GQN-rooms Eslami et al. (2018)
dataset. We generated simple linear motion trajectories for objects over 10 frames. We added tall
static cylinders as pillars in the room which generate occlusions. The scene was rendered from
15 different camera views. We first trained our model on the GQN dataset and used the output
dynamic groundplans to train the frame interpolation method. The training was done in 2 steps.
Firstly, we extracted dynamic groundplan for the samples over different timesteps by passing the
multi-view observation through our groundplan generation pipeline. Two dynamic groundplans at
different timesteps were given as input to RIFE, and an intermediate timestep was queried. An L2
loss on the output dynamic plan against the output of our pipeline for that timestep was sufficient to
obtain a good initialization. In the training stage, we combined the RIFE model with our method
for higher-quality results. All losses discussed in the main paper were applied on the rendered novel
views generated using the output dynamic floorplans on the intermediate timesteps. In Fig. 12, we
show the rendered output of our model for the intermediate timesteps given the leftmost and rightmost
frames as input. The proposed method succeeds at inferring the correct object motion, and enables
novel view synthesis through space and time.

B.5   S UPPLEMENTAL W EBPAGE

We strongly encourage the readers to refer to our supplemental webpage for more novel-view
synthesis, static-dynamic disentanglement, localization, and scene editing results, as well as video
comparisons with the state of the art.


                                                 19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


  Input t=0                             Predicted intermediate frames             Input t=1


   Figure 12: Temporal 3D scene interpolation for novel view synthesis in space and time.


                                               20
