Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


R E - WEIGHTING BASED G ROUP FAIRNESS R EGULAR -
IZATION VIA C LASSWISE ROBUST O PTIMIZATION

 Sangwon Jung1∗ Taeeon Park1∗ Sanghyuk Chun2 Taesup Moon1,3†
 1
  Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Seoul National University
 2
  NAVER AI Lab 3 ASRI/INMC/IPAI/AIIS, Seoul National University
 {s.jung,pte1235,tsmoon}@snu.ac.kr, sanghyuk.c@navercorp.com



                                                 A BSTRACT
              Many existing group fairness-aware training methods aim to achieve the group
              fairness by either re-weighting underrepresented groups based on certain rules or
              using weakly approximated surrogates for the fairness metrics in the objective as
              regularization terms. Although each of the learning schemes has its own strength
              in terms of applicability or performance, respectively, it is difficult for any method
              in the either category to be considered as a gold standard since their successful
              performances are typically limited to specific cases. To that end, we propose a
              principled method, dubbed as FairDRO, which unifies the two learning schemes
              by incorporating a well-justified group fairness metric into the training objective
              using a classwise distributionally robust optimization (DRO) framework. We then
              develop an iterative optimization algorithm that minimizes the resulting objective
              by automatically producing the correct re-weights for each group. Our experiments
              show that FairDRO is scalable and easily adaptable to diverse applications, and con-
              sistently achieves the state-of-the-art performance on several benchmark datasets
              in terms of the accuracy-fairness trade-off, compared to recent strong baselines.


1        I NTRODUCTION
Machine learning algorithms are increasingly used in various decision-making applications that
have societal impact; e.g., crime assessment (Julia Angwin & Kirchner, 2016), credit estimation
(Khandani et al., 2010), facial recognition (Buolamwini & Gebru, 2018; Wang et al., 2019), automated
filtering in social media (Fan et al., 2021), AI-assisted hiring (Nguyen & Gatica-Perez, 2016) and law
enforcement (Garvie, 2016). A critical issue in such applications is the potential discrepancy of model
performance, e.g., accuracy, across different sensitive groups (e.g., race or gender) (Buolamwini &
Gebru, 2018), which is easily observed in the models trained with a vanilla empirical risk minimization
(ERM) (Valiant, 1984) when the training data has unwanted bias. To address such issues, the fairness-
aware learning has recently drawn attention in the AI research community.
One of the objectives of fairness-aware learning is to achieve group fairness, which focuses on the
statistical parity of the model prediction across sensitive groups. The so-called in-processing methods
typically employ additional machinery for achieving the group fairness while training. Depending on
the type of machinery used, recent in-processing methods can be divided into two categories (Caton
& Haas, 2020): regularization based methods and re-weighting based methods. Regularization
based methods incorporate fairness-promoting terms to their loss functions. They can often achieve
good performance by balancing the accuracy and fairness, but be applied only to certain types of
model architectures or tasks, such as DNNs (e.g., MFD (Jung et al., 2021) or FairHSIC (Quadrianto
et al., 2019)) or binary classification tasks (e.g., Cov (Baharlouei et al., 2020)). On the other hand,
re-weighting based methods are more flexible and can be applied to a wider range of models and
tasks by adopting simpler strategy to give higher weights to samples from underrepresented groups.
However, most of them (e.g., LBC (Jiang & Nachum, 2020), RW (Kamiran & Calders, 2012), and
FairBatch (Roh et al., 2020)) lack sound theoretical justifications for enforcing group fairness and
may perform poorly on some benchmark datasets.
     ∗
         Equal contribution.
     †
         Corresponding author.


                                                        1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


In this paper, we devise a new in-processing method, dubbed as Fairness-aware Distributionally
Robust Optimization (FairDRO), which takes the advantages of both regularization and re-weighting
based methods. The core of our method is to unify the two learning categories: namely, FairDRO
incorporates a well-justified group fairness metric in the training objective as a regularizer, and opti-
mizes the resulting objective function using a re-weighting based learning method. More specifically,
we first present that a group fairness metric, Difference of Conditional Accuracy (DCA) (Berk et al.,
2021), which is a natural extension of Equalized Opportunity (Hardt et al., 2016) to the multi-class,
multi-group label settings, is equivalent (up to a constant) to the average (over the classes) of the roots
of the variances of groupwise 0-1 losses. We then employ the Group DRO formulation, which uses
the χ2 -divergence ball including quasi-probabilities as the uncertainty set, for each class separately
to convert the DCA (or variance) regularized group-balanced empirical risk minimization (ERM) to a
more tractable minimax optimization. The inner maximizer in the converted optimization problem is
then used as re-weights for the samples in each group, making a unified connection between the re-
weighting and regularization-based fairness-aware learning methods. Lastly, we develop an efficient
iterative optimization algorithm, which automatically produces the correct (sometimes even negative)
re-weights during the optimization process, in a more principled way than other re-weighting based
methods.
In our experiments, we empirically show that our FairDRO is scalable and easily adaptable to
diverse application scenarios, including tabular (Julia Angwin & Kirchner, 2016; Dua et al., 2017),
vision (Zhang et al., 2017), and natural language text (Koh et al., 2021) datasets. We compare with
several representative in-processing baselines that apply either re-weighting schemes or surrogate
regularizations for group fairness, and show that FairDRO consistently achieves the state-of-the-art
performance on all datasets in terms of accuracy-fairness trade-off thanks to leveraging the benefits
of both kinds of fairness-aware learning methods.

2     R ELATED WORKS
2.1   I N - PROCESSING METHODS FOR GROUP FAIRNESS

Regularization based methods add penalty terms in their objective function for promoting the group
fairness. Due to non-differentiability of desired group fairness metrics, they use weaker surrogate
regularization terms; e.g., Cov (Zafar et al., 2017b), Rényi (Baharlouei et al., 2020) and FairHSIC
(Quadrianto et al., 2019) employ a covariance approximation, Rényi correlation (Rényi, 1959) and
Hilbert Schmidt Independence Criterion (HSIC) (Gretton et al., 2005) between the group label and the
model as fairness constraints, respectively. Jung et al. (2021) devised MFD that uses Maximum Mean
Discrepancy (MMD) (Gretton et al., 2005) regularization for distilling knowledge from a teacher
model and promoting group fairness at the same time. Although these methods can achieve high
performance when hyperparameters for strengths of the regularization terms are well-tuned, they are
sensitive to choices of model architectures and task settings as they employ surrogate regularization
terms; see Sec. 5 and Appendix C.2 for more details.
Meanwhile, some other works (Agarwal et al., 2018; Cotter et al., 2019) used an equivalent constrained
optimization framework to enforce group fairness instead of using the regularization formulation.
Namely, they consider a minimax problem of the Lagrangian function from the given constrained
optimization problem and seek to find a saddle point through the alternative updates of model
parameters and the Lagrangian variables. By doing so, they can successfully control the degree
of fairness while maximizing the accuracy. However, their alternating optimization algorithms
require severe computational costs due to the repetitive full training of the model. Furthermore, we
empirically observed that they fail to find a feasible solution when applied to complex tasks in vision
or NLP domains. A more detailed discussion is in Appendix B.
As alternative in-processing methods, several re-weighting based methods (Kamiran & Calders, 2012;
Jiang & Nachum, 2020; Roh et al., 2020; Agarwal et al., 2018) have also been proposed to address
group fairness. Kamiran & Calders (2012) proposed a re-weighting scheme (RW) based on the
ratio of the number of data points per each group. Recently, Label Bias Correction (LBC) (Jiang
& Nachum, 2020) and FairBatch (Roh et al., 2020) have been developed, which adaptively adjust
weights and mini-batch sizes based on the average loss per group, respectively. Perhaps, the most
similar to our work is Agarwal et al. (2018), which demonstrates that a Lagrangian formulation of
fairness-constrained optimization problem can be reduced to a cost-sensitive classification problem


                                                    2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


and solved through a re-weighting learning scheme with relabling of class labels. However, their
method is limited to binary classification tasks, whereas our FairDRO, using the DRO framework,
can be applied to more complex tasks with non-binary class labels.

2.2   D ISTRIBUTIONALLY ROBUST OPTIMIZATION (DRO)

Distributionally robust optimization (DRO) (Ben-Tal et al., 2009) is a general robust optimization
framework that was originally used for learning a model that is robust to potential test distribution
shift from the training set, by optimizing for the worst-case distribution in an uncertainty set. The
DRO framework is now widely adopted in other applications, including algorithmic fairness.
DRO in algorithmic fairness Numerous works in the algorithmic fairness literature have recently
utilized the DRO frameworks in various settings. For example, a line of works (Jiang et al., 2020;
Taskesen et al., 2020; Wang et al., 2021; Mandal et al., 2020) embeds the DRO frameworks into
the fairness-constrained optimization problem to make a fair model robust to distribution shifts of
a test dataset. Another related line of works (Wang et al., 2020; Hashimoto et al., 2018) proposed
DRO formulations for achieving fairness in more challenging settings such as learning with noisy
group labels or sequential learning. In spite of their effectiveness, both of above lines of works do
not use DRO as a direct tool for achieving group fairness. Similarly to ours, Rezaei et al. (2020);
Yurochkin et al. (2019) adopt DRO frameworks for the purpose of achieving fairness. However, the
key difference is that they either require the group labels at test time or target individual fairness. On
the other hand, our FairDRO directly aims to achieve group fairness while not requiring group labels
at test time. A more detailed discussion is in Appendix B.
DRO in other applications Applications of DRO are actively studied in other contexts, e.g., image
classification (Sagawa et al., 2020), multilingual machine translation (Oren et al., 2019; Zhou et al.,
2021), long-tailed classification (Samuel & Chechik, 2021) or out-of-distribution generalization
(Krueger et al., 2021; Xie et al., 2020). For example, Sagawa et al. (2020) proposed Group DRO
which constructs the uncertainty set of joint distributions over the class-group label pairs to withstand
the spurious correlations between the class and group labels. Although these works are effective in
their applications, the notion of statistical parity across groups (i.e., group fairness) has not been
explicitly pursued as in our FairDRO.


3     N OTATIONS AND FAIRNESS CRITERION

Notations We consider a classification problem where each sample consists of an input x ∈ X , a
class label y ∈ Y and a group label a ∈ A. The group label is defined by sensitive attributes such
as gender or race. Given a training dataset D with N samples (i.e., D = {(xi , yi , ai )}N   i=1 ), we aim
to find a fair classifier θ FAIR : X → Y satisfying the given fairness criterion while maintaining the
high classification accuracy. Moreover, given a loss function ℓ(θ, (x, y)) : Θ × (X × Y) → R, we
                       1
                          P|D|                                           y
denote L(θ, D) ≜ |D|         i=1 ℓ(θ, (xi , yi )). Additionally, Da and Da denote the subsets of D that are
confined to the samples with group label a or class-group label pair (y, a), respectively.
Fairness criterion The notion of fairness may depend on the different points of view on how
discrimination is defined (Hardt et al., 2016; Dwork et al., 2012; Chouldechova, 2017; Berk et al.,
2021). For example, one may argue that a classifier is fair if its prediction is not dependent on a
(Demographic Parity), while the other can insist that the classifier should be conditionally independent
of a given the true class (Equalized Odds). In our work, we focus on the Equalized Conditional
Accuracy (ECA) (Berk et al., 2021), which can naturally cover the multi-class, multi-group label
setting.
A classifier θ satisfies ECA if all of the accuracies among groups are the same for each given class,
i.e., ∀a, a′ ∈ A, y ∈ Y, P (Yb = y|A = a, Y = y) = P (Yb = y|A = a′ , Y = y), where Yb is the
prediction of θ. We measure the degree of unfairness with Difference of Conditional Accuracy (DCA),
denoted as ∆DCA , by taking the average of the maximum accuracy gaps among groups over y:

              1 X
    ∆DCA ≜        ∆y , ∆y ≜ max  |P (Yb = y|A = a, Y = y) − P (Yb = y|A = a′ , Y = y)|. (1)
             |Y|            a,a′
                 y∈Y


                                                    3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Remark: We note that ECA has close connections with the two popular group fairness criteria,
Equalized Odds (EO) and Equal Opportunity (EOpp) (Hardt et al., 2016). EO requires the conditional
independence between Yb and A given Y , and hence, we can easily observe that ECA is equivalent to
EO for the binary classification setting. Furthermore, we argue that ECA is a natural extension of
EOpp to the multi-class setting; namely, ECA requires equality of TPR among groups for each class
label, which resembles the argument for justifying EOpp.

4     FAIRNESS - AWARE DRO (FAIR DRO)
Our goal is to unify the regularization and re-weighting based methods by incorporating the DCA (1)
in the objective function for learning. To that end, we first show in Sec. 4.1 that the empirical DCA is
equivalent to the average (over the classes) of the roots of the variances of groupwise 0-1 losses. Then,
we utilize the previous result (Xie et al., 2020) given in Sec. 4.2 to make the connection between
the Group DRO with the uncertainty set of χ2 -divergence ball (including quasi-probabilities) and
the variance regularized group-balanced empirical loss minimization. Subsequently, in Sec. 4.3, we
present our training objective that applies Group DRO separately for each class y, which essentially
converts the DCA (or variance) regularized group-class balanced ERM into a more tractable minimax
optimization problem. Finally, Sec. 4.4 proposes an efficient iterative algorithm that does alternating
minimization-maximization of our training objective.

4.1   E QUIVALENCE BETWEEN DCA AND VARIANCE OF GROUPWISE LOSSES

Proposition 1 Assume ℓ(θ) = 1{θ(x) ̸= y}. Then, the following inequalities hold for all y ∈ Y,
                q                                       q
                  2 Var {L(θ, Day )}a∈A ≤ ∆     by ≤ 2|A|2 Var {L(θ, Day )}a∈A ,

                                                                                                      (2)
         by is the empirical version of ∆y and Var({xi }d ) ≜ 1       P         1
                                                                                  P      2
in which ∆                                                  i=1     d   i (xi − d  i xi ) is
                                                                                             the variance
                   d                                                                y
of d numbers {xi }i=1 . Thus, ∆by of a classifier is 0 if and only if Var {L(θ, Da )}a∈A = 0 .

The proof is in Appendix A. By taking the average over y in (2), Proposition 1 implies that the
empirical DCA is equivalent to the average (over y) of the square roots of the variances of the
groupwise 0-1 losses, up to a constant. Building this equivalence, we are now able to utilize the Group
DRO formulation given in the next subsection to make a connection between DCA regularization and
robust optimization.

4.2   P RIOR WORK ON VARIANCE REGULARIZATION VIA G ROUP DRO

While ERM merely minimizes the empirical loss, DRO optimizes for the worst-case distributions
in an uncertainty set, as mentioned in Sec. 2.2. Since general DRO (Duchi et al., 2019) may lead
to a pessimistic model that optimizes for implausible worst-case distributions, Sagawa et al. (2020)
recently proposed the Group DRO framework, which performs at a group level and can incorporate
prior knowledge about the groups1 ; it aims to obtain
                                                       X
                            θ GDRO ≜ arg min max           qa L(θ, Da ),                         (3)
                                              θ     q∈∆|A|
                                                             a∈A
             |A|
in which ∆         is the |A|-simplex.
The applications of Group DRO are actively studied in various contexts, e.g., image classification
(Sagawa et al., 2020) or machine translation (Zhou et al., 2021). In particular, Xie et al. (2020)
proposed Risk Variance Penalization (RVP), an OOD generalization method, using a variance
regularization with respect to risks of each domain (a formulation first introduced by V-REx (Krueger
et al., 2021)). The author showed the connection between the variance regularization and Group
DRO, when the uncertainty set is the following χ2 -divergence ball with radius ρ > 0:
                              n             X                      1           o
                       Qρ ≜ q ∈ R|A| :          qa = 1, Dϕ q           1 ≤ρ ,                     (4)
                                                                  |A|
                                             a∈A
   1
     In this subsection, the term “group” is used in a more inclusive manner. Namely, the group here refers to
any hierarchical structure in the data distribution, e.g., domain, environment, and sensitive attribute.


                                                      4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


in which Dϕ (p∥q) ≜ i qi ϕ(pi /qi ) with ϕ(t) = (t − 1)2 , and |A| 1
                                                                     1 ∈ R|A| denotes the uniform
                        P

distribution. Note (4) does not have the nonnegativity constraint on q, and hence, depending on ρ,
Qρ can also include quasi-probabilities, which have negative components as well. Namely, Xie et al.
(2020) shows the following lemma that the inner maximization of Group DRO with Qρ uncertainty set
is equivalent to the group-balanced empirical loss plus the group-wise variance term as a regularizer.

Lemma 1 (Xie et al., 2020, Proposition 1) For any finite loss ℓ(θ, (x, y)) and Qρ , we have
                                     1 X
                X                                         q
          max        qa L(θ, Da ) =         L(θ, Da ) + ρ Var {L(θ, Da )}a∈A .                            (5)
          q∈Qρ                      |A| a
                    a∈A

To be self-contained, the proof of the lemma is given in Appendix A.

4.3   T RAINING OBJECTIVE OF FAIR DRO

To make the connection between Proposition 1 and Lemma 1 and realize the DCA regularization for
fairness-aware training, we propose to apply the Group DRO separately for each class y. Namely, we
define our FairDRO as minimizing the average of the worst-case losses defined for each class y:
                                              1 X             X
                        θ FairDRO ≜ arg min           max       qay L(θ, Day ),                 (6)
                                        θ    |Y|     q y ∈Q ρ
                                                           y∈Y            a∈A
                                            y
in which Qρ is as defined in (4), q             = {qay }a∈A is a quasi-probability vector, and ρ is a tunable
hyperparameter. We stress that while applying Group DRO by treating each pair (y, a) as a “group”
has been considered in Sagawa et al. (2020), applying Group DRO separately for each class as in
FairDRO has not been considered before. Now, we present our key result which follows by combining
Proposition 1 and Lemma 1.

Corollary 1 Assume ℓ(θ) = 1{θ(x)√̸= √    y}. Then, given a dataset D, there is a corresponding
positive constant CD in the range of [ 2, 2|A|] such that θ FairDRO also achieves
                               n 1      X                   √ b o
                          min              L(θ, Day ) + CD ρ∆    DCA .                     (7)
                            θ    |Y||A|
                                                  (y,a)

The corollary implies that when the 0-1 loss is used, FairDRO is a regularization based method,
as described in Sec. 2.1, with the exact DCA serving as a regularizer. We emphasize that we do
not solve the minimization in (7) directly. ∆ bDCA can have high variance when estimated from a
small mini-batch, particularly when the number of groups is large, and is even hard to be minimized
due to non-differentiability. We indeed empirically observe in Sec. 5.4 that directly solving (7)
using approximation of ∆ bDCA with a differentiable cross-entropy loss performs poorly. Instead, we
solve a much more tractable minimax optimization in (6) where the maximization is a simple linear
optimization and the minimization is for the re-weighted group losses.
At this point, it is now clear that during solving (6), FairDRO produces the re-weights {qay }’s for each
(y, a), which makes it also categorized as a re-weighting based method. The following proposition
shows how the re-weights are characterized and controlled by the hyperparameter ρ.

Proposition 2 For Qρ in (4) with ρ > 0, each element of the optimum q y∗ for the inner-maximization
of (6) can be obtained by a closed-form solution:
                                                            P 1
                                   r          L(θ, Day ) −                y
                                                               |A| L(θ, Da )
                             1         ρ                   a∈A
                     qay∗ =      +       ×                                    ,                 (8)
                                      |A| ∥L(θ, Day ) −                  y
                                                           P 1
                            |A|                               |A| L(θ, Da )∥2
                                                                          a∈A
                         h           √                     √              i
                              1          ρ(|A|−1) 1            ρ(|A|−1)
and is in the range of       |A| −         |A|   , |A| +         |A|          .

The proof is in Appendix A. Proposition 2 shows that some elements of q y∗ can be negative depending
on the radius ρ and the groupwise loss L(θ, Day ). Moreover, it shows that the range of each element
of the optimum q y∗ is automatically determined by a radius ρ and the number of groups |A|, which


                                                           5
  Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


  means FairDRO controls the degree of the group penalization by varying ρ. We will show in Sec. 5
  that we can find a proper degree of penalization by tuning ρ so that the performances on various
  datasets in terms of accuracy-fairness trade-off are significantly improved.
  A crucial difference from typical re-weighting based methods is that our re-weights are obtained as
  the solution of an optimization problem as opposed to those in Kamiran & Calders (2012); Jiang
  & Nachum (2020) that are heuristically obtained based on the ratio of the number of data points or
  losses for each group. Also, we allow negative values for qay in Qρ , which enables penalizing the high
  accuracy group more aggressively than typical re-weighting methods that only control the positive
  weights for each group a and class y.
   4.4   A N EFFICIENT ITERATIVE OPTIMIZATION FOR FAIR DRO

  A canonical way of solving the minimax optimization in DRO is to use a primal-dual method
  (Nemirovski et al., 2009) in which one alternates between a regular gradient descent on θ and an
  exponentiated gradient (EG) ascent (Kivinen & Warmuth, 1997) on q. However, the EG algorithm is
  widely used when the variables lie in the probability simplex because it is a special case of mirror
  descent when the convex function for the Bregman divergence is the negative Shannon entropy. Thus,
  EG cannot be applied to solving (6) since our uncertainty set also allows the quasi-probability for q y .
  Hence, we employ the smoothed Iterated Best Response (IBR) which is a variant of IBR recently used
  for solving a DRO problem in (Zhou et al., 2021). Using standard IBR for the inner maximization step,
  q is updated as the closed-form solution of the maximization (i.e., (8)), instead of the gradient ascent
  of q. It is known that solving the minimax optimization using the standard IBR has a convergence
  guarantee w.r.t θ under some regularity assumptions (Zhou et al., 2021). However, it does not
  imply the convergence of q y , and we empirically observed in Appendix D.6 that the q y∗,t oscillates
  unsteadily when the loss for each group fluctuates. To that end, we applied the learning rate scheduling
  of ηqt = 1 − Tt with T being the number of total epochs, which results in updating q y,t smoothly.
  Namely, our overall update rules for θ and q y are
                                                1 XX
                         θ t+1 ← θ t − ηθt ∇θ                 qay,t L(θ t , Day ) , (update θ)         (9)
                                                |Y|
                                                              y∈Y a∈A
                            y,t+1
                        q            ←   (1 − ηqt )q y,t + ηqt q y∗,t ,   ∀y ∈ Y,            (update q y )        (10)
                                                    X
                              y∗,t
                in which q           ≜ arg max            qay L(θ t+1 , Day ),
                                          q y ∈Qρ
                                                    a∈A

   Algorithm 1: FairDRO Iterative Optimization                            and ηθt and ηqt denote the learning rates for
                                                                          θ and q y , respectively. By applying the
   Input : Dataset {Day }y∈Y,a∈A , radius ρ, epoch                        smoothed IBR in (10), we empirically ob-
              T , iteration I, mini-batch size B                          serve improvements in the group fairness
                             0
 1 Randomly initialize θ
                                                                          and more stable convergence of q y (detailed
 2 Set q
         y,0
             ← |A| 1 for y ∈ Y, in which 1 ∈ R|A|
                   1
                                                                          results are given in Appendix D.6). We note
 3 for t = 0 to T − 1 do                                                  that for (7) to hold, we use 0-1 loss in (6),
 4     // θ-update                                                        which makes our training objective still non-
 5     for i = 0 to I − 1 do                                              differentiable with respect to θ. Thus, in
 6          Sample a mini-batch {(xj , yj , aj )}j∈[B] ,                  practice, we solves the cross-entropy loss
             equally from Day for each                                    for the outer minimization (9) and the 0-1
             (y, a) ∈ Y × A.                                              loss for the inner maximization (10). We
 7          Update θ t with (9) using the mini-batch                      also note that θ is updated in a mini-batch
 8     end                                                                manner, whereas q is updated after com-
 9     // q-update                                                        puting the group losses for all training data
10     Update q y,t for each y ∈ Y with (10)                              points. Algorithm 1 illustrates the summary
11 end
                                                                          of FairDRO optimization scheme.
   Output : θ T , {q y,T }y∈Y
                                                                          5      E XPERIMENTAL RESULTS
  In this section, we demonstrate the versatility of FairDRO by comparing it with various baseline
  methods on three modalities of datasets: (1) two tabular datasets, UCI Adult (Dua et al., 2017)
  and ProPublica COMPAS (Julia Angwin & Kirchner, 2016), (2) two vision datasets, UTKFace
  (Zhang et al., 2017), CelebA (Liu et al., 2015) (in Appendix D.2) and (3) a natural language dataset,


                                                               6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023

                                        Scratch RW LBC Cov Rényi FairBatch EGR PL FairDRO (ours)
                                                    Adult                                             COMPAS
                                       82
                                                                                       62
                                       80


                        Accuracy (%)


                                                                        Accuracy (%)
                                       78                                              60

                                       76                                              58

                                       74                                              56
                                            7   6   5       4   3   2                       14   12    10   8   6   4
                                                    DCA (%)                                           DCA (%)


Figure 1: The trade-offs between accuracy and DCA on Adult (left) and COMPAS (right). The per-
formances of “Scratch” are highlighted by the black dotted lines. Each point is the result corresponding to a
different hyperparameter of each method. Each line is a convex envelop of points of the corresponding method.

CivilComments-WILDS (Koh et al., 2021). We use logistic regression, ResNet18 (He et al., 2016),
and a pre-trained BERT (Devlin et al., 2019; Wolf et al., 2019) as the classifier for each modality,
respectively. For the evaluation, we plotted the convex envelops of the trade-offs between the accuracy
and ∆DCA for varying hyperparameters, i.e., the pareto frontiers. As a single number evaluation
metric, we also reported the best DCA with at least 95% accuracy of the vanilla trained model
(Scratch) in the Appendix D.1. Since the most datasets are severely skewed toward a specific group or
class, we report the balanced accuracy over all combinations of groups and classes as Bellamy et al.
(2018) (the issue discussed more in Appendix D.7). Moreover, we give a thorough ablation study
on our design choice in (6), namely, the classwise DRO formulation and the uncertainty set (4) in
Sec. 5.4 and Appendix D.4, respectively. We further visualize the re-weights produced by FairDRO
in Sec. 5.4. More implementation details are given in Appendix C.
Comparison methods. We compare FairDRO with vanilla training without any fairness constraint
(Scratch) and nine in-processing fair-training methods; three re-weighting based methods (RW
(Kamiran & Calders, 2012), LBC (Jiang & Nachum, 2020), FairBatch (Roh et al., 2020)), four
regularization based methods (Cov (Zafar et al., 2017b), FairHSIC (Quadrianto et al., 2019), Rényi
(Baharlouei et al., 2020), MFD (Jung et al., 2021)) and two methods employing a constrained
optimization (EGR (Agarwal et al., 2018), PL (Cotter et al., 2019)). Since we consider a group-class
balanced accuracy, we modified the objective functions of all baselines including Scratch such that
they use the group-class balanced ERM loss, not the standard ERM loss.2 We note that Cov, EGR and
Rényi are task-dependent, and FairHSIC and MFD are model-dependent; namely, Cov and EGR are
designed only for binary classification tasks, Rényi is for tasks with binary groups, and FairHSIC and
MFD are for DNN-based classifiers. We also note that all baselines except RW were implemented for
targeting EO. Considering that ECA is equivalent to EO only in binary classification as we mentioned
in Section 3, we also reported the difference of EO (DEO) for multi-class classification tasks in
Appendix D.1. We provide more details of implementations of the baselines in Appendix C.

5.1   TABULAR DATASETS

Two tabular datasets, UCI Adult (Dua et al., 2017) (Adult) and ProPublica COMPAS (Julia Angwin
& Kirchner, 2016) (COMPAS), are used for the benchmark. Both tasks are binary classification tasks
(predicting whether the income of an individual exceeds $50K per a year and whether a defendant
re-offends, respectively) with binary sensitive groups (“Female” and “Male”, and “Caucasian” and
“Non-Caucasin”, respectively). Following pre-processing of Bellamy et al. (2018), each dataset
includes 45K and 5K rows, respectively.
Fig. 1 shows the accuracy-fairness trade-offs for varying hyperparameters on Adult and COMPAS.
We note that there is only a single score for RW because it has no controllable hyperparameter. In the
figure, we observe that FairDRO is placed to the most top-right area among methods, showing the best
trade-off, and even achieves the lowest level of DCA with a slight loss of accuracy. This implies that
FairDRO successfully finds better weights (i.e., quasi-probability q y ) than other re-weighting based
methods and employs a better regularizer than other regularization based methods. Furthermore,
our FairDRO can provide pareto-frontiers in a wider range than other re-weighting baselines by
introducing negative weights.
   2
     The results of employing original objective functions are reported in Appendix D.3. From the results, we
observe that using the balanced ERM loss improves the balanced accuracy and DCA for the most methods.


                                                                        7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023

                                  Scratch RW LBC Cov FairBatch EGR PL FairHSIC MFD FairDRO (ours)
                                                        UTKFace                                   CivilComments
                                         82
                                                                                        80
                                         80


                          Accuracy (%)


                                                                         Accuracy (%)
                                         78
                                         76                                             78
                                         74
                                         72                                             76
                                         70
                                              24   22   20   18    16   14                   20      15         10   5
                                                         DCA (%)                                      DCA (%)


Figure 2: The trade-offs between accuracy and DCA on UTKFace (left) and CivilComments (right).
Details are the same as Fig. 1.

 5.2   V ISION DATASETS

We also evaluate FairDRO on UTKFace (Zhang et al., 2017), a face dataset with multi-class and
multi-group labels. UTKFace includes more than 20K images with age, gender and ethnicity labels.
We divide the age labels into three classes (“0 to 19”, “20 to 40”, and “more than 40”), and set them
as the class labels. We also use four ethnic classes (“White”, “Black”, “Asian”, and “Indian”) as the
group labels. The description and results on another vision dataset, CelebA (Liu et al., 2015), are
given in Appendix D.2.
From Fig. 2 (left), we confirm that FairDRO significantly improves the trade-off, compared to most
baselines. For MFD, we note that it provides a competitive pareto-frontier with higher accuracy
than FairDRO, thanks to the knowledge distillation effect. However, MFD requires additional
computations for training a teacher model, and its high performance is sensitive to task domains
(refer to the next result on the NLP task). We again observe that the re-weighting based baselines
are ineffective in achieving fairness on UTKFace, while FairDRO achieves strong performance due
to its systematic optimization of the group weights. We further note that much lower accuracy of
PL implies that its minimax optimization fails to produce good performance due to difficulty of
finding feasible saddle points. Since EO is not equivalent to ECA for non-binary target task as
aforementioned above, we additionally report the difference of EO (DEO) for UTKFace in Appendix
D.1 and show FairDRO again outperforms other baselines in DEO.

 5.3   L ANGUAGE DATASET

 In order to show the versatility of FairDRO, we additionally consider a natural language dataset,
 CivilComments-WILDS (Koh et al., 2021). CivilComments is a large collection of comments on
 online articles taken from the Civil Comments platform. It comprises 450K comments which are
 annotated with identity attributes by 10 crowdworkers and majority votes. The CivilComments task
 is to predict whether a given comment is toxic or not. We set ethnicity as the sensitive attribute and
 extract the subset of comments that contain identities w.r.t. ethnicity (“Black”, “White”, “Asian”,
“Latino” and “Ohters”). Note that the dataset has continuous values for the identities (between 0 and
 1), hence, we binarized the continuous group values by setting the maximum as 1 and the others as 0,
 since the existing in-processing methods are only available to handle discrete group labels.
The results are shown in Fig. 2 (right). Note that since a pre-trained BERT is fine-tuned only for
small epochs, the update for q y of FairDRO and weights of re-weighting baselines is executed per
100 iterations, instead of every epoch. We empirically observed that FairHSIC fails to converge due
to the gradient exploding. Consistent with the previous results, FairDRO achieves the best trade-off
on CivilComments. Note that although MFD is very competitive on UTKFace, it is not effective on
CivilComments.

 5.4   A NALYSIS

Ablation study. Fig. 3 shows the accuracy-fairness trade-off for each ablated version of FairDRO
on each dataset. “FairDRO (w/o DRO)” directly solves (7) by approximating both terms in the
objective with the cross-entropy loss; namely, both terms are replaced with the group-class balanced
average cross-entropy loss and the average (over y) of the maximum gaps of groupwise cross-entropy
losses. The “RVP (w /classwise)” is also similar, but uses the average (over y) of the variances of
the groupwise cross-entropy losses (as shown in (5)) as a regularization term instead of the direct
approximation of ∆  bDCA . FairDRO (w/o classwise) defines only one uncertainty set over the (y, a)


                                                                          8
 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023

                                   Scratch       FairDRO (w/o DRO)    RVP (w/ classwise)                                                    FairDRO (w/o classwise)                                 FairDRO (ours)
                                 Adult                           COMPAS                                                                          UTKFace                                                    CivilComments
               82                                                                                                                 80                                                           81
               81                                               62                                                                79                                                           80

Accuracy (%)


                                                 Accuracy (%)


                                                                                                                   Accuracy (%)


                                                                                                                                                                                Accuracy (%)
               80                                                                                                                 78                                                           79
                                                                60
               79
                                                                                                                                  77                                                           78
               78                                               58
                                                                                                                                  76                                                           77
               77
                           6        4        2                       14          12          10       8     6     4                    22   20    18   16             14        12                         12      10       8
                                 DCA (%)                                                     DCA (%)                                              DCA (%)                                                       DCA (%)


 Figure 3: Ablation study of FairDRO. RVP and FairDRO (w/o classwise) are for the ablation study of our key
 two components, the DRO formulation, and classwise treatment, respectively. The best performance of each
 result is in Tab. D.4.
                                                            Group 0                                   Group 1                           Scratch                       FairDRO
                  80                                                                        80                                                                        80
q1 Accuracy (%)


                                                                          q1 Accuracy (%)
                  70                                                                        70
                                                                                                                                                                      70


                                                                                                                                                       Accuracy (%)
                  60                                                                        60
                  50                                                                        50                                                                        60
                  40                                                                        40
                                                                                                                                                                      50
                   1                                                                         1
                   0                                                                         0                                                                        40
                       0       10 20 30 40 50 60 70                                               0       10 20 30 40 50 60 70                                              0           10 20 30 40 50 60 70
                                  Training epochs                                                               Training epochs                                                                      Training epochs
                               (a) Scratch (train)                                                        (b) FairDRO (train)                                              (c) Scratch & FairDRO (test)
 Figure 4: Accuracies and loss weights for each group (q) on COMPAS. The groupwise training accuracies
 and loss weights during training for Scratch (a) and FairDRO (b) are shown. Groupwise test accuracies are
 shown in (c). The reported accuracies and weights are only for label 1, while label 0 results are in Appendix D.5.

 pair in (6) for the ablation study of the classwise treatment. In Fig. 3, we note that RVP (w/ classwise)
 on CivilComments fails to converge by the gradient exploding. Our observations from the figures are
 as follows. First, we see that FairDRO achieves consistently better pareto-frontiers on all datasets
 than FairDRO (w/o DRO) and RVP (w/classwise), which asserts that solving (7) by a re-weighting
 learning scheme via our classwise DRO formulation is essential for better performance and stable
 learning. Second, we clearly observe that FairDRO (w/o classwise) shows sub-optimal accuracy-DCA
 trade-offs (except for Adult), indicating that our classwise DRO formulation is critical for the optimal
 performance since it makes the connection with the DCA regularization more clearly. Further ablation
 studies for the choice of the uncertainty set are in Appendix D.4.
 Visualization of q y . We visualize the learning dynamics of the group weights (q y ), including training
 accuracies (Fig. 4 (a) and (b)) and test accuracies (Fig. 4 (c)) for Scratch and FairDRO on COMPAS.
 For simplicity, we report the result for y = 1 (for y = 0 is in Appendix D.5). In Fig. 4 (a), q 1 assigns
 the same value for each group as Scratch employs the balanced ERM loss. At the top of the plot,
 Scratch shows a large discrepancy in accuracy between the two groups throughout training. On the
 other hand, Fig. 4 (b) shows FairDRO adjusts q 1 by assigning low values to the high accuracy group
 (Group 0) and high values to the low accuracy group (Group 1). Note that q 1 initially fluctuates and
 even assigns negative values for the high accuracy group but eventually converges via the learning rate
 scheduling in (10). As a result, we clearly observe both the training and test accuracy gaps between
 the groups smoothly become negligible as the training continues. We believe this example clearly
 shows the effectiveness of introducing the quasi-probability in Qρ , and our FairDRO framework in
 achieving small test accuracy gaps between the groups, i.e., ∆DCA .

 6                  C ONCLUDING REMARK

We proposed a theoretically well-justified in-processing method for achieving group fairness. To
make a clear connection between re-weighting and regularization based methods, our FairDRO
employs the classwise Group DRO framework with χ2 -divergence ball including quasi-probabilities
as an uncertainty set. Then, the FairDRO training objective directly incorporates DCA as a regularizer
and can be effectively solved by our proposed re-weighting optimization scheme. As a result, our
DRO formulation enables FairDRO to have strengths of both re-weighing based and regularization
based methods. Indeed, we showed through our experiments that our FairDRO is applicable to various
settings and consistently achieves superior accuracy-fairness trade-off on benchmark datasets.


                                                                                                                   9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This work was supported in part by the NRF grant [NRF-2021R1A2C2007884] and IITP grants
[No.2021- 0-01343, No.2021-0-02068, No.2022-0-00959, No.2022-0-00113]] funded by the Korean
government, and SNU-NAVER Hyperscale AI Center.

R EFERENCES
Alekh Agarwal, Alina Beygelzimer, Miroslav Dudı́k, John Langford, and Hanna Wallach. A
  reductions approach to fair classification. In Int. Conf. Mach. Learn. (ICML), pp. 60–69. PMLR,
  2018.

Sina Baharlouei, Maher Nouiehed, Ahmad Beirami, and Meisam Razaviyayn. Rényi fair inference.
  In Int. Conf. Learn. Represent. (ICLR), 2020.

Rachel KE Bellamy, Kuntal Dey, Michael Hind, Samuel C Hoffman, Stephanie Houde, Kalapriya
  Kannan, Pranay Lohia, Jacquelyn Martino, Sameep Mehta, Aleksandra Mojsilovic, et al. AI Fair-
  ness 360: An extensible toolkit for detecting, understanding, and mitigating unwanted algorithmic
  bias. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.01943, 2018.

Aharon Ben-Tal, Laurent El Ghaoui, and Arkadi Nemirovski. Robust optimization, volume 28.
  Princeton University Press, 2009.

Richard Berk, Hoda Heidari, Shahin Jabbari, Michael Kearns, and Aaron Roth. Fairness in criminal
  justice risk assessments: The state of the art. Sociological Methods & Research, 50(1):3–44, 2021.

Joy Buolamwini and Timnit Gebru. Gender shades: Intersectional accuracy disparities in commercial
  gender classification. In Conf. Fairness, Accountability and Transparency (FAccT), pp. 77–91.
  PMLR, 2018.

Simon Caton and Christian Haas. Fairness in machine learning: A survey. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2010.04053, 2020.

Alexandra Chouldechova. Fair prediction with disparate impact: A study of bias in recidivism
  prediction instruments. Big Data, 5(2):153–163, 2017.

Ching-Yao Chuang and Youssef Mroueh. Fair mixup: Fairness via interpolation. In Int. Conf. Learn.
  Represent. (ICLR), 2021.

Andrew Cotter, Heinrich Jiang, Maya R Gupta, Serena Wang, Taman Narayan, Seungil You, and
  Karthik Sridharan. Optimization with non-differentiable constraints with applications to fairness,
  recall, churn, and other goals. Journal of Machine Learning Research (JMLR), 20(172):1–59,
  2019.

Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. BERT: Pre-training of
  deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding. In Proc. of the 2019 Conf. of the
  North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language
  Technologies 1 (NAACL-HLT (1)), pp. 4171–4186, 2019.

Dheeru Dua, Casey Graff, et al. UCI machine learning repository. http://archive.ics.uci.
  edu/ml, 2017.

John C Duchi, Tatsunori Hashimoto, and Hongseok Namkoong. Distributionally robust losses against
  mixture covariate shifts. Under review, 2019.

Sanghamitra Dutta, Dennis Wei, Hazar Yueksel, Pin-Yu Chen, Sijia Liu, and Kush Varshney. Is there
  a trade-off between fairness and accuracy? A perspective using mismatched hypothesis testing. In
  Int. Conf. Mach. Learn. (ICML), pp. 2803–2813. PMLR, 2020.

Cynthia Dwork, Moritz Hardt, Toniann Pitassi, Omer Reingold, and Richard Zemel. Fairness through
  awareness. In Conf. Innov. Theor. Compu. Scien. (ITCS), pp. 214–226, 2012.


                                                10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Hong Fan, Wu Du, Abdelghani Dahou, Ahmed A Ewees, Dalia Yousri, Mohamed Abd Elaziz,
 Ammar H Elsheikh, Laith Abualigah, and Mohammed AA Al-qaness. Social media toxicity
  classification using deep learning: Real-world application UK brexit. Electronics, 10(11):1332,
  2021.
Clare Garvie. The perpetual line-up: Unregulated police face recognition in America. Georgetown
  Law, Center on Privacy & Technology, 2016.
Arthur Gretton, Olivier Bousquet, Alex Smola, and Bernhard Schölkopf. Measuring statistical
  dependence with Hilbert-Schmidt norms. In Int. Conf. Algo. Learn. Theory (ALT), pp. 63–77.
  Springer, 2005.
Moritz Hardt, Eric Price, and Nati Srebro. Equality of opportunity in supervised learning. In Adv.
 Neural Inform. Process. Syst. (NeurIPS), volume 29, 2016.
Tatsunori Hashimoto, Megha Srivastava, Hongseok Namkoong, and Percy Liang. Fairness without
  demographics in repeated loss minimization. In Int. Conf. Mach. Learn. (ICML), pp. 1929–1938.
  PMLR, 2018.
Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image
  recognition. In IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recog. (CVPR), pp. 770–778, 2016.
Heinrich Jiang and Ofir Nachum. Identifying and correcting label bias in machine learning. In Int.
  Conf. Artificial Intelligence and Statistics (AISTATS), pp. 702–712. PMLR, 2020.
Ray Jiang, Aldo Pacchiano, Tom Stepleton, Heinrich Jiang, and Silvia Chiappa. Wasserstein fair
  classification. In Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence (UAI), pp. 862–872. PMLR, 2020.
Chi Jin, Praneeth Netrapalli, and Michael Jordan. What is local optimality in nonconvex-nonconcave
  minimax optimization? In Int. Conf. Mach. Learn. (ICML), pp. 4880–4889. PMLR, 2020.
Surya Mattu Julia Angwin, Jeff Larson and Lauren Kirchner. There’s software used across the
  country to predict future criminals. and its biased against blacks. ProPublica, 2016. URL
  https://github.com/propublica/compas-analysis.
Sangwon Jung, Donggyu Lee, Taeeon Park, and Taesup Moon. Fair feature distillation for visual
  recognition. In IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recog. (CVPR), pp. 12115–12124, 2021.
Sangwon Jung, Sanghyuk Chun, and Taesup Moon. Learning fair classifiers with partially annotated
  group labels. In IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recog. (CVPR), pp. 10348–10357, 2022.
Faisal Kamiran and Toon Calders. Data preprocessing techniques for classification without discrimi-
  nation. Knowledge and Information Systems (KAIS), 33(1):1–33, 2012.
Amir E Khandani, Adlar J Kim, and Andrew W Lo. Consumer credit-risk models via machine-
 learning algorithms. Journal of Banking & Finance (JBF), 34(11):2767–2787, 2010.
Jyrki Kivinen and Manfred K Warmuth. Exponentiated gradient versus gradient descent for linear
  predictors. Information and Computation, 132(1):1–63, 1997.
Pang Wei Koh, Shiori Sagawa, Henrik Marklund, Sang Michael Xie, Marvin Zhang, Akshay Bal-
  subramani, Weihua Hu, Michihiro Yasunaga, Richard Lanas Phillips, Irena Gao, et al. Wilds: A
  benchmark of in-the-wild distribution shifts. In Int. Conf. Mach. Learn. (ICML), pp. 5637–5664.
  PMLR, 2021.
David Krueger, Ethan Caballero, Joern-Henrik Jacobsen, Amy Zhang, Jonathan Binas, Dinghuai
  Zhang, Remi Le Priol, and Aaron Courville. Out-of-distribution generalization via risk extrapola-
  tion (REx). In Int. Conf. Mach. Learn. (ICML), pp. 5815–5826. PMLR, 2021.
Evan Z Liu, Behzad Haghgoo, Annie S Chen, Aditi Raghunathan, Pang Wei Koh, Shiori Sagawa,
  Percy Liang, and Chelsea Finn. Just train twice: Improving group robustness without training
  group information. In Int. Conf. Mach. Learn. (ICML), pp. 6781–6792. PMLR, 2021.
Ziwei Liu, Ping Luo, Xiaogang Wang, and Xiaoou Tang. Deep learning face attributes in the wild. In
  Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV), pp. 3730–3738, 2015.


                                               11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Ilya Loshchilov and Frank Hutter. SGDR: Stochastic gradient descent with warm restarts. In Int.
   Conf. Learn. Represent. (ICLR), 2017.

Ilya Loshchilov and Frank Hutter. Decoupled weight decay regularization. In Int. Conf. Learn.
   Represent. (ICLR), 2019.

Debmalya Mandal, Samuel Deng, Suman Jana, Jeannette Wing, and Daniel J Hsu. Ensuring fairness
  beyond the training data. In Adv. Neural Inform. Process. Syst. (NeurIPS), volume 33, 2020.

Arkadi Nemirovski, Anatoli Juditsky, Guanghui Lan, and Alexander Shapiro. Robust stochastic
  approximation approach to stochastic programming. SIAM Journal on Optimization (SIOPT), 19
  (4):1574–1609, 2009.

Laurent Son Nguyen and Daniel Gatica-Perez. Hirability in the wild: Analysis of online conversa-
  tional video resumes. IEEE Trans. Multimedia, 18(7):1422–1437, 2016.

Yonatan Oren, Shiori Sagawa, Tatsunori B Hashimoto, and Percy Liang. Distributionally robust
  language modeling. In Conf. Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), pp.
  4227–4237, 2019.

Adam Paszke, Sam Gross, Francisco Massa, Adam Lerer, James Bradbury, Gregory Chanan, Trevor
  Killeen, Zeming Lin, Natalia Gimelshein, Luca Antiga, et al. PyTorch: An imperative style, high-
  performance deep learning library. In Adv. Neural Inform. Process. Syst. (NeurIPS), volume 32,
  2019.

Novi Quadrianto, Viktoriia Sharmanska, and Oliver Thomas. Discovering fair representations in the
  data domain. In IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recog. (CVPR), pp. 8227–8236, 2019.

Alfréd Rényi. On measures of dependence. Acta Mathematica Hungarica, 10(3-4):441–451, 1959.

Ashkan Rezaei, Rizal Fathony, Omid Memarrast, and Brian Ziebart. Fairness for robust log loss
  classification. In Proc. of the AAAI Conf. Artificial Intelligence (AAAI), volume 34, pp. 5511–5518,
  2020.

Yuji Roh, Kangwook Lee, Steven Euijong Whang, and Changho Suh. Fairbatch: Batch selection for
  model fairness. Int. Conf. Learn. Represent. (ICLR), 2020.

Shiori Sagawa, Pang Wei Koh, Tatsunori B Hashimoto, and Percy Liang. Distributionally robust
  neural networks for group shifts: On the importance of regularization for worst-case generalization.
  Int. Conf. Learn. Represent. (ICLR), 2020.

Dvir Samuel and Gal Chechik. Distributional robustness loss for long-tail learning. In Int. Conf.
 Comput. Vis. (ICCV), pp. 9495–9504, 2021.

Xinyue Shen, Steven Diamond, Yuantao Gu, and Stephen Boyd. Disciplined convex-concave
  programming. In IEEE 55th Conf. Decision and Control (CDC), pp. 1009–1014. IEEE, 2016.

Bahar Taskesen, Viet Anh Nguyen, Daniel Kuhn, and Jose Blanchet. A distributionally robust
  approach to fair classification. arXiv preprint arXiv:2007.09530, 2020.

Leslie G Valiant. A theory of the learnable. Communications of the ACM, 27(11):1134–1142, 1984.

Mei Wang, Weihong Deng, Jiani Hu, Xunqiang Tao, and Yaohai Huang. Racial faces in the wild:
 Reducing racial bias by information maximization adaptation network. In Int. Conf. Comput. Vis.
 (ICCV), pp. 692–702, 2019.

Serena Wang, Wenshuo Guo, Harikrishna Narasimhan, Andrew Cotter, Maya Gupta, and Michael
  Jordan. Robust optimization for fairness with noisy protected groups. In Adv. Neural Inform.
  Process. Syst. (NeurIPS), volume 33, 2020.

Yijie Wang, Viet Anh Nguyen, and Grani A Hanasusanto. Wasserstein robust classification with
  fairness constraints. arXiv preprint arXiv:2103.06828, 2021.


                                                 12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Thomas Wolf, Lysandre Debut, Victor Sanh, Julien Chaumond, Clement Delangue, Anthony Moi,
  Pierric Cistac, Tim Rault, Rémi Louf, Morgan Funtowicz, et al. Huggingface’s transformers:
  State-of-the-art natural language processing. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.03771, 2019.
Chuanlong Xie, Fei Chen, Yue Liu, and Zhenguo Li. Risk variance penalization: From distributional
  robustness to causality. arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.07544, 2020.
Mikhail Yurochkin, Amanda Bower, and Yuekai Sun. Training individually fair ML models with
 sensitive subspace robustness. arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.00020, 2019.
Muhammad Bilal Zafar, Isabel Valera, Manuel Gomez Rodriguez, and Krishna P Gummadi. Fair-
 ness beyond disparate treatment & disparate impact: Learning classification without disparate
 mistreatment. In Proc. of the 26th Int. Conf. World Wide Web (WWW), pp. 1171–1180, 2017a.
Muhammad Bilal Zafar, Isabel Valera, Manuel Gomez Rogriguez, and Krishna P Gummadi. Fairness
 constraints: Mechanisms for fair classification. In Int. Conf. Artificial Intelligence and Statistics
 (AISTATS), pp. 962–970. PMLR, 2017b.
Brian Hu Zhang, Blake Lemoine, and Margaret Mitchell. Mitigating unwanted biases with adversarial
  learning. In AAAI/ACM Conf. AI, Ethics, and Society (AIES), pp. 335–340, 2018.
Zhifei Zhang, Yang Song, and Hairong Qi. Age progression/regression by conditional adversarial
  autoencoder. In IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recog. (CVPR), pp. 5810–5818, 2017.
Chunting Zhou, Daniel Levy, Xian Li, Marjan Ghazvininejad, and Graham Neubig. Distribution-
  ally robust multilingual machine translation. In Conf. Empirical Methods in Natural Language
  Processing (EMNLP), pp. 5664–5674, 2021.


                                                 13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A PPENDIX

We provide additional materials in this document. We include the proofs for Lemma 1 and Proposition
1 and 2 in Appendix A, additional related work in Appendix B, and implementation details such as
optimization, implementations of baselines, and hyperparameter search in Appendix C. Finally, we
report additional experimental results in Appendix D.

A     P ROOFS

Proof of Proposition 1       We define Ly ∈ R|A|×|A| for brevity:
                             Lyi,j ≜L(θ, Diy ) − L(θ, Djy ), 1 ≤ ∀i, j ≤ |A|.

                         2
If we denote Λy ∈ R|A| as
                         Λy ≜ (Ly1,1 , ..., Ly|A|,1 , Ly1,2 , ..., Ly|A|,2 , ..., Ly|A|,|A| ),

then, we have the following chain of equalities:
                                       1 X                  2   1 X                    2
            Var {L(θ, Day )}a∈A =                L(θ, Day ) −             L(θ, Day )

                                      |A| a                        |A| a
                                        1 XX                                    2
                                                               y            y
                                    =                   L(θ, Da  ) − L(θ, Da′ )
                                      2|A|2 a a′
                                                1
                                         =          ∥Λy ∥22 .
                                              2|A|2

Note that as we consider ℓ to be zero-one loss function, we have the followings:
                                          y                                    y
                                       |Da |                        |Da′ |
                                  1 X                          1 X
                 ∆
                 by ≜ max                    1{θ(xi ) ̸= y} − y            1{θ(xi ) ̸= y}
                         a,a′   |Day | i=1                   |Da′ | i=1
                                               y
                     = max |L(θ, Day ) − L(θ, Da′ )|
                         a,a′
                            y
                      = ∥Λ ∥∞ .

Since ∥Λy ∥∞ = maxi |Λyi | ≤
                                   pP y                 y
                                                2
                                        i (Λ i ) = ∥Λ ∥2 , we
                                                            p obtain the second inequality of (2). Note
                                 y
                      p                   p
also that ∥Λy ∥2 =                                               2 ∥Λy ∥2 = |A|∥Λy ∥ . We thereby
                         P          2 ≤
                                            P        y ∥2 =
                            i (Λ i )            i ∥Λ    ∞     |A|       ∞             ∞
obtain the first inequality of (2).

From (2), we obtain ∆     by = 0 if Var {L(θ, Day )}a∈A = 0 for all y ∈ Y. Consider-
ing variance is always   non-negative, we obtain the necessary condition that ∆y = 0 implies
                                                                                     b
               y
Var {L(θ, Da )}a∈A = 0 for all y ∈ Y.

                                                                        P  y     1

Proof of Lemma 1 Suppose that a model parameter θ is given. As             qa − |A|   = 0 and
P 1                                                                    a∈A
             y
                                                   qay L(θ, Day ) into
                                                 P
   |A| L(θ, Da ) is a constant, we can decompose
a∈A                                                         a∈A
      X                    X 1                  X           1
          qay L(θ, Day ) =         L(θ, Day ) +     (qay −     )L(θ, Day )
                               |A|                         |A|
      a∈A                  a∈A                  a∈A
                           X 1                  X           1                 X 1
                                          y
                         =         L(θ, Da ) +      (qay −     ) L(θ, Day ) −      L(θ, Day ) .
                               |A|                         |A|                 |A|
                         a∈A                         a∈A                                    a∈A

                 1
Let v y ≜ q y − |A| 1 , where 1 ∈ R|A| . From a∈A qay = 1, we have a∈A vay = 0.
                                                     P                               P
                              P
                         1                1                               1 2
                                            (|A|qay −1)2 = a∈A |A|(qay − |A| ) = |A| a∈A (vay )2 ,
                                                          P                         P
Considering Dϕ q |A|       1 = a∈A |A|


                                                         14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


the following problems are equivalent:
           X                        X 1                    X                    X 1
                 y        y                         y            y        y                    y
     max       qa  L(θ, Da  ) = max         L(θ,  D a )  +     v a L(θ, Da  ) −         L(θ, Da  )
   q y ∈Qρ                       vy     |A|                                         |A|
           a∈A                      a∈A                    a∈A                  a∈A
                                    X                        ρ
                         subject to     vay = 0, ∥v y ∥22 ≤     .
                                                            |A|
                                       a∈A
Also, we have the following inequalities:
                                          sX       s                                 2
 X                    X 1                      y 2
                                                     X               X 1
       y        y
     va L(θ, Da ) −                  y
                              L(θ, Da ) ≤    (va )      L(θ, Day ) −      L(θ, Day )
                          |A|                                         |A|
 a∈A                    a∈A                          a∈A                a∈A                         a∈A
                                                                                                              (A.1)
                                                    r
                                                         ρ
                                                              q
                                                                   |A| × Var {L(θ, Day )}a∈[A] ,

                                                ≤                                                             (A.2)
                                                        |A|
in which (A.1) holds by the Cauchy-Schwartz inequality. The second inequality follows from
                                          1 X                  X 1                2
              Var {L(θ, Day )}a∈A =               L(θ, Day ) −         L(θ, Day ) ,

                                         |A|                       |A|
                                              a∈A              a∈A
                                          ρ
                              ∥v y ∥22 ≤     .
                                         |A|
                                                              y                y
                                           P if the 1vector v ysatisfies: (i) v and the |A|-dimensional
The equality in (A.2) is attained if and only
vector whose a-th element is L(θ, Day ) − a∈A |A|      L(θ, Da ) are in the same direction; (ii) ||v y ||22 =
 ρ                                            y
|A| . This implies that the a-th element of v should be
                                                            P 1
                            r                L(θ, Day ) −                  y
                                                                |A| L(θ, Da )
                                ρ                          a∈A
                     vay =          ×s
                               |A|      P
                                                          y      P 1            y
                                                                                    2
                                           a∈A    L(θ,  D a ) −      |A| L(θ, D a )
                                                                        a∈A
                                                                    1
                                           L(θ, Day ) −                      y
                                                          P
                             r                                     |A| L(θ, Da )
                                  ρ               a∈A
                         =           ×q                                             .
                                 |A|    |A| × Var {L(θ, Dy )}           a    a∈A

Thus, Lemma 1 holds if and only if
                                                                  1
                                                    L(θ, Day ) −            y
                                                                        P
                                       r                         |A| L(θ, Da )
                              1             ρ                a∈A
                       qay =     +            ×                                 ,
                                           |A| ∥L(θ, Day ) −               y
                                                             P 1
                             |A|                                |A| L(θ, Da )∥2
                                                                       a∈A
for all a ∈ A.

Proof of Proposition 2     From the proof of Lemma 1, the equality in (5) holds if and only if
                                                            P 1
                                  r           L(θ, Day ) −                y
                                                               |A| L(θ, Da )
                        y    1        ρ                    a∈A
                       qa =     +        ×                                    ,
                                     |A| ∥L(θ, Day ) −                   y
                                                           P 1
                            |A|                               |A| L(θ, Da )∥2
                                                                       a∈A

for ∀a ∈ A. We now consider each element of q . For given y ∈ Y, we define γ y ∈ R|A| as
                                                              y∗

follows:                                    P 1
                          y
                                L(θ, Day ) − a |A| L(θ, Day )
                         γa ≜                                  ,
                               ∥L(θ, Da ) − a |A| L(θ, Day )∥2
                                      y     P 1

for any a ∈ A. Fix i ∈ A by symmetry. Then, we have:
                          X                              X
                              γay = 0, and thus, γiy = −   γay ,                                              (A.3)
                              a∈A                                     a∈A\i
                           X                                                  X
                                 (γay )2 = 1, and thus, (γiy )2 = 1 −                   (γay )2 .             (A.4)
                          a∈A                                                a∈A\i



                                                        15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


By the Cauchy-Schwarz inequality,
            |γiy | = |(1, ..., 1) · (γ1y , ..., γi−1
                                                 y      y
                                                     , γi+1         y
                                                            , ..., γ|A| )|
                                     q
                   ≤ |A| − 1 · (γ1y )2 + · · · + (γi−1         y           y                  y
                     p
                                                                    )2 + (γi+1 )2 + · · · + (γ|A| )2
                                     q
                   = |A| − 1 · 1 − (γiy )2 ,
                     p

in which the first and last equality follow from (A.3) and (A.4), respectively.
From the above inequality, we have the followings:
                                 (γiy )2 ≤ (|A| − 1) · (1 − (γiy )2 ),
                                    |A|(γiy )2 ≤ |A| − 1,
                                                  s
                                                    |A| − 1
                                       |(γiy )| ≤           .                                          (A.5)
                                                      |A|
Considering (A.3), the equality in (A.5) is attained if and only if
                                        s
                                  y         |A| − 1
                                γi = ±              ,
                                              |A|
                                        s
                                                  1
                                γay = ∓                   , ∀a ∈ A\i.
                                            |A|(|A| − 1)
Thus, we can derive the range described in Proposition 2.

B     A DDITIONAL RELATED WORKS
B.1    FAIRNESS - CONSTRAINED OPTIMIZATION

As mentioned in Sec. 2.1, some works (Agarwal et al., 2018; Cotter et al., 2019) employ a constrained
optimization framework to enforce the group fairness. They formulate a minimax problem of the
Lagrangian function from the given constrained optimization problem and find a saddle point by
alternating the outer minimization step w.r.t. model parameters and the inner maximization step w.r.t.
the Lagrangian variables. When updating the model parameters, they employ a convex upper bounded
surrogate of 0-1 loss such as hinge loss or cross entropy loss in order to address non-differentiability
of the fairness constraints. Further, Cotter et al. (2019) employ a non-zero sum formulation that
uses the surrogates for updating the model parameters and use the original 0-1 loss for updating the
Lagrangian dual variables.
Although both Cotter et al. (2019) and our method similarly solve the minimax problems with 0-1
loss terms by using surrogate losses in the minimization step (w.r.t. model parameters) and the
original 0-1 loss in the maximization step, we emphasize that Fair DRO address a different kind of
minimax problem compared to that of Cotter et al. (2019). Namely, their approach solves a minimax
problem involving both model parameters and Lagrangian variables, while we only focus on the
minimization w.r.t. model parameters, with a fixed ρ (which corresponds to a fixed Lagrangian
variable). Instead, based on our theoretical results that the minimization problem w.r.t. model
parameters can be formulated as another minimax problem based on the DRO framework, FairDRO
solves such minimax problem by the non-zero sum formulation.
Furthermore, we argue that our surrogates would be more advantageous in terms of bounding the
original objective function. When implementing the algorithm of Cotter et al. (2019), they make
surrogates of group fairness constraints by typically using an upper bounded function of 0-1 loss
such as the hinge loss or the cross entropy loss. However, the modified fairness constraint terms with
such surrogates sometimes are not necessarily sharp upper bounds of the original constraints, e.g.,
multi-class classification setting. The reason is because the group fairness constraints, such as EO or
ECA, are typically defined as the gap of averaged 0-1 losses for measuring the parity over groups.
However, if we use the cross entropy loss as a surrogate in equation (6), we can get valid convex
upper bound of (7) whenever q y is a maximizer of the inner maximization problem, and all entries of
q y are positive values. Thus, we expect that our FairDRO can outperform PL by solving the original
objective function better, which is shown in our experimental results.


                                                        16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


B.2   ROBUST OPTIMIZATION IN ALGORITHMIC FAIRNESS

Much more works related to algorithmic fairness have recently utilized the DRO frameworks for their
own goals. A line of works embeds the DRO frameworks into the fairness-constraint optimization
problem to make a model fair, and robust to distribution shifts of a test dataset (Jiang et al., 2020;
Taskesen et al., 2020; Wang et al., 2021; Mandal et al., 2020). For example, Mandal et al. (2020)
aimed to train fair classifiers to be with respect to weighted perturbations in the training distribution
by considering all possible weight set over the training samples. Wang et al. (2021) and Taskesen
et al. (2020) proposed DRO objectives with Wasserstein uncertainty sets which are combined by
group fairness constraints. Although all aforementioned methods showed improvements in group
fairness and robustness, the key differences from FairDRO are that we leverage the DRO framework
for directly promoting group fairness, not robustness, and consider the uncertainty set over groups,
not samples.
Some works proposed DRO formulations for achieving fairness in more challenging settings like
learning with imperfect group labels or sequential learning. Wang et al. (2020) proposed how to
achieve the group fairness successfully given noisy group labels only, by considering the worst-case
distribution of group labels. Hashimoto et al. (2018) devised repeated loss minimization using the
DRO-based training objective with the χ2 -divergence uncertainty set for encouraging long-term
fairness in a sequential setting where the group populations changes over time. However, they do not
also use DRO as a direct tool for achieving group fairness.
There are some recent works perhaps closest to our method in terms of using DRO for achieving
the fairness. Rezaei et al. (2020) incorporated a group fairness constraint into statistic-matching
based robust log-loss minimization problem for training fair logistic regression models. Although
they showed nice theoretical benefits in terms of its convexity and convergence, their method has a
limitation that group information is needed at the test time. Yurochkin et al. (2019) aims to achieve
the fairness of a classifier using DRO frameworks. However, they only focus on a novel individual
fairness notion called as distributionally robust fairness (DRF), not group fairness.

B.3   M INIMAX OPTIMIZATION IN ALGORITHMIC FAIRNESS

Several works adopted min-max optimization techniques for group fairness (although they are not
based on DRO frameworks). Zhang et al. (2018) proposed an adversarial debiasing technique that
eliminates group information of latent features of a neural network (NN) model through the mini-
max game of an adversary and the NN model. Baharlouei et al. (2020) and Jiang et al. (2020)
proposed novel regularization terms for group fairness using Rényi correlation and Wasserstein
distance respectively, which lead to min-max formulations. We emphasize that these methods rely
on additional terms or adversaries for promoting group fairness, while our method directly uses the
DRO-based min-max formulation as a fairness regularization term.


C     M ORE IMPLEMENTATION DETAILS

We used PyTorch (Paszke et al., 2019); Experiments are performed on a server with AMD Ryzen
Threadripper PRO 3975WX CPUs and NVIDIA RTX A5000 GPUs. All models are evaluated on
separate test sets, and all experiments are repeated with 4 different random seeds. All the reported
results are the averaged results.

C.1   O PTIMIZATION

For tabular and vision datasets, we train all models with the AdamW optimizer (Loshchilov & Hutter,
2019) for 70 epochs. We set the mini-batch size and the weight decay as 128 and 0.001, respectively.
The initial learning rate is set as 0.001 and decayed by cosine annealing technique (Loshchilov &
Hutter, 2017).
For the language dataset, we fine-tune pre-trained BERT with the AdamW optimizer for 3 epochs.
We set the mini-batch size and the weight decay as 24 and 0.001, respectively. The initial learning
rate is set as 0.00002 and adjusted with a learning rate schedule using a warm-up phase followed by a
linear decay. All results are reported for the model at the last epoch.


                                                  17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


C.2   I MPLEMENTATION DETAILS OF IN - PROCESSING BASELINES

Here, we describe the implementation details of each in-processing baseline used for the experiments.
The original LBC (Jiang & Nachum, 2020) requires multiple full-training iterations by alternatively
re-weighting each group based on the given fairness metric and re-training the full dataset. Since this
optimization procedure needs a very high computation budget, we modify full-training iterations to 5
epochs and 14 iterations for vision and language datasets.
FairBatch (Roh et al., 2020) and RW (Kamiran & Calders, 2012) are implemented in the way they
were originally proposed.
Cov (Zafar et al., 2017b) utilized a fairness constraint based on Covariance between the group
label and the signed distance of the feature vectors from the decision boundary of a classifier.
Although they used the Disciplined convex-concave program (DCCP) (Shen et al., 2016) solver
for the constrained problem, we apply our optimization procedure (i.e., AdamW) by setting the
covariance-based constraint as a regularization term. We note that extenstion Cov to multi-class
classifcation tasks is non-trivial because the signed distance is not obviously defined for multi-class
decision boundary.
MFD (Jung et al., 2021) and FairHSIC (Quadrianto et al., 2019) use additional fairness-promoting
regularization terms based on MMD and HSIC. For FairHSIC, we only implement the second term
of their decomposition loss (i.e., the HSIC loss between the feature representations and the group
labels). For implementing their regularization terms, we use the Gaussian RBF kernel of which the
variance parameter is set as the mean of squared distance between all data points, following Jung et al.
(2022). Since regularization terms used in both MFD and FairHSIC are applied to feature vectors of
DNN model, they are limited to DNN-based models.
Baharlouei et al. (2020) attempted to remove the non-linear dependency between the model prediction
and the sensitive attribute by using Rényi correlation as a regularization term. The resulting training
objective is a minimax optimization problem where the maximization is for computing the Rényi
correlation, and the minimization is for learning a model. When the group label is binary, we use
modified Algorithm 2 in Baharlouei et al. (2020), where the minimization step (i.e., line 4 in Algorithm
2) is processed in a mini-batch manner. Although Algorithm 1 is designed for the non-binary group
label, applying the algorithm to a task with non-binary group labels is not straightforward because the
second term in the RHS of equation 6 is a biased estimator when using the mini-batch optimization.

C.3   H YPERPARAMETERS FOR MAIN RESULTS

We perform the grid search on the hyperparameter candidates for every method. The full hyperparam-
eter search space is illustrated in Tab. C.1.

C.4   M ODEL SELECTION RULE FOR A SINGLE EVALUATION METRIC

The accuracy-fairness trade-off may exist in many real-world applications (Dutta et al., 2020); better
accuracy leads to worse fairness, and vice versa. For example, Fig. 1 shows the trade-off for the Adult
and COMPAS datasets. Therefore, when using a single evaluation the model should be carefully
selected for fair evaluation. To that end, we explore varying hyperparameters (HPs) of each method
for controlling the strength between accuracy and fairness. We then select the best model showing the
best fairness criterion ∆DCA while achieving at least 95% of the accuracy of the vanilla-trained model.
With this selection rule, we report the best performance of each model throughout Appendix D. The
HPs for each method were extensively searched, but fairly in terms of computation budgets. The
search range of each hyperparameter is listsed in Tab. C.1.


D     A DDITIONAL RESULTS

D.1   R ESULT TABLES

Following our model selection rule, described in Appendix C.4, we report the best performances of
each result in Tab. D.1 and Tab. D.2. The numbers in the parentheses correspond to the standard


                                                  18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Table C.1: Hyperparameter search spaces. We perform the grid search to find the best hyperparameters for
each method.
                       Method                                       Hyperparameter                 Search range
             Cov (Zafar et al., 2017b)                         Covariance strength λ                [10−2 , 102 ]
          Rényi (Baharlouei et al., 2020)               Rényi correlation strength λ              [10−2 , 103 ]
               MFD (Jung et al., 2021)                           MMD strength λ                     [10−2 , 104 ]
        FairHSIC (Quadrianto et al., 2019)                          HSIC strength λ                 [10−2 , 104 ]
          LBC (Jiang & Nachum, 2020)                            LR for re-weights η                 [10−3 , 102 ]
           FairBatch (Roh et al., 2020)            LR for mini-batch size of each group α           [10−3 , 102 ]
                                                        LR for Lagrange multiplier η                [10−2 , 102 ]
           EGR (Agarwal et al., 2018)
                                                             L1 -norm bound B                       [10−2 , 101 ]
                                                        LR for Lagrange multiplier η                [10−2 , 102 ]
               PL (Cotter et al., 2019)
                                                         Violation upper bound κ                    [10−2 , 101 ]
                      FairDRO                          Radius of χ2 -divergence ball ρ              [10−2 , 102 ]



Table D.1: The best performances on Adult and COMPAS datasets. The number in the parentheses with ±
stands for the standard deviation of each metric obtained from several independent runs with 4 different seeds.
The target accuracy (higher is better) and DCA (1) (lower is better) are shown. We follow the proposed model
selection criterion in Appendix C.4.
                                                            Adult                        COMPAS
                                                 Acc. (↑)           ∆DCA (↓)      Acc. (↑)    ∆DCA (↓)
            Scratch                            81.95 (±0.03)     6.83 (±0.06)   63.29 (±0.00)   14.51 (±0.00)
            RW (Kamiran & Calders, 2012)       81.98 (±0.04)     6.84 (±0.09)   63.29 (±0.15)   14.87 (±0.62)
            LBC (Jiang & Nachum, 2020)         81.21 (±0.17)     4.92 (±0.27)   62.04 (±0.24)    6.03 (±1.13)
            FairBatch (Roh et al., 2020)       81.63 (±0.03)     5.75 (±0.09)   62.38 (±0.07)    6.71 (±1.07)
            Cov (Zafar et al., 2017a)          78.68 (±0.12)     5.08 (±0.51)   60.31 (±0.30)   7.58 (±3.71)
            Rényi (Baharlouei et al., 2020)   77.09 (±0.21)     4.86 (±0.78)   61.44 (±0.35)   6.77 (±0.86)
            EGR (Agarwal et al., 2018)         80.59 (±0.04)     6.03 (±0.07)   60.66 (±0.73)   7.47 (±0.94)
            PL (Cotter et al., 2019)           79.49 (±0.14)     2.55 (±0.39)   61.95 (±0.35)   6.73 (±0.95)
            FairDRO                            79.23 (±0.11)     1.99 (±0.38)   61.97 (±0.24)   5.20 (±0.92)


deviation. From Tab. D.1 and Tab. D.2, we observe FairDRO achieves the best ∆DCA with moderate
variances. For example, in Tab. D.1, while the best baselines achieve ∆DCA of 2.55 and 6.03 on Adult
and COMPAS, respectively, our FairDRO achieves 1.99 and 5.20 for the same datasets, respectively.
We also emphasize that although the accuracy of FairDRO is slightly worse than the one of RW and
Scratch on COMPAS, FairDRO shows significantly better DCA (5.20) compared to RW (14.87) and
Scratch (14.51).
In Tab. D.2, we observe consistent results with Tab. D.1. We again note that we marked results of
COV and FairHSIC as N/A because COV is designed only for binary classification and FairHSIC fails
to converge due to the gradient exploding. We again observe that FairDRO achieves the best level of
the fairness metric (DCA) compared to other methods. We also provide difference of Equalized Odds
(DEO) on UTKFace, denoted by ∆DEO , which is defined as follows:

                    1 X
        ∆DEO ≜            max  |P (Yb = y ′ |A = a, Y = y) − P (Yb = y ′ |A = a′ , Y = y)|.
                   |Y|2 ′ a,a′
                          y,y ∈Y


Note that ∆DCA and ∆DEO are the same for binary labels. Although LBC, FairBatch, and FairHSIC
were devised for achieving EO, we again show that FairDRO outperforms baselines on UTKFace
with respect to DEO.


                                                            19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Table D.2: The best performances on UTKFace and CivilComments. The number in the parentheses with ±
stands for the standard deviation of each metric obtained from several independent runs with 4 different seeds.
“N/A” denotes the method is not trainable. All other details are the same as Tab. D.1.
                                                         UTKFace                                         CivilComments
                                         Acc. (↑)        ∆DCA (↓)           ∆DEO (↓)                 Acc. (↑)     ∆DCA (↓)
  Scratch                              78.83 (±0.35)   19.42 (±1.44)   13.78 (±0.95)               78.12 (±1.28)    12.24 (±2.37)
  RW (Kamiran & Calders, 2012)         79.27 (±1.10)   17.92 (±0.60)   11.22 (±0.00)               76.58 (±1.63)    7.78 (±1.19)
  LBC (Jiang & Nachum, 2020)           75.58 (±1.84)   16.92 (±1.83)   12.89 (±1.03)               75.85 (±2.17)     7.04 (±0.97)
  FairBatch (Roh et al., 2020)         78.04 (±0.76)   15.92 (±2.47)   12.39 (±0.96)               77.18 (±1.30)    18.91 (±3.80)
  Cov (Zafar et al., 2017a)                                N/A                                     76.39 (±1.11) 12.18 (±4.07)
  FairHSIC (Quadrianto et al., 2019)   77.35 (±0.91)   17.58 (±1.67)   12.83 (±0.73)                           N/A
  MFD (Jung et al., 2021)              81.83 (±0.95)   16.08 (±0.76)   11.08 (±0.55)               76.70 (±1.09) 11.36 (±2.78)
  EGR (Agarwal et al., 2018)                               N/A                                     76.40 (±3.04)    9.53 (±6.22)
  PL (Cotter et al., 2019)             78.71 (±0.67)   16.42 (±0.83)   11.89 (±0.52)               78.00 (±1.67)    10.38 (±3.37)
  FairDRO                              79.48 (±0.59)   14.25 (±1.26)   11.06 (±1.02)               77.65 (±1.75)    7.07 (±1.44)


                                                                            Scratch LBC       FairHSIC Cov PL
                                                                            RW      FairBatch MFD      Rényi FairDRO (ours)
                                               CelebA                                                     CelebA
                                       Acc. (↑)     ∆DCA (↓)                           90.0
 Scratch                            85.80 (±0.55) 14.24 (±0.84)
                                                                                       87.5



                                                                        Accuracy (%)
 RW (Kamiran & Calders, 2012)       77.60 (±0.68) 15.49 (±1.41)
 LBC (Jiang & Nachum, 2020)         88.96 (±0.97) 6.67 (±2.39)                         85.0
 FairBatch (Roh et al., 2020)       83.85 (±0.70) 10.62 (±0.86)
                                                                                       82.5
 Cov (Zafar et al., 2017a)          90.10 (±0.25) 7.57 (±0.84)
 Rényi (Baharlouei et al., 2020)   86.22 (±0.79) 10.62 (±1.10)                        80.0
 FairHSIC (Quadrianto et al., 2019) 86.63 (±0.64) 9.10 (±3.19)                         77.5
 MFD (Jung et al., 2021)            90.97 (±0.35) 4.44 (±1.13)                                20     15       10     5
 PL (Cotter et al., 2019)           83.23 (±1.06) 1.46 (±0.84)                                            DCA (%)
 FairDRO                            87.95 (±1.61) 2.57 (±0.82)
                                                                       Figure D.1: Trade-offs between accuracy
Table D.3: The best performances on CelebA. Details are                and DCA on CelebA. The “Scratch” perfor-
the same as Tab. D.1.                                                  mances are highlighted by the dotted lines


D.2     C ELEBA RESULTS

To show consistent improvements, we conducted an additional experiment on the CelebA dataset,
which includes about 200K celebrities’ face images with 40 annotated binary attributes. Among the
attributes, we select “blond hair” as the class label and “gender” as the group label, which is the set
of attributes widely used in many previous works (Sagawa et al., 2020; Jung et al., 2022; Chuang &
Mroueh, 2021; Liu et al., 2021).
Tab. D.3 and Fig. D.1 show a similar result trend to one of UTKFace in Sec. 5.2. FairDRO again
outperforms the baselines in terms of DCA and achieves a competitive trade-off with MFD. We also
observe re-weighting based baselines show worse DCA than FairDRO, meaning that FairDRO finds
the better weights over groups for lower DCA.

D.3     R ESULTS WITH THE STANDARD ERM LOSS

For fair comparison with FairDRO, we used the balanced ERM loss for the training of each baseline
as mentioned in Sec. 5. Since all baselines were originally designed for employing the standard
ERM, we further reported the results for all methods solving the standard ERM loss. Fig. D.2 show
the best performances and the accuracy-fairness trade-offs on Adult, COMPAD, UTKFace, and
CivilComments datasets.


                                                          20
 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                         Scratch           RW       LBC                          Cov        Rényi          FairBatch                     FairHSIC          EGR         MFD                       PL       FairDRO (ours)
                               Adult                                                    COMPAS                                                       UTKFace                                             CivilComments
               82                                                      64                                                                                                                   80
                                                                                                                                   82
               80                                                                                                                                                                           78
                                                                                                                                   81
Accuracy (%)


                                                        Accuracy (%)


                                                                                                                    Accuracy (%)


                                                                                                                                                                             Accuracy (%)
                                                                       62
               78
                                                                                                                                   80                                                       76
               76                                                      60
                                                                                                                                   79                                                       74
               74
                                                                       58                                                          78
               72                                                                                                                                                                           72
                    12    10   8       6        4   2                       16    14   12    10       8    6    4                        24     22   20    18     16   14                         16    14   12      10     8     6
                               DCA (%)                                                      DCA (%)                                                   DCA (%)                                                   DCA (%)



 Figure D.2: The trade-offs between accuracy and DCA. Each method is trained with the standard ERM.
 Details are the same as Fig. 1.


 Table D.4: Ablation study of FairDRO. RVP (w/ classwise) and FairDRO (w/o classwise) are for the ablation
 study of our key two components, the DRO formulation and classwise treatment, respectively. We follow the
 same model selection criterion introduced in Appendix C.4.
                                                               Adult                                          COMPAS                                       UTKFace                                       CivilComments
                                                        Acc. (↑) ∆DCA (↓)                                 Acc (↑) ∆DCA (↓)                            Acc. (↑) ∆DCA (↓)                                Acc. (↑) ∆DCA (↓)
          Scratch                                            81.95                     6.83               63.29                         14.51             78.83             19.42                       78.12             12.24
          FairDRO (w/o DRO)                                  80.47                     4.86               62.20                         8.55              79.21             17.58                       78.13             9.79
          RVP (w/ classwise)                                 80.10                     4.62               61.99                         9.74              77.25             12.33                                N/A
          FairDRO (w/o classwise)                            78.45                     1.62               60.72                         6.28              78.25             20.75                       77.42             8.85
          FairDRO                                            79.23                     1.99               61.97                         5.20              79.48             14.25                       77.65             7.07



 D.4                A BLATION STUDY FOR THE CHOICE OF UNCERTAINTY SET

We continue from Sec. 5.4 and provide further study of FairDRO. We analyze the effect of each
constraint employed by FairDRO. Tab. D.5 shows the overall accuracy, ∆DCA and the worst accuracy
over groups for each ablation case. “Classwise”, “χ2 -divergence” and “Quasi-prob” (4) indicate each
component added when defining the uncertainty set of Group DRO (i.e., simplex over groups) as
described in Sec. 4. For a fair comparison, we apply the same optimization scheme (described in
Sec. 4.4) for all DRO variants.
 As the supremum in (3) is attained at the vertex of the simplex ∆|Y|×|A| , Group DRO minimizes
 the worst-case loss over the (y, a) pair, thereby it can prevent the lowest accuracy across the group
 and class from becoming too low. Thus, Group DRO substantially improves and achieves the best
 worst-case accuracy over groups compared to ERM (i.e., 1st →     − 2nd row). However, it shows the
 worst DCA among the DRO variants, confirming the mismatch between the criterion Group DRO
 uses and the group fairness metric. We observe that changing the simplex uncertainty set of Group
 DRO to the proposed χ2 -divergence and quasi-prob uncertainty sets (4) (i.e., 2nd → − 3rd row) has an
 impact on the group fairness mostly. In addition, reducing the size of uncertainty sets via classwise
 treatment (i.e., 3rd →
                      − 6th row) further improves the group fairness. Finally, including negative values
 in the uncertainty set also helps to improve the group fairness (i.e., 5th →
                                                                            − 6th row) on most datasets,
 by more severely penalizing the major groups with high accuracy with negative weights.


                                                                                                                21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Table D.5: Ablation study for uncertainty set of FairDRO. We show the effects of each component of
the proposed FairDRO: GDRO and the constraints on the uncertainty set, including classwise uncertainty set,
χ2 -divergence ball, and quasi-probability. All numbers are average results over Adult, COMPAS, UTKFace, and
CivilComments datasets. GDRO is an abbreviation for Group DRO.
                                                           Adult                              COMPAS                          UTKFace                  CivilComments
    GDRO Classwise χ2 -div. Q-prob.
                                                 Acc. ∆DCA Worst acc. Acc. ∆DCA Worst acc. Acc. ∆DCA Worst acc. Acc. ∆DCA Worst acc.
              ✗            ✗       ✗      ✗      81.95 6.83                   76.86     63.29 14.51    50.78    78.83 19.42                 61.00   78.12 12.24   61.26
             ✓             ✗       ✗      ✗      81.89 6.18                   78.62     62.06 6.68     57.57    79.54 18.17                 61.00   80.32 12.63   69.72
             ✓             ✗       ✓      ✓      78.45 1.62                   77.46     60.72 6.28     55.94    78.25 20.75                 45.75   77.42 8.85    63.70
             ✓             ✓       ✗      ✗      81.68 5.89                   77.67     62.10 6.41     53.59    78.69 14.50                 63.75   79.99 9.16    71.52
             ✓             ✓       ✓      ✗      81.53 5.76                   77.38     62.32 6.42     53.91    78.37 13.75                 66.50   78.56 7.89    67.24
             ✓             ✓       ✓      ✓      79.23 1.99                   75.60     61.97 5.20     53.91    79.48 14.25                 65.75   77.65 7.07    62.85


                                                 Group 0                          Group 1             Scratch                     FairDRO
                  80                                                     80                                                       80
q0 Accuracy (%)


                                                       q0 Accuracy (%)

                  70                                                     70


                                                                                                                   Accuracy (%)
                                                                                                                                  70
                  60                                                     60
                  50                                                     50                                                       60
                   1                                                      1
                   0                                                      0                                                       50
                       0   10 20 30 40 50 60 70                               0    10 20 30 40 50 60 70                                 0   10 20 30 40 50 60 70
                               Training epochs                                           Training epochs                                        Training epochs
                           (a) Scratch (train)                                        (b) FairDRO (train)                              (c) Scratch & FairDRO (test)
Figure D.3: Accuracies and loss weights for each group (q) on COMPAS (y = 0). Details are the same as
Fig. 4.


D.5                    V ISUALIZATION OF q 0

We continue from Sec. 5.4 and provide the visualization results including the weights (q y ), training
accuracy, and test accuracy for y = 0. In Fig. D.3 (a), Scratch shows that the significant accuracy gap
between two groups is kept during all training time. On the other hand, we observe again in Fig. D.3
(b) that q 0 initially fluctuates and eventually converges by our optimization procedure, and as a result,
the large discrepancy of training accuracy is reduced at the end of training. Finally, we show from
Fig. D.3 (c) that the test accuracy gap between the groups of FairDRO is smaller than that of Scratch,
i.e., FairDRO achieves lower DCA.

D.6                    A BLATION STUDY OF SMOOTHED IBR

We observe the effectiveness of smoothed IBR updates introduced in Sec. 4.4. Fig. D.4 and Tab. D.6
compares dynamics of q 1 and performance on COMPAS depending on whether or not our smoothing
technique is used for FairDRO optimization. Jin et al. (2020) showed a theoretical result that the
standard IBR asymptotically converge to an approximate stationary point w.r.t. θ under regularity
assumptions. However, from Fig. D.4 (left), we still observe the instability of standard IBR; i.e.,
q oscillates whenever the group loss fluctuates. On the other hand, Fig. D.4 (right) shows that
our smoothing technique has obvious effect on preventing the oscillation of q when using IBR.
Furthermore, Tab. D.6 demonstrates that stable dynamics of q can significantly improve performance
in terms of DCA.

D.7                    I SSUE OF STANDARD ACCURACY

In the experiments, we reported the balanced accuracy for measuring the performance of the models
instead of the standard accuracy. While the balanced accuracy offers several advantages in measuring
performance on imbalanced datasets, it also has some drawbacks. In general, it may underestimate the
performance of certain groups with relatively large numbers. As in most cases, the groups with large
numbers often become majority groups. The balanced accuracy metric may not capture accuracy


                                                                                            22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                       Group 0                    Group 1

                  1                                        1


              q1


                                                      q1
                  0                                        0

                      0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70                   0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70
                          Training epochs                          Training epochs
Figure D.4: q on COMPAS. The groupwise loss weights during training for label 1 are shown. The reported
weights are for FairDRO (w/o smoothing) (left) and FairDRO (right).


               Table D.6: The best performances on Adult and COMPAS datasets. We
               follow the same model selection criterion described in Appendix C.4.
                                                      Adult               COMPAS
                                             Acc. (↑) ∆DCA (↓) Acc. (↑) ∆DCA (↓)
                 Scratch                        81.95          6.83          63.29      14.51
                 FairDRO (w/o smoothing)        81.55          5.76          61.86       5.50
                 FairDRO                        79.23          1.99          61.97       5.20


                      Table D.7: The number of samples in Adult, COMPAS, and
                      CelebA datasets.
                                    Adult          COMPAS                  CelebA
                               a=0 a=1            a=0 a=1                a=0 a=1
                       y=0     13026     20988        2080     1278      17809       67054
                       y=1     1669      9539         1987        822    23060       1567


            Table D.8: The number of samples in UTKFace and CivilComments datasets.
                              UTKFace                                 CivilComments
                      a=0    a=1 a=2         a=3         a=0        a=1 a=2 a=3                 a=4
            y=0       2049   336      1025      638     11485       17632     8154     4048     9823
            y=1       3735   3116     1856   2221          4564       5892     828      545     1286
            y=2       4294   1074      553   1116                               -



reduction in majority group. In real-world applications, there is also concern about a decrease in
majority-group accuracy.
However, we argue that reporting the vanilla standard accuracy would be problematic when the dataset
is severely class-imbalanced. For example, Tab. D.7 shows the number of samples in each dataset with
respect to the class and group labels. For the case of Adult dataset, 75.2% of the samples are labeled
as y = 0, hence, a naive predictor that always predict Ŷ = 0 will achieve the standard accuracy of
75.2% and DCA= 0, which are clearly overestimating the (accuracy, fairness) performance of the
classifier. Therefore, to avoid such issue, we use the group-class balanced accuracy, rather than the
standard accuracy.


                                                      23
