Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


T OWARDS E FFECTIVE AND I NTERPRETABLE
H UMAN -AGENT C OLLABORATION IN MOBA G AMES :
A C OMMUNICATION P ERSPECTIVE
  Yiming Gao1∗ Feiyu Liu1∗ Liang Wang1 Zhenjie Lian1 Weixuan Wang1
 Siqin Li1 Xianliang Wang1 Xianhan Zeng1 Rundong Wang1 Jiawei Wang1
 Qiang Fu1 Wei Yang1 Lanxiao Huang2 Wei Liu1
 1
   Tencent AI Lab, Shenzhen, China 2 Tencent TiMi L1 Studio, Chengdu, China
 {yatminggao,marsxliu,enginewang,leolian,waihinwang,gracesqli
 lemxlwang,ritzeng,rundongwang,donutwang,leonfu,willyang,
 jackiehuang}@tencent.com;wl2223@columbia.edu


                                                A BSTRACT
          MOBA games, e.g., Dota2 and Honor of Kings, have been actively used as the
          testbed for the recent AI research on games, and various AI systems have been
          developed at the human level so far. However, these AI systems mainly focus on
          how to compete with humans, less on exploring how to collaborate with humans.
          To this end, this paper makes the first attempt to investigate human-agent collabo-
          ration in MOBA games. In this paper, we propose to enable humans and agents
          to collaborate through explicit communication by designing an efficient and inter-
          pretable Meta-Command Communication-based framework, dubbed MCC, for
          accomplishing effective human-agent collaboration in MOBA games. The MCC
          framework consists of two pivotal modules: 1) an interpretable communication pro-
          tocol, i.e., the Meta-Command, to bridge the communication gap between humans
          and agents; 2) a meta-command value estimator, i.e., the Meta-Command Selector,
          to select a valuable meta-command for each agent to achieve effective human-agent
          collaboration. Experimental results in Honor of Kings demonstrate that MCC
          agents can collaborate reasonably well with human teammates and even generalize
          to collaborate with different levels and numbers of human teammates. Videos are
          available at https://sites.google.com/view/mcc-demo.


1    I NTRODUCTION
Games, as the microcosm of real-world problems, have been widely used as testbeds to evaluate
the performance of Artificial Intelligence (AI) techniques for decades. Recently, many researchers
focus on developing various human-level AI systems for complex games, such as board games like
Go (Silver et al., 2016; 2017), Real-Time Strategy (RTS) games like StarCraft 2 (Vinyals et al.,
2019), and Multi-player Online Battle Arena (MOBA) games like Dota 2 (OpenAI et al., 2019).
However, these AI systems mainly focus on how to compete instead of collaborating with humans,
leaving Human-Agent Collaboration (HAC) in complex environments still to be investigated. In this
paper, we study the HAC problem in complex MOBA games (Silva & Chaimowicz, 2017), which is
characterized by multi-agent cooperation and competition mechanisms, long time horizons, enormous
state-action spaces (1020000 ), and imperfect information (OpenAI et al., 2019; Ye et al., 2020a).
HAC requires the agent to collaborate reasonably with various human partners (Dafoe et al., 2020).
One straightforward approach is to improve the generalization of agents, that is, to collaborate with
a sufficiently diverse population of teammates during training. Recently, some population-based
methods proposed to improve the generalization of agents by constructing a diverse population of
partners in different ways, succeeding in video games (Jaderberg et al., 2017; 2019; Carroll et al.,
2019; Strouse et al., 2021) and card games (Hu et al., 2020; Andrei et al., 2021). Furthermore, to
better evaluate HAC agents, several objective as well as subjective metrics have been proposed (Du
et al., 2020; Siu et al., 2021; McKee et al., 2022). However, the policy space in complex MOBA
    * These authors contributed equally to this work.


                                                        1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


   Macro-Strategy                 Game Environment
                                                                             Clean Up Top-Lane Minions   Where: Come To The Top-Lane
                              E                                                                          What: Clean Up Minions
                        D                                                                                How long: Within 20 Seconds
         B                                                                                  E              Where              How long
                                                                             C
                                                               C2                                              < L, E, T mc >
                                                                                    A
                                                A1                                                                  What
    C1
                         A2                                                         D              B     Where: Come To The Dragon
                                                                                                         What: Attack The Dragon
  Signaling System                 Micro-Operation        Signaling System   Come And Kill The Dragon    How long: Until The Dragon Is Killed

                     (a) Key elements in Honor of Kings                                   (b) Example of Meta-Command
Figure 1: Introduction of Honor of Kings. (a) Key elements in Honor of Kings, including the game environment,
micro-operation buttons, examples of macro-strategy, and the signaling system. (b) Example of collaboration
via meta-commands. The Come And Kill The Dragon is more valuable for humans A and B and agent D to
collaborate, while the Clean Up Top-Lane Minions is more valuable for human C and agent E to collaborate.


games is enormous (Gao et al., 2021) and requires massive computing resources to build a sufficiently
diverse population of agents, posing a big obstacle to the scalability of these methods.
The communication ability to explicitly share information with others is important for agents to collab-
orate effectively with humans (Dafoe et al., 2020). In Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning (MARL),
communication is often used to improve inter-agent collaboration. Previous work (Sukhbaatar et al.,
2016; Foerster et al., 2016; Lazaridou et al., 2016; Peng et al., 2017; Mordatch & Abbeel, 2018;
Singh et al., 2018; Das et al., 2019; Wang et al., 2020) mainly focused on exploring communication
protocols between multiple agents. Other work (Ghavamzadeh & Mahadevan, 2004; Jiang & Lu,
2018; Kim et al., 2019) proposed to model the value of multi-agent communication for effective
collaboration. However, these methods all model communication in latent spaces without consider-
ing the human-interpretable common ground (Clark & Brennan, 1991; Stalnaker, 2002) or lingua
franca Kambhampati et al. (2022), making themselves less interpretable to humans. Explicit com-
munication dominated by natural language is often considered in human-robot interaction (Kartoun
et al., 2010; Liu et al., 2019; Shafti et al., 2020; Gupta et al., 2021). However, these studies are mainly
limited to collaboration between a robot and a human through one-way communication, i.e., humans
give robots orders. Therefore, there is still a large room to study RL with the participation of humans.
Success in MOBA games requires subtle individual micro-operations and excellent communication
and collaboration among teammates on macro-strategies, i.e., long-term intentions (Wu, 2019; Gao
et al., 2021). The micro-operation ability of the existing State-Of-The-Art (SOTA) MOBA agents has
exceeded the high-level (top 1%) humans (Ye et al., 2020a). However, these agents’ macro-strategies
are deterministic and quite different from those of humans (Ye et al., 2020a). Moreover, all existing
SOTA MOBA AI systems lack bridges for explicit communication between agents and humans
on macro-strategies. These result in the agent’s behavior not being understood immediately by
humans (Ye et al., 2020a) and not performing well when collaborating with humans (see Section 4.3).
To this end, we propose an efficient and interpretable Meta-Command Communication-based human-
agent collaboration framework, dubbed MCC, to achieve effective HAC in MOBA games through
explicit communication. First, we design an interpretable communication protocol, i.e., the Meta-
Command, as a general representation of macro-strategies to bridge the communication gap between
agents and humans. Both macro-strategies sent by humans and messages outputted by agents can be
converted into unified meta-commands (see Figure 1(b)). Second, following Gao et al. (2021), we
construct a hierarchical model that includes the command encoding network (macro-strategy layer)
and the meta-command conditioned action network (micro-action layer), used for agents to generate
and execute meta-commands, respectively. Third, we propose a meta-command value estimator, i.e.,
the Meta-Command Selector, to select the optimal meta-command for each agent to execute. The
training process of the MCC agent consists of three phases. We first train the command encoding
network to ensure that the agent learns the distribution of meta-commands sent by humans. Afterward,
we train the meta-command conditioned action network to ensure that the agent learns to execute
meta-commands. Finally, we train the meta-command selector to ensure that the agent learns to select
the optimal meta-commands to execute. We train and evaluate the agent in Honor of Kings 5v5 mode
with a full hero pool (over 100 heroes). Experimental results demonstrate the effectiveness of the
MCC framework. In general, our contributions are as follows:


                                                                  2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


• To the best of our knowledge, we are the first to investigate the HAC problem in MOBA games.
  We propose the MCC framework to achieve effective HAC in MOBA games.
• We design the Meta-Command to bridge the communication gap between humans and agents. We
  also propose the Meta-Command Selector to model the agent’s value system for meta-commands.
• We introduce the training process of the MCC agent in a typical MOBA game Honor of Kings and
  evaluate it in practical human-agent collaboration tests. Experimental results show that the MCC
  agent can reasonably collaborate with different levels and numbers of human teammates.

2     BACKGROUND
2.1   MOBA G AMES

MOBA games have recently received much attention from researchers, especially Honor of Kings (Wu,
2019; Ye et al., 2020a;b;c; Gao et al., 2021), one of the most popular MOBA games worldwide. The
gameplay is to divide ten players into two camps to compete on the same map. The game environment
is shown in Figure 1(a). Each camp competes for resources through individual micro-operations
(A1, A2) and team collaboration on macro-strategies (B), and finally wins the game by destroying
the enemy’s crystal. Players can communicate and collaborate with teammates through the in-game
signaling system. Particularly, players can send macro-strategies by dragging signal buttons (C1, C2)
to the corresponding locations in the mini-map (D), and these signals display to teammates in the
mini-map (E). See Appendix A for detailed game introductions.

2.2   H UMAN -AGENT C OLLABORATION

We consider an interpretable communicative human-agent collaboration task, which can be extended
from the Partially Observable Markov Decision Process (POMDP) and formulated as a tuple <
N, H, S, AN , AH , O, M, r, P, γ >, where N and H represent the numbers of agents and humans,
respectively. S is the space of global states. AN = {AN                   H       H
                                                       i }i=1,...,N and A = {Ai }i=1,...,H denote
the spaces of actions of N agents and H humans, respectively. O = {Oi }i=1,...,N +H denotes
the space of observations of N agents and H humans. M represents the space of interpretable
messages. P : S × AN × AH → S and r : S × AN × AH → R denote the shared state
transition probability function and reward function of N agents, respectively. Note that r includes
both individual rewards and team rewards. γ ∈ [0, 1) denotes the discount factor. For each agent i in
state st ∈ S, it receives an observation oit ∈ Oi and a selected message cit ∈ M, and then outputs
an action ait = πθ (oit , cit ) ∈ AN                     i            i
                                   i and a new message mt+1 = πϕ (ot ) ∈ M, where πθ and πϕ are
action network and message encoding network, respectively. A message selector cit = πω (oit , Ct ) is
introduced to select a message cit from a message set Ct = {mit }i=1,...,N +H ⊂ M.
We divide the HAC problem in MOBA games into the Human-to-Agent (H2A) and the Agent-to-
Human (A2H) scenarios. The H2A Scenario: Humans send their macro-strategies as messages to
agents, and agents select the optimal one to collaborate with humans based on their value systems.
The A2H Scenario: Agents send their messages as macro-strategies to humans, and humans select
the optimal one to collaborate with agents based on their value systems. The goal of both scenarios is
that agents and humans communicate macro-strategies with pre-defined communication protocols
and then select valuable macro-strategies for effective collaboration to win the game.

3     M ETA -C OMMAND C OMMUNICATION -BASED F RAMEWORK
In this section, we present the proposed MCC framework in detail. We first briefly describe three
key stages of the MCC framework (Section 3.1). Then we introduce its two pivotal modules: 1)
an interpretable communication protocol, i.e., the Meta-Command, as a general representation of
macro-strategies to bridge the communication gap between agents and humans (Section 3.2); 2) a
meta-command value estimator, i.e., the Meta-Command Selector, to model the agent’s value system
for meta-commands to achieve effective HAC in MOBA games (Section 3.3).

3.1   OVERVIEW
The process of the MCC framework consists of three stages: (I) the Meta-Command Conversion
Stage, (II) the Meta-Command Communication Stage, and (III) the Human-Agent Collaboration


                                                  3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


       (I) Meta-Command Conversion Stage                                            Communication Step: 𝑡                                                𝑡 + 𝑇 %&
                                                            𝐿%$   𝐸$%        𝑇$%
                                   Command
       𝑜!"                                            𝑚!"                    𝑇 &"       Time Step:                               𝑡+𝑖
                                  Converter 𝑓 ""                                                                                                  𝑅!%&
                  text signal
                                                                                                        I                                                  I
                                                            𝐿$    𝐸$         𝑇$
                       Command Encoding
       𝑜𝑡                                             𝑚!          𝐸∗         𝑇 &"
                          Network 𝜋#                                                                          𝐶𝑡 = {𝑚!" , 𝑚𝑡}

       (II) Meta-Command Communication Stage
                                                                        𝑐𝑡                              II                                                 II
       𝑜𝑡
                                                                                         …                                           𝑐𝑡
                                                                                                                                                                    …
                                                                                                              𝑐! ∈ 𝐶𝑡
             ②         ① 𝑚$%
             𝐸∗                        Meta-Command                          ①
       𝐶𝑡         ①                     Selector 𝜋'                                                                𝑟𝑡                        𝑟!#$
                       ② 𝑚𝑡                                                                             III
                                                                                                                        …            III                  III

       (III) Human-Agent Collaboration Stage                                                      𝑠𝑡          𝑎𝑡                           𝑎!#$
                                                                                                                        𝑠!#$
       𝑜𝑡                                                               𝑎𝑡

       𝑐𝑡
                           Meta-Command Conditioned
                               Action Network 𝜋!
                                                                                    Environment                         …                                           …
                                     (a)                                                                                       (b)

Figure 2: The MCC framework. (a) Three key stages of MCC: (I) the meta-command conversion stage, (II) the
meta-command communication stage, and (III) the human-agent collaboration stage. (b) The temporal process
of MCC. Stage I and II are executed at each communication step. Stage III is executed at each time step.

Stage, as shown in Figure 2. Notably, Stage I and II are executed at each communication step, and
Stage III is executed at each time step. At Stage I, the MCC framework converts humans’ explicit
messages and agents’ implicit messages into unified meta-commands mH          t , mt , respectively, and
broadcasts them to all agents and humans. At Stage II, the MCC framework estimates the values
of all received meta-commands Ct and selects the optimal one ct ∈ Ct for each agent to execute.
The selected meta-command will remain unchanged between each two communication steps (e.g.
within [t, t + T mc ) time steps). At stage III, the MCC framework predicts a sequence of actions for
each agent to perform based on its selected meta-command ct . In each game, humans and agents
collaborate multiple times, that is, execute the three stages multiple times, to win the game.

3.2   M ETA -C OMMAND

We divide a macro-strategy into three components: where to go, what to do, and how long. For
example, a macro-strategy can be Come And Kill The Dragon, which consists of Come To The Dragon
Location (where to go), Attack The Dragon (what to do), and Until The Dragon Is Killed (how long).
Thus, a general representation of macro-strategies, i.e., the Meta-Command, can be formulated as a
tuple < L, E, T mc >, as shown in Figure 1(b), where L is the Location to go, E is the Event to do
after reaching L, and T mc is the Time Limit for executing the meta-command.
Meta-Command Conversion. To realize bidirectional interpretable human-agent communication, the
MCC framework converts humans’ explicit messages and agents’ implicit messages into unified meta-
commands. To achieve the former, we use the Command Converter function f cc (Appendix B.6.1)
to extract corresponding location LH and event E H from explicit messages sent by humans in the
in-game signaling system. To achieve the latter, we use a command encoder network (CEN) πϕ (m|o)
to generate L and E based on the agent’s observation o. The CEN is trained via supervised learning
(SL) with the goal of learning the distribution of meta-commands sent by humans (Appendix B.6.2).
In MOBA game settings, we use a common location description, i.e., divide L of meta-commands in
the map into 144 grids. Since the macro-strategy space is enormous (Gao et al., 2021), customizing
corresponding rewards for each specific event to train the agent is not conducive to generalization and
is even impossible. Instead, we train a micro-action network to learn to do optimal event E ∗ at location
L, just as humans do optimal micro-operations at location L based on their own value systems. We
also do not specify a precise T mc for the execution of each specific meta-command. Instead, we set
T mc to how long it takes a human to complete a macro-strategy in MOBA games. Usually, 20 seconds
corresponds to an 80% completion rate, based on our statistics (Appendix B.6.2). Thus, the MCC
framework converts humans’ explicit messages into meta-commands mH =< LH , E H , T mc >,
generates meta-commands m =< L, E ∗ , T mc > for agents based on their observations (Figure 2(I)),
and then broadcasts them to all agents and humans.
Meta-Command Execution. After receiving a meta-command candidate set, agents can select one
meta-command from it to execute. Note that the MCC framework will replace E H with E ∗ when the
agent selects a meta-command from humans. We adopt the MCCAN πθ (a|o, m) for agents to perform
actions based on the selected meta-command, as shown in Figure 3(a)(II). The MCCAN is trained via


                                                                                    4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


      (I) Command Encoding Network             (II) Meta-Command Conditioned Action Network                    Observation                                     Meta-Command Set 𝐶
                 (CEN)                                            (MCCAN)
                                                           softmax                                                              𝑜                         𝑚!                               𝑚
                                              𝑜𝑡         𝜙          𝑚𝑡
        𝑜𝑡         𝜙            𝑚𝑡                                                                                                        CNN Feature
                                                   pre-trained                     𝑉!"#!        𝐺!"#!                                      Extraction
                                                                                           RL                     MLPs                                              Shared CNNs
                       SL                                           𝜃              𝑉!'(!        𝐺!'(!
                                                                                                               State Embed           Map Set Embed             Map Embed      Map Embed
         Expert data < 𝑜𝑡 , 𝑚!   >                                                  𝑎𝑡              𝐺𝑡
                                                                                                                  MLP                    MLP
                                                                                                                                                                     Shared MLPs
                                 (III) Meta-Command Selector (CS)                                               Map Gate               State Gate
                                                                                                                          Gating
                       argmax                                                                                            Mechanism                                                 query
                                                                                                                                                                 query
        𝑜𝑡                        𝑚𝑡                         𝑄𝑡     softmax
                  𝜙                                𝜔                          𝑐𝑡           𝜃             𝑎𝑡                                    Target Attention
        𝑜!$                       𝑚!$                        𝑄!$                                                         Fused Embed                 key
              pre-trained                                                           pre-trained
                                     𝐶𝑡                             RL                                                       Value                               Q or 𝝅         Q or 𝛑
                                                             𝑉!%&             𝐺!%&                                         𝑉(𝑜, 𝐶)                             𝑄(𝑜, 𝐶, 𝑚! )   𝑄(𝑜, 𝐶, 𝑚)

                                                   (a)                                                                                              (b)

Figure 3: The training process and model structure of MCC. (a) The training process is divided into three
phases: we first (I) train the CEN via supervised learning (SL), then (II) train the MCCAN via goal-conditioned
RL, and finally (III) train the CS via RL. Among them, the dashed box represents the frozen model. (b) The
detailed CS model structure, including CNN feature extraction, gating mechanism, target attention module, etc.

self-play RL with the goal of achieving a high completion rate for the meta-commands while ensuring
that the win rate is not reduced. To achieve this, we introduce extrinsic rewards r (including individual
and team rewards) and intrinsic rewards rtint (st , mt , st+1 ) = f ce (st ) − mt − f ce (st+1 ) − mt ,
where f ce extracts the agent’s location from state st , and f ce (st ) − mt is the distance between the
agent’s location and the meta-command’s location at time step t. Intuitively, the intrinsic rewards are
adopted to guide the agent to reach L of the meta-command and stay at L to do some event E. The
extrinsic rewards are adopted to guide the agent to perform optimal actions to reach L and do optimal
event E ∗ at L. Overall, the optimization objective is maximizing            the expectation over extrinsic
                                                             hP
                                                                  ∞      i
                                                                                    PT mc j int i
and intrinsic discounted total rewards Gt = Es∼dπθ ,a∼πθ          i=0  γ   rt+i + α    j=0 γ rt+j , where

dπ (s) = limt→∞ P st = s | s0 , π is the probability when following π for t time steps from s0 . We
use α to weigh the intrinsic and extrinsic rewards.
After training the CEN and the MCCAN, we can achieve HAC by simply setting an agent to randomly
select a meta-command derived from humans to execute. However, such collaboration is non-
intelligent and can even be a disaster for game victory because agents have no mechanism to model
meta-commands’ values and cannot choose the optimal meta-command to execute. While humans
usually choose the optimal one based on their value systems for achieving effective collaboration to
win the game. Thus, we propose a meta-command value estimator to model the agent’s value systems
for meta-commands, as described in the following subsection.

3.3      M ETA -C OMMAND S ELECTOR
In MOBA games, the same macro-strategy often has different values for different humans in different
situations. For example, a macro-strategy can be Come And Kill The Dragon, as shown in Figure 1(b).
It is more valuable for humans A and B and agent D to collaborate. However, another macro-strategy
Clean Up Top-Lane Minions is more valuable for human C and agent E than the others. Therefore,
agents must select the most valuable meta-command from the received meta-command candidate set
C to achieve effective human-agent collaboration. We propose a meta-command value estimator, i.e.,
the Meta-Command Selector (CS) πω (o, C), to estimate the values of all received meta-commands
and select the most valuable one for each agent to execute.
CS Optimization Objective. Typically, executing a meta-command involves reaching location L
and doing event E, of which the latter is more important to the value of the meta-command. For
example, for the meta-command Come And Kill The Dragon, if the event Kill The Dragon cannot
be done within T mc time steps, then it is pointless to Come To The Dragon. Thus, the optimization
objective of CS is to select the optimal meta-command m∗t = πω (ot , Ct ) for each agent to maximize
the expected discounted meta-command execution return Gmc   t ,
                                                                                                                               L                             mc
                                                                                                                           T                             T
                                                                                                                                                           X
                                                                                                                             X
                                           ∞
                                          X                                                                              rt+i β      rt+j
                 Gmc
                  t  = Es∼dπ ,m∼πω ,a∼πθ θ
                                              i
                                             γmc  mc
                                                 Rt+i·T mc  ,                                                Rtmc = i=0     + j=T L      ,
                                                                        i=0                                          | {z } |     {z    }
                                                                                                                       (I)       (II)


                                                                                                5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


where ot ∈ O, Ct is the meta-command candidate set in state st , γmc ∈ [0, 1) is the discount factor,
and Rtmc is a generalized meta-command execution reward function. For Rtmc , (I) and (II) are the
total extrinsic rewards r before reaching location L and doing event E, respectively. T L ≤ T mc is
the time for reaching L, and β > 1 is a trade-off parameter representing the relative importance of E.

CS Training Process. We construct a self-play training environment for CS, where agents can send
messages to each other, as shown in Figure 3(a)(III). Specifically, three tricks are adopted to increase
the sample efficiency while ensuring efficient exploration. First, each meta-command m is sampled
with the argmax rule from the results outputted by the pre-trained CEN. Second, each agent sends
its meta-command with a probability p every T mc time steps. Finally, each agent selects the final
meta-command c sampled with the softmax rule from its CS output results and hands it over to the
pre-trained MCCAN for execution. We use the multi-head value mechanism (Ye et al., 2020a) to
model the value of the meta-command execution,
                                                  which can be formulated
                                                                              as:
                                                           X
                                 LV (ω) = EO,C                  ∥Gmc   k
                                                                   k − Vω (O, C)∥2 ,
                                                                                  
                                                         headk

where Vωk (S, C) is the value of the k-th head. For DQN-based methods (Mnih et al., 2015; Van Hasselt
et al., 2016; Wang et al., 2016), hthe Q loss is:              i                                    X
                     LQ (ω) = EO,C,M ∥Gtotal − Qkω (O, C, M )∥2 ,                        Gtotal =           wk Gmc
                                                                                                                k ,
                                                                                                    headk

where wk is the weight of the k-th head and Gmck is the Temporal Difference (TD) estimated value
error Rkmc + γmc Vωk (O′ , C ′ ) − Vωk (O, C).
CS Model Structure. We design a general network structure for CS, as shown in Figure 3(b). In
MOBA games, the meta-commands in adjacent regions have similar values. Thus, we divide the
meta-commands in the map into grids, a common location description for MOBA games, and use
the shared Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) to extract region-related information to improve
the generalization of CS to adjacent meta-commands. Then, the map embeddings of all received
meta-commands are integrated into a map set embedding by max-pooling. Besides, we use the
gating mechanism (Liu et al., 2021) to fuse the map set embedding and the state embedding of
the observation information. Finally, to directly construct the relationship between the observation
information and each meta-command, we introduce a target attention module, where the query is the
fused embedding and the key is the map embedding of each meta-command. The fused embedding is
fed into the subsequent state-action value network Q(o, C, m) and state value network V (o, C) of
CS. In this way, we can also easily convert the state-action value network Q(o, C, m) to the policy
network π(m|o, C). Thus, the CS model structure can be easily applied to the most popular RL
algorithms, such as PPO (Schulman et al., 2017), DQN (Mnih et al., 2015), etc.

4       E XPERIMENTS
In this section, we evaluate the proposed MCC framework by performing both agent-only and human-
agent experiments in Honor of Kings. All experiments were conducted in the 5v5 mode with a full
hero pool (over 100 heroes, see Appendix A.4).

        Train Environment                     Agent-Only Environment                                 Human-Agent Environment
                                         Test I                            Test II
         Broadcast Channel                                                                                       Broadcast Channel
                                   Broadcast Channel                 Broadcast Channel
    p
                                                                                                            CS

           …          …
                                    …          …                       …             …                      …            +           …
                VS                                                                   Simulated
                                         VS                                 VS        Human                             VS
           …          …
                                                                                                                   …          …
                                                       …         …
         Broadcast Channel                             Opponents                                             Fixed Opponents

               (a)                                         (b)                                                         (c)

Figure 4: Communication environments in the experiment. The orange arrows indicate sending meta-
commands, and the blue arrows indicate receiving meta-commands. The dashed line denotes sending meta-
commands with probability p.


                                                                 6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


4.1   E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP
Due to the complexity of MOBA games and limited resources, we train the CEN, the MCCAN, and
the CS sequentially instead of training the MCC framework jointly. Specifically, we first train the
CEN via SL until it converges for 26 hours using 8 NVIDIA P40 GPUs. The batch size of each
GPU is set to 512. Then, we train the MCCAN by fine-tuning the pre-trained WuKong model (Ye
et al., 2020a) conditioned on the meta-command sampled from the pre-trained CEN. The MCCAN
is trained until it converges for 48 hours using a physical computer cluster with 63,000 CPUs and
560 NVIDIA V100 GPUs. The batch size of each GPU is set to 256. The parameter α is set to 16.
After that, we train the CS via self-play until it converges for 24 hours using a physical computer
cluster with 70,000 CPUs and 680 NVIDIA V100 GPUs. The batch size of each GPU is set to 256.
The parameter β is set to 2. Each agent sends a meta-command with a probability p of 0.8 and an
interval T mc of 20s, as shown in Figure 4(a). For the entire training process of the MCC framework,
the location L of meta-commands in the game map is divided into 144 grids, and the time limit T mc
for the meta-command execution is set to 20s. Finally, we obtain the trained MCC agent that can
receive meta-commands from other agents and humans and select the most valuable one to execute.
To evaluate the performance of the MCC agent, we conduct both agent-only and human-agent
experiments and compare the MCC agent with three different types of agents: the MC-Base agent
(agent only executes its own meta-command without communication), the MC-Rand agent (agent
randomly selects a meta-command to execute), and the MC-Rule agent (agent selects the nearest
meta-command to execute). Note that the MC-Base agent can be considered as a State-Of-The-Art
(SOTA) in Honor of Kings since it maintains the same capabilities as the WuKong agent (Ye et al.,
2020a) (Appendix B.6.3). Results are reported over five random seeds.

4.2   AGENT-O NLY C OLLABORATION
Directly evaluating agents with humans is expensive, which is not conducive to model selection
and iteration. Instead, we built two agent-only testing environments, Test I and Test II, to evaluate
agents, as shown in Figure 4(b). Test I is a complex environment where all agent teammates can
send and receive meta-commands simultaneously with an interval of 20s. Test I evaluates the agents’
performance under complex situations. Test II is a simple environment to simulate most practical
game scenarios, where at most one human can send his/her macro-strategy at a time step. Thus, in
Test II, only one agent is randomly selected to send its meta-command with an interval of 20s, and
the other agents only receive meta-commands. See the detailed experimental results of the CEN and
MCCAN in Appendixes B.6.2 and B.6.3, respectively.
Finding 1: MCC outperforms all baselines.
We first evaluate the capabilities of the MCC agent and baselines to examine the effectiveness of
CS. Figure 5(a) and (b) show the win rates (WRs) of four types of agent teams who play against
each other for 600 matches in Test I and Test II, respectively. Figure 5(c) demonstrates the final Elo
scores (Coulom, 2008) of these agents. We see that the MCC agent team significantly outperforms
the MC-Rand and MC-Rule agent teams. This indicates that compared to selecting meta-commands
randomly or by specified rules, the CS can select valuable meta-commands for agents to execute,
resulting in effective collaboration. Such collaboration manners in the MCC agent team can even be
conducive to winning the game, bringing about 10% WR improvement against the MC-Base agent
team. On the contrary, the unreasonable collaboration manners in the MC-Rand and MC-Rule agent
teams can hurt performance, leading to significant decreases in the WR against the MC-Base agent
team. Note that the MC-Base agent has the same capabilities as the WuKong agent (Ye et al., 2020a),
the SOTA in Honor of Kings. Overall, the MCC agent achieves the highest Elo scores compared to
all baselines in both testing environments, validating the effectiveness of CS. Notably, we also find
that the WRs of the MCC agent in Test I and Test II are close, suggesting that the MCC agent can
generalize to different numbers of meta-commands. We also investigate the influence of different
components, including CNN feature extraction with the gating mechanism (Liu et al., 2021), target
attention module, and optimization algorithms on the performance of CS (Appendix B.6.4).

4.3   H UMAN -AGENT C OLLABORATION
In this section, we conduct an online experiment to evaluate the MCC agent and baselines in
collaborating with humans, as shown in Figure 4(c). We contacted the game provider and got a


                                                  7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                                                Elo Score


  (a) Win rate (row vs. col) in Test I. (b) Win rate (row vs. col) in Test II.   (c) Elo scores of different agents.

Figure 5: AI performance in the testing environments. (a) and (b) show the win rate maps of four types of
agent teams who play against each other. (c) shows the final Elo scores of these agents.

test authorization. The game provider helped us recruit 30 experienced participants with personal
information stripped, including 15 high-level (top1%) and 15 general-level (top30%) participants.
We used a within-participant design: m Human + n Agent (mH + nA) team mode to evaluate the
performance of agents teaming up with different numbers of participants, where m + n = 5. This
design allowed us to evaluate both objective performances as well as subjective preferences.
All participants read detailed guidelines and provided informed consent before the testing. Participants
tested 20 matches for the 1H + 4A team mode. High-level participants tested additional 10 matches
for the 2H + 3A and the 3H + 2A team modes, respectively. After each test, participants reported
their preference over the agent teammates. For fair comparisons, participants were not told the type
of their agent teammates. The MC-Base agent team was adopted as the fixed opponent for all tests.
To eliminate the effects of collaboration between agents, we prohibit communication between agents.
Thus the agents can only communicate with their human teammates. See Appendix C for additional
experimental details, including experimental design, result analysis, and ethical review.
Finding 1: Human-MCC team achieves the highest WR across team modes and human levels.
We first compare the human-agent team objective performance metrics supported by the MCC agent
and baselines, as shown in Table 1. We see that the human-MCC team significantly outperforms
all other human-agent teams across different team modes and human levels. This indicates that the
MCC agent can generalize to different levels and numbers of human teammates. Note that the SOTA
agent can easily beat the high-level human players (Nair, 2019; Chen, 2021). So as the number of
participants increases, the WRs of all human-agent teams decrease. Surprisingly, the WR increased
significantly when the participants teamed up with the MCC agent. We suspect that the human-MCC
team has also achieved effective communication and collaboration on macro-strategies. To verify this,
we count the Response Rates (RRs) of agents and participants to the meta-commands sent from their
teammates, as shown in Table 2. We find that the RRs of the MCC agents to high-level participants
(73.05%) and the high-level participants to the MCC agents (78.5%) are close to the RR of high-level
participants themselves (74.91%). This suggests that the CS is close to the value system of high-level
humans. Besides, the RRs of participants to the MCC agents (73.43% and 78.5%) are higher than
those of the MC-Rand agents (41.07% and 35.69%), indicating that participants collaborated with the
MCC agents more often and more effectively.
Table 1: The win rates (WRs) of different human-                   Table 2: The response rates (RRs) of Receiver to
agent teams against the fixed opponent. Each human-                the meta-commands sent by Sender, including
agent team consists of different types (MC-Base, MC-               the RRs of agents to participants (H2A scenarios),
Rand, and MCC) of agents and different levels (General             the RRs of participants to agents (A2H scenarios),
and High) and numbers (1H, 2H, and 3H) of participants.            and the RRs of participants themselves.

                     1H + 4A         2H + 3A     3H + 2A              Sender\Receiver     General    High       MCC
   Agent\Team
                  General High        High        High                   MC-Rand          41.07%    35.69%     34.03%
    MC-Base        23%     42%        26%          8%                     General         72.34%       -       61.17%
    MC-Rand         5%     28%        18%          3%                      High              -      74.91%     73.05%
     MCC           37%     54%        39%         18%                      MCC            73.43%    78.50%        -

Finding 2: Participants prefer MCC over all baselines.
We then compare the subjective preference metrics, i.e., the Reasonableness of H2A, the Reason-
ableness of A2H, and the Overall Preference, reported by participants over their agent teammates, as


                                                             8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 6: Participants’ preference over their agent teammates. (a) Reasonableness of H2A: how well the
agents respond to your meta-commands. (b) Reasonableness of A2H: how reasonable the meta-commands sent
by agents are. (c) Overall Preference: your overall preference for the agent teammates. Participants scored (1:
Terrible, 2: Poor, 3: Normal, 4: Good, 5: Perfect) in these metrics after each game test. Error bars represent 95%
confidence intervals, calculated over games. See Appendix C.2.3 for detailed wording and scale descriptions.

shown in Figure 6. Participants believed that the MCC agent responded more reasonably and gave
the highest score in the Reasonableness of the H2A metric (Figure 6(a)). Besides, participants also
believed that the meta-commands sent by the MCC agent are more aligned with their own value
system and rated the MCC agent much better than the MC-Rand agent in the Reasonableness of
A2H metric (Figure 6(b)). In general, participants were satisfied with the MCC agent over the other
agents and gave the highest score in the Overall Preference metric (Figure 6(c)). The results of these
subjective preference metrics are also consistent with the results of objective performance metrics.

4.4    C OLLABORATIVE I NTERPRETABILITY A NALYSIS
To better understand how the MCC agents and humans can collaborate effectively and interpretably.
We visualize the comparison of CS and high-level participants’ value systems on a game scene with
three meta-commands existing, as shown in Figure 7. We see that the CS selects the meta-command
B for the two heroes in the red dashed box to collaborate, selects the meta-command C for the two
heroes in the purple dashed box to collaborate, and selects the meta-command A for the remaining
hero to execute alone. The CS selection results are consistent with the ranking results of high-level
participants, confirming the effectiveness of the collaboration behaviors between the MCC agents
and humans. Such collaboration enhances the human interpretability of agent behavior.

                                                        Q-Value of CS                 Average Rank of
                                                                                   High-level Participants
      A
                   B


                       C


      Figure 7: Case study on the value estimation of CS and average rank of high-level participants.


5     C ONCLUSION
In this work, we proposed an efficient and interpretable Meta-Command Communication-based
framework, dubbed MCC, to achieve effective human-agent collaboration in MOBA games. To
bridge the communication gap between humans and agents, we designed the Meta-Command - a
common ground between humans and agents for bidirectional communication. To achieve effective
collaboration, we constructed the Meta-Command Selector - a value estimator for agents to select
valuable meta-commands to collaborate with humans. Experimental results in Honor of Kings
demonstrate that MCC significantly outperforms all baselines in both objective performance and
subjective preferences, and it could even generalize to different levels and numbers of humans.


                                                        9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


R EFERENCES
Lupu Andrei, Cui Brandon, Hu Hengyuan, and Foerster Jakob N. Trajectory diversity for zero-shot
  coordination. 139:7204–7213, 2021.
Micah Carroll, Rohin Shah, Mark K Ho, Tom Griffiths, Sanjit Seshia, Pieter Abbeel, and Anca
 Dragan. On the utility of learning about humans for human-ai coordination. Advances in Neural
 Information Processing Systems, 32, 2019.
Hongyu Chen. Tencent shows off artificial intelligence with honor of kings ai competition,
  2021. URL https://www.sportsbusinessjournal.com/Esports/Sections
 /Technology/2021/07/HoK-AI-Battle.aspx?hl=KPL&sc=0.
Herbert H Clark and Susan E Brennan. Grounding in communication. 1991.
Rémi Coulom. Whole-history rating: A bayesian rating system for players of time-varying strength.
  In Proceedings of the International Conference on Computers and Games, pp. 113–124, 2008.
Allan Dafoe, Edward Hughes, Yoram Bachrach, Tantum Collins, Kevin R McKee, Joel Z Leibo, Kate
  Larson, and Thore Graepel. Open problems in cooperative ai. arXiv preprint arXiv:2012.08630,
  2020.
Abhishek Das, Théophile Gervet, Joshua Romoff, Dhruv Batra, Devi Parikh, Mike Rabbat, and
 Joelle Pineau. Tarmac: Targeted multi-agent communication. In Proceedings of the International
 Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 1538–1546, 2019.
Yuqing Du, Stas Tiomkin, Emre Kiciman, Daniel Polani, Pieter Abbeel, and Anca Dragan. Ave:
  Assistance via empowerment. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:4560–4571,
  2020.
Jakob Foerster, Ioannis Alexandros Assael, Nando De Freitas, and Shimon Whiteson. Learning
  to communicate with deep multi-agent reinforcement learning. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 29, 2016.
Yiming Gao, Bei Shi, Xueying Du, Liang Wang, Guangwei Chen, Zhenjie Lian, Fuhao Qiu, Guoan
  Han, Weixuan Wang, Deheng Ye, et al. Learning diverse policies in moba games via macro-goals.
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34, 2021.
Mohammad Ghavamzadeh and Sridhar Mahadevan. Learning to communicate and act using hierar-
 chical reinforcement learning. Computer Science Department Faculty Publication Series, pp. 172,
 2004.
Abhinav Gupta, Marc Lanctot, and Angeliki Lazaridou. Dynamic population-based meta-learning
  for multi-agent communication with natural language. Advances in Neural Information Processing
 Systems, 34:16899–16912, 2021.
Hengyuan Hu, Adam Lerer, Alex Peysakhovich, and Jakob Foerster. “other-play” for zero-shot
  coordination. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 4399–4410,
  2020.
Max Jaderberg, Valentin Dalibard, Simon Osindero, Wojciech M Czarnecki, Jeff Donahue, Ali
 Razavi, Oriol Vinyals, Tim Green, Iain Dunning, Karen Simonyan, et al. Population based training
 of neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1711.09846, 2017.
Max Jaderberg, Wojciech M Czarnecki, Iain Dunning, Luke Marris, Guy Lever, Antonio Garcia
 Castaneda, Charles Beattie, Neil C Rabinowitz, Ari S Morcos, Avraham Ruderman, et al. Human-
 level performance in 3D multiplayer games with population-based reinforcement learning. Science,
 364(6443):859–865, 2019.
Jiechuan Jiang and Zongqing Lu. Learning attentional communication for multi-agent cooperation.
   Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 31, 2018.
Subbarao Kambhampati, Sarath Sreedharan, Mudit Verma, Yantian Zha, and Lin Guan. Symbols
  as a lingua franca for bridging human-ai chasm for explainable and advisable ai systems. In
  Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 36, pp. 12262–12267, 2022.


                                               10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Uri Kartoun, Helman Stern, and Yael Edan. A human-robot collaborative reinforcement learning
  algorithm. Journal of Intelligent & Robotic Systems, 60(2):217–239, 2010.
Daewoo Kim, Sangwoo Moon, David Hostallero, Wan Ju Kang, Taeyoung Lee, Kyunghwan Son,
  and Yung Yi. Learning to schedule communication in multi-agent reinforcement learning. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1902.01554, 2019.
Diederik P Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1412.6980, 2014.
Angeliki Lazaridou, Alexander Peysakhovich, and Marco Baroni. Multi-agent cooperation and the
  emergence of (natural) language. arXiv preprint arXiv:1612.07182, 2016.
Tsung-Yi Lin, Priya Goyal, Ross Girshick, Kaiming He, and Piotr Dollár. Focal loss for dense
  object detection. In Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision, pp.
  2980–2988, 2017.
Hanxiao Liu, Zihang Dai, David So, and Quoc V Le. Pay attention to mlps. Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 34:9204–9215, 2021.
Quan Liu, Zhihao Liu, Wenjun Xu, Quan Tang, Zude Zhou, and Duc Truong Pham. Human-robot
  collaboration in disassembly for sustainable manufacturing. International Journal of Production
 Research, 57(12):4027–4044, 2019.
Kevin R McKee, Xuechunzi Bai, and Susan T Fiske. Warmth and competence in human-agent
  cooperation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.13448, 2022.
Volodymyr Mnih, Koray Kavukcuoglu, David Silver, Andrei A. Rusu, Joel Veness, Marc G. Belle-
  mare, Alex Graves, Martin A. Riedmiller, Andreas Fidjeland, Georg Ostrovski, Stig Petersen,
  Charles Beattie, Amir Sadik, Ioannis Antonoglou, Helen King, Dharshan Kumaran, Daan Wierstra,
  Shane Legg, and Demis Hassabis. Human-level control through deep reinforcement learning.
  Nature, 518(7540):529–533, 2015.
Igor Mordatch and Pieter Abbeel. Emergence of grounded compositional language in multi-agent
  populations. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 32, 2018.
Sharmila Nair. Tencent’s ai beats human players to win honour of kings mobile game, 2019.
  URL https://www.thestar.com.my/tech/tech-news/2019/08/07/tencen
  t039s-ai-beats-human-players-to-win-honour-of-kings-mobile-game.
OpenAI, Christopher Berner, Greg Brockman, Brooke Chan, Vicki Cheung, Przemysław D˛ebiak,
  Christy Dennison, David Farhi, Quirin Fischer, Shariq Hashme, Chris Hesse, Rafal Józefowicz,
  Scott Gray, Catherine Olsson, Jakub Pachocki, Michael Petrov, Henrique Pondé de Oliveira Pinto,
 Jonathan Raiman, Tim Salimans, Jeremy Schlatter, Jonas Schneider, Szymon Sidor, Ilya Sutskever,
 Jie Tang, Filip Wolski, and Susan Zhang. Dota 2 with large scale deep reinforcement learning.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:1912.06680, 2019.
Peng Peng, Ying Wen, Yaodong Yang, Quan Yuan, Zhenkun Tang, Haitao Long, and Jun Wang.
  Multiagent bidirectionally-coordinated nets: Emergence of human-level coordination in learning
  to play starcraft combat games. arXiv preprint arXiv:1703.10069, 2017.
Tabish Rashid, Mikayel Samvelyan, Christian Schroeder, Gregory Farquhar, Jakob Foerster, and Shi-
  mon Whiteson. Qmix: Monotonic value function factorisation for deep multi-agent reinforcement
  learning. In Proceedings of International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 4295–4304, 2018.
John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy
  optimization algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347, 2017.
Ali Shafti, Jonas Tjomsland, William Dudley, and A Aldo Faisal. Real-world human-robot collabora-
  tive reinforcement learning. In 2020 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and
  Systems, pp. 11161–11166, 2020.
Victor do Nascimento Silva and Luiz Chaimowicz. Moba: A new arena for game ai. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1705.10443, 2017.


                                               11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


David Silver, Aja Huang, Chris J Maddison, Arthur Guez, Laurent Sifre, George Van Den Driessche,
  Julian Schrittwieser, Ioannis Antonoglou, Veda Panneershelvam, Marc Lanctot, et al. Mastering
  the game of Go with deep neural networks and tree search. Nature, 529(7587):484–489, 2016.
David Silver, Julian Schrittwieser, Karen Simonyan, Ioannis Antonoglou, Aja Huang, Arthur Guez,
  Thomas Hubert, Lucas Baker, Matthew Lai, Adrian Bolton, et al. Mastering the game of Go
  without human knowledge. Nature, 550(7676):354–359, 2017.
Amanpreet Singh, Tushar Jain, and Sainbayar Sukhbaatar. Learning when to communicate at scale in
 multi-agent cooperative and competitive tasks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1812.09755, 2018.
Ho Chit Siu, Jaime Peña, Edenna Chen, Yutai Zhou, Victor Lopez, Kyle Palko, Kimberlee Chang, and
  Ross Allen. Evaluation of human-ai teams for learned and rule-based agents in hanabi. Advances
  in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:16183–16195, 2021.
Robert Stalnaker. Common ground. Linguistics and philosophy, 25(5/6):701–721, 2002.
DJ Strouse, Kevin McKee, Matt Botvinick, Edward Hughes, and Richard Everett. Collaborating with
  humans without human data. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34, 2021.
Sainbayar Sukhbaatar, Rob Fergus, et al. Learning multi-agent communication with backpropagation.
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 29, 2016.
Hado Van Hasselt, Arthur Guez, and David Silver. Deep reinforcement learning with double q-
  learning. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 30, 2016.
Oriol Vinyals, Igor Babuschkin, Wojciech M Czarnecki, Michaël Mathieu, Andrew Dudzik, Junyoung
  Chung, David H Choi, Richard Powell, Timo Ewalds, Petko Georgiev, et al. Grandmaster level in
  StarCraft II using multi-agent reinforcement learning. Nature, 575(7782):350–354, 2019.
Rundong Wang, Xu He, Runsheng Yu, Wei Qiu, Bo An, and Zinovi Rabinovich. Learning effi-
  cient multi-agent communication: An information bottleneck approach. In Proceedings of the
  International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 9908–9918, 2020.
Ziyu Wang, Tom Schaul, Matteo Hessel, Hado Hasselt, Marc Lanctot, and Nando Freitas. Dueling
  network architectures for deep reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the International
  Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 1995–2003, 2016.
Bin Wu. Hierarchical macro strategy model for moba game ai. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference
  on Artificial Intelligence, volume 33, pp. 1206–1213, 2019.
Deheng Ye, Guibin Chen, Wen Zhang, Sheng Chen, Bo Yuan, Bo Liu, Jia Chen, Zhao Liu, Fuhao
  Qiu, Hongsheng Yu, et al. Towards playing full moba games with deep reinforcement learning.
 Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:621–632, 2020a.
Deheng Ye, Guibin Chen, Peilin Zhao, Fuhao Qiu, Bo Yuan, Wen Zhang, Sheng Chen, Mingfei
  Sun, Xiaoqian Li, Siqin Li, et al. Supervised learning achieves human-level performance in moba
  games: A case study of honor of kings. IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning
  Systems, 2020b.
Deheng Ye, Zhao Liu, Mingfei Sun, Bei Shi, Peilin Zhao, Hao Wu, Hongsheng Yu, Shaojie Yang,
  Xipeng Wu, Qingwei Guo, et al. Mastering complex control in moba games with deep reinforce-
  ment learning. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 34, pp.
  6672–6679, 2020c.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A     E NVIRONMENT D ETAILS
A.1    G AME I NTRODUCTION

Honor of Kings is one of the most popular MOBA games worldwide. The gameplay is to divide ten
players into two camps to compete on the same symmetrical map. Players of each camp compete
for resources through online confrontation, team collaboration, etc., and finally win the game by
destroying the enemy’s crystal. The behaviors performed by players in the game can be divided into
two categories: macro-strategies and micro-operations. Macro-strategy is long-distance scheduling
or collaborating with teammates for quick resource competition, such as long-distance support for
teammates, collaborating to compete for monster resources, etc. Micro-operation is the real-time
behavior adopted by each player in various scenarios, such as skill combo release, evading enemy
skills, etc. Complicated game maps, diverse hero combinations, diverse equipment combinations,
and diverse player tactics make MOBA games extremely complex and exploratory.

A.2    G AME E NVIRONMENT

Figure 8 shows the UI interface of Honor of Kings. For fair comparisons, all experiments in this paper
were carried out using a fixed released game engine version (Version 3.73 series) of Honor of Kings.


Figure 8: The UI interface of Honor of Kings. The hero controlled by the player is called Main Hero. The
player controls the hero’s movement through the bottom-left wheel (C.1) and releases the hero’s skills through
the bottom-right buttons (C.2, C.3). The player can observe the local view via the screen, observe the global
view via the top-left mini-map (A), and obtain game states via the top-right dashboard (B).


A.3    I N - GAME S IGNALING S YSTEM


                                                                   Player1: Come
                                A.1                                And Kill The
                                                                   Dragon !
                                                                                   C
      A.2                                                             B.1
                                                            Chat


                          A.1
                                              Main
                                              Hero

                                                                   B.2 B.3                               D


Figure 9: The in-game signaling system of Honor of Kings. Players can send their macro-strategies by dragging
signal buttons (A.2) to the corresponding locations (A.1) in the mini-map. The sent result is displayed as a yellow
circle (D). The buttons in C are the convenience signals representing attack, retreat, and assembly, respectively.
Voice (B.2) and text (B.1 and B.3) are two other forms of communication.


                                                       13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 9 demonstrates the in-game signaling system of Honor of Kings. Players can communicate
and collaborate with teammates through the in-game signaling system. In the Human-Agent
Collaboration Test, humans can send macro-strategies to agents through signals like A in Figure 9,
and these signals are displayed to teammates in the form of D. The MCC framework converts these
explicit messages, i.e., signals, into meta-commands by the hand-crafted command converter function
f cc and broadcasts them to all agent teammates. Moreover, the MCC framework can also convert the
meta-commands sent by agents into signals by the inverse of f cc and broadcast them to all human
teammates.
Voice (B.2) and text (B.1 and B.3) are two other forms of communication. In the future, we will
consider introducing a general meta-command encoding model that can handle all forms of explicit
messages (signals, voice, and text).

A.4         H ERO P OOL

Table 3 shows the full hero pool and 20 hero pool used in Experiments. Each match involves two
camps playing against each other, and each camp consists of five randomly picked heroes.
                                           Table 3: Hero pool used in Experiments.

                      Lian Po, Xiao Qiao, Zhao Yun, Mo Zi, Da Ji, Ying Zheng, Sun Shangxiang, Luban Qihao, Zhuang Zhou, Liu Chan
                      Gao Jianli, A Ke, Zhong Wuyan, Sun Bin, Bian Que, Bai Qi, Mi Yue, Lv Bu, Zhou Yu, Yuan Ge
                      Xia Houdun, Zhen Ji, Cao Cao, Dian Wei, Gongben Wucang, Li Bai, Make Boluo, Di Renjie, Da Mo, Xiang Yu
                      Wu Zetian, Si Mayi, Lao Fuzi, Guan Yu, Diao Chan, An Qila, Cheng Yaojin, Lu Na, Jiang Ziya, Liu Bang
                      Han Xin, Wang Zhaojun, Lan Lingwang, Hua Mulan, Ai Lin, Zhang Liang, Buzhi Huowu, Nake Lulu, Ju Youjing, Ya Se
 Full Hero pool       Sun Wukong, Niu Mo, Hou Yi, Liu Bei, Zhang Fei, Li Yuanfang, Yu Ji, Zhong Kui, Yang Yuhuan, Chengji Sihan
                      Yang Jian, Nv Wa, Ne Zha, Ganjiang Moye, Ya Dianna, Cai Wenji, Taiyi Zhenren, Donghuang Taiyi, Gui Guzi, Zhu Geliang
                      Da Qiao, Huang Zhong, Kai, Su Lie, Baili Xuance, Baili Shouyue, Yi Xing, Meng Qi, Gong Sunli, Shen Mengxi
                      Ming Shiyin, Pei Qinhu, Kuang Tie, Mi Laidi, Yao, Yun Zhongjun, Li Xin, Jia Luo, Dun Shan, Sun Ce
                      Zhu Bajie, Shangguan Waner, Ma Chao, Dong Fangyao, Xi Shi, Meng Ya, Luban Dashi, Pan Gu, Chang E, Meng Tian
                      Jing, A Guduo, Xia Luote, Lan, Sikong Zhen, Erin, Yun ying, Jin Chan, Fei, Sang Qi
                      Jing, Pan Gu, Zhao Yun, Ju Youjing, Donghuang Taiyi, Zhang Fei, Gui Guzi, Da Qiao, Sun Shangxiang, Luban Qihao,
 20 Hero Pool
                      Chengji Sihan, Huang Zhong, Zhuang Zhou, Lian Po, Liu Bang, Zhong Wuyan, Yi Xing, Zhou Yu, Xi Shi, Zhang Liang


B     F RAMEWORK D ETAILS
B.1     I NFRASTRUCTURE D ESIGN

                                                        Inference Server
                                                                                              parameter sync
                                                           Network forward prediction

                                                              Sample management
 AI Server with Game Env                                                                                     RL Learner
               self-play                                                                                         Policy network
 5 agents       Env #1      5 agents
                                                                                                                 Value network
                  …


                                                               Memory Pool
 5 agents       Env #n      5 agents                            Memory
                                                                 MemoryPool
                                                                        Pool                                  GPUs with All-Reduce


                                            Figure 10: The designed infrastructure.

Figure 10 shows the infrastructure of the training system (Ye et al., 2020a), which consists of four key
components: AI Server, Inference Server, RL Learner, and Memory Pool. The AI Server (the actor)
covers the interaction logic between the agents and the environment. The Inference Server is used for
the centralized batch inference on the GPU side. The RL Learner (the learner) is a distributed training
environment for RL models. And the Memory Pool is used for storing the experience, implemented
as a memory-efficient circular queue.
Training complex game AI systems often require a large number of computing resources, such as
AlphaGo Lee Sedol (280 GPUs), OpenAI Five Final (1920 GPUs), and AlphaStar Final (3072 TPUv3


                                                                   14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


cores). We also use hundreds of GPUs for training the agents. A worthy research direction is to
improve resource utilization using fewer computing resources.

B.2        R EWARD D ESIGN

Table 4 demonstrates the details of the designed environment reward.

                                        Table 4: The details of the environment reward.

        Head                Reward Item                   Weight        Type       Description
                            Gold                          0.005         Dense      The gold gained.
                            Experience                    0.001         Dense      The experience gained.
        Farming Related     Mana                          0.05          Dense      The rate of mana (to the fourth power).
                            No-op                         -0.00001      Dense      Stop and do nothing.
                            Attack monster                0.1           Sparse     Attack monster.
                            Kill                          1             Sparse     Kill a enemy hero.
                            Death                         -1            Sparse     Being killed.
                            Assist                        1             Sparse     Assists.
        KDA Related         Tyrant buff                   1             Sparse     Get buff of killing tyrant, dark tyrant, storm tyrant.
                            Overlord buff                 1.5           Sparse     Get buff of killing the overlord.
                            Expose invisible enemy        0.3           Sparse     Get visions of enemy heroes.
                            Last hit                      0.2           Sparse     Last hitting an enemy minion.
                            Health point                  3             Dense      The health point of the hero (to the fourth power).
        Damage Related
                            Hurt to hero                  0.3           Sparse     Attack enemy heroes.
                            Attack turrets                1             Sparse     Attack turrets.
        Pushing Related
                            Attack crystal                1             Sparse     Attack enemy home base.
        Win/Lose Related    Destroy home base             2.5           Sparse     Destroy enemy home base.


B.3        F EATURE D ESIGN

B.3.1       CEN
See Table 5.
                                                  Table 5: Feature details of CEN.

 Feature Class               Field                  Description                                                   Dimension       Type
 1. Unit feature             Scalar                 Includes heroes, minions, monsters, and turrets               3946
                                                    Current HP, mana, speed, level, gold, KDA,
                             Status                                                                               1562            (one-hot, normalized float)
 Heroes                                             and magical attack and defense, etc.
                             Position               Current 2D coordinates                                        20              (normalized float)
                             Status                 Current HP, speed, visibility, killing income, etc.           920             (one-hot, normalized float)
 Minions
                             Position               Current 2D coordinates                                        80              (normalized float)
                             Status                 Current HP, speed, visibility, killing income, etc.           728             (one-hot, normalized float)
 Monsters
                             Position               Current 2D coordinates                                        56              (normalized float)
                             Status                 Current HP, locked targets, attack speed, etc.                540             (one-hot, normalized float)
 Turrets
                             Position               Current 2D coordinates                                        40              (normalized float)
 2. In-game stats feature    Scalar                 Real-time statistics of the game                              104
                             Time                   Current game time                                             57              (one-hot)
                             Camp                   Types of two camps                                            1               (one-hot)
 Static statistics           Alive heroes           Number of alive heroes of two camps                           10              (one-hot)
                             Kill                   Number of Kill of each camp (Segment representation)          6               (one-hot)
                             Alive turrets          Number of alive turrets of each camp                          8               (one-hot)
                             Alive heroes diff      Alive heroes difference between two camps                     11              (one-hot)
 Comparative statistics      Kill diff              Kill difference between two camps                             5               (one-hot)
                             Alive turrets diff     Alive turrets difference between two camps                    6               (one-hot)


                                                                     15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


B.3.2        MCCAN
See Table 6.
                                             Table 6: Feature details of MCCAN.

 Feature Class                       Field                Description                                                       Dimension   Type
 1. Unit feature                     Scalar               Includes heroes, minions, monsters, and turrets                   8599
                                                          Current HP, mana, speed, level, gold, KDA, buff,
                                     Status                                                                                 1842        (one-hot, normalized float)
                                                          bad states, orientation, visibility, etc.
                                     Position             Current 2D coordinates                                            20          (normalized float)
                                                          Is main hero or not, hero ID, camp (team), job, physical attack
 Heroes                              Attribute                                                                              1330        (one-hot, normalized float)
                                                          and defense, magical attack and defense, etc.
                                                          Skill 1 to Skill N’s cool down time, usability, level,
                                     Skills                                                                                 2095        (one-hot, normalized float)
                                                          range, buff effects, bad effects, etc.
                                     Item                 Current item lists                                                60          (one-hot)
                                     Status               Current HP, speed, visibility, killing income, etc.               1160        (one-hot, normalized float)
                                     Position             Current 2D coordinates                                            80          (normalized float)
 Minions                             Attribute            Camp (team)                                                       80          (one-hot)
                                                          Type of minions (melee creep, ranged creep,
                                     Type                                                                                   200         (one-hot)
                                                          siege creep, super creep, etc.)
                                     Status               Current HP, speed, visibility, killing income, etc.               868         (one-hot, normalized float)
 Monsters                            Position             Current 2D coordinates                                            56          (normalized float)
                                     Type                 Type of monsters (normal, blue, red, tyrant, overlord, etc.)      168         (one-hot)
                                     Status               Current HP, locked targets, attack speed, etc.                    520         (one-hot, normalized float)
 Turrets                             Position             Current 2D coordinates                                            40          (normalized float)
                                     Type                 Type of turrets (tower, high tower, crystal, etc.)                80          (one-hot)
 2. In-game stats feature            Scalar               Real-time statistics of the game                                  68
                                     Time                 Current game time                                                 5           (one-hot)
                                     Gold                 Golds of two camps                                                12          (normalized float)
 Static statistics                   Alive heroes         Number of alive heroes of two camps                               10          (one-hot)
                                     Kill                 Kill number of each camp (Segment representation)                 6           (one-hot)
                                     Alive turrets        Number of alive turrets of two camps                              8           (one-hot)
                                     Gold diff            Gold difference between two camps (Segment representation)        5           (one-hot)
                                     Alive heroes diff    Alive heroes difference between two camps                         11          (one-hot)
 Comparative statistics
                                     Kill diff            Kill difference between two camps                                 5           (one-hot)
                                     Alive turrets diff   Alive turrets difference between two camps                        6           (one-hot)
 3. Invisible opponent information   Scalar               Invisible information used for the value net                      560
 Opponent heroes                     Position             Current 2D coordinates, distances, etc.                           120         (normalized float)
                                                          Current 2D coordinates of all non-player characters,
 NPC                                 Position                                                                               440         (normalized float)
                                                          including minions, monsters, and turrets
 4. Spatial feature                  Spatial              2D image-like, extracted in channels for convolution              6x17x17
                                     Region               Potential damage regions of ally and enemy skills                 2x17x17
 Skills
                                     Bullet               Bullets of ally and enemy skills                                  2x17x17
 Obstacles                           Region               Forbidden region for heroes to move                               1x17x17
 Bushes                              Region               Bush region for heroes to hide                                    1x17x17
 5. Meta-Command feature             Spatial              Flattened Meta-Command                                            144         (one-hot)


                                                                16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


B.3.3       CS

See Table 7.

                                                       Table 7: Feature details of CS.

 Feature Class                              Field                  Description                                              Dimension   Type
 1. Unit feature                            Scalar                 Includes heroes, minions, monsters, and turrets          3946
                                                                   Current HP, mana, speed, level, gold, KDA,
                                            Status                                                                          1562        (one-hot, normalized float)
 Heroes                                                            and magical attack and defense, etc.
                                            Position               Current 2D coordinates                                   20          (normalized float)
                                            Status                 Current HP, speed, visibility, killing income, etc.      920         (one-hot, normalized float)
 Minions
                                            Position               Current 2D coordinates                                   80          (normalized float)
                                            Status                 Current HP, speed, visibility, killing income, etc.      728         (one-hot, normalized float)
 Monsters
                                            Position               Current 2D coordinates                                   56          (normalized float)
                                            Status                 Current HP, locked targets, attack speed, etc.           540         (one-hot, normalized float)
 Turrets
                                            Position               Current 2D coordinates                                   40          (normalized float)
 2. In-game stats feature                   Scalar                 Real-time statistics of the game                         104
                                            Time                   Current game time                                        57          (one-hot)
                                            Camp                   Types of two camps                                       1           (one-hot)
 Static statistics                          Alive heroes           Number of alive heroes of two camps                      10          (one-hot)
                                            Kill                   Kill number of each camp                                 6           (one-hot)
                                            Alive turrets          Number of alive turrets of two camps                     8           (one-hot)
                                            Alive heroes diff      Alive heroes difference between two camps                11          (one-hot)
 Comparative statistics                     Kill diff              Kill difference between two camps                        5           (one-hot)
                                            Alive turrets diff     Alive turrets difference between two camps               6           (one-hot)
 3. Invisible opponent information          Scalar                 Invisible information used for the value net             560
 Opponent heroes                            Position               Current 2D coordinates, distances, etc.                  120         (normalized float)
                                                                   Current 2D coordinates of all non-player characters,
 NPC                                        Position                                                                        440         (normalized float)
                                                                   including minions, monsters, and turrets
 4. Meta-Command feature                    Spatial                2D image-like, extracted in channels for convolution     5x12x12
 Meta-Commands                              Spatial                All received Meta-Commands in the team                   5x12x12     (one-hot)


B.4        AGENT ACTION

Table 8 shows the action space of agents.

                                                    Table 8: The action space of agents.

                     Action   Detail                        Description
                              Illegal action                Placeholder.
                              None action                   Executing nothing or stopping continuous action.
                              Move                          Moving to a certain direction determined by move x and move y.
                              Normal Attack                 Executing normal attack to an enemy unit.
                              Skill1                        Executing the first skill.
                              Skill2                        Executing the second skill.
                     What     Skill3                        Executing the third skill.
                              Skill4                        Executing the fourth skill (only a few heroes have Skill4).
                              Summoner ability              An additional skill choosing before the game begins (10 to choose).
                              Return home(Recall)           Returning to spring, should be continuously executed.
                              Item skill                    Some items can enable an additional skill to player’s hero.
                              Restore                       Blood recovering continuously in 10s, can be disturbed.
                              Collaborative skill           Skill given by special ally heroes.
                              Move X                        The x-axis offset of moving direction.
                              Move Y                        The y-axis offset of moving direction.
                     How
                              Skill X                       The x-axis offset of a skill.
                              Skill Y                       The y-axis offset of a skill.
                     Who      Target unit                   The game unit(s) chosen to attack.


                                                                          17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


B.5         N ETWORK A RCHITECTURE

B.5.1              CEN
Figure 11 shows the detailed model structure of CEN. The CEN network extracts game stats features
and serval unit features from the observation o. Each unit feature is encoded by shared MLP layers to
obtain serval unit embeddings, and the game stats features are encoded by MLP layers to obtain the
game stats embedding. Finally, we concatenate the unit embeddings and the game stats embedding,
and output the probability distribution of the meta-commands. The outputted meta-command indicates
the macro-strategy for future T mc time steps.

                                          Game Stats Feature                                              MLPs                                                                        Meta Command
            Game Stat Info


 Unit                                            Unit Feature                                                                                                  Sample


                                                                                                 Max Pooling
                                          Monsters            ……                                                                                                Rule
                          Unit
                                             Turrets          ……
            Game Stat Info                  Minions           ……
                                                                      Shared MLPs                              Units Embed
                                                 Heros        ……



                                                                Figure 11: The CEN model structure.


B.5.2              MCCAN
Figure 12 shows the detailed model structure of MCCAN. The MCCAN predicts a sequence of
actions for each agent based on its observation and the meta-command sampled from the Top-k
Softmax distribution of CEN. The observations are processed by a deep LSTM, which maintains
memory among steps. We use the target attention mechanism to improve the model prediction
accuracy, and we design the action mask module to eliminate unnecessary actions for efficient
exploration. To manage the uncertain value of state-action in the game, we introduce the multi-head
value estimation (Ye et al., 2020a) into the MCCAN by grouping the extrinsic rewards in Table 4.
We also treat the intrinsic rewards as a value head and estimate it using a separate value network.
Besides, we introduce a value mixer module (Rashid et al., 2018) to model team value to improve
the accuracy of the value estimation. All value networks consist of an FC layer with LSTM outputs
as input and output a single value, respectively. Finally, following Ye et al. (2020a) and Gao et al.
(2021), we adopt hierarchical heads of actions, including three parts: 1) What action to take; 2) who
to target; 3) how to act.
Network Parameter Details. We develop 6 channels of spatial features read from the game engine
with resolution 6*17*17, and then use 5*5 and 3*3 CNN to sequentially extract features. The LSTM
unit sizes are 1024 and the time steps are 16. The k value in the CEN sampling is set to 20.

                        Hero5                    Game Stats Feature   MLP
                       Hero4                                                                                                        Attention Key
                                                    Unit Feature                                                                                                                       Monster Hero      Turret
                     Hero3                                                                                                                                                                               …
                                                                                                                                                                                 who
                    Hero2                         Monsters     ……
                   Hero1                                                                                                     LSTM
                                                               ……                                                                             Actions                            how Offset_x Offset_y
                                          Unit      Turrets           MLP
           Game Stat Info
                                                               ……
                                                                                                                                                                                           Move Attack       Skill
 Spatial Feature                                   Minions
                                                                               MLP                                                                                               what                    …
 Unit                                                                                          Max Pooling
                                                     Heros     ……                                                            MLP
                         Unit                                                                                                                Action Mask
                                                                                                    Embed5
                                                   Spatial Feature                                 Embed4
                                                                                                  Embed3                                                                Farming Related
           Game Stat Info                                                                        Embed2                                                                 KDA Related
                                                                      CNN                       Embed1                                            Multi-Head
                                                                                                                                                 Multi-Head                                        Team Value
                                                                                                                                                Multi-Head
                                                                                                                                               Multi-Head
                                                                                                                                                     Value1             Damage Related
                                                                                                                                              Multi-Head
                                                                                                                                                    Value1
                                                                                                                                                  Value1
                                                                                                                                                 Value1
                                                                                                                                                 Value
                                                                                                                                                                        Pushing Related
                                 sample                                                                                                                                 Win/Lose Related             Mixer
                   CEN                             Meta-Command       MLP           Invisible Opponent Info
                                                                                                                                                                        Intrinsic Reward


                                                              Figure 12: The MCCAN model structure.


B.5.3              CS
Figure 13 shows the detailed model structure of CS. For each agent, the CS predicts the value
Q(o, C, m) or probability π(m|o, C) of each meta-command m based on its observations o and
all received meta-commands C. First, all received meta-commands (mH from human and m from


                                                                                           18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


the CEN) is reshaped to a 2D image (12*12*1). Then, we use a shared CNN to extract the region-
                                                     H
related information from meta-commands, i.e., zm        =CNN(mH ) and zm =CNN(m). Besides,
the map embeddings of all received meta-commands are integrated into a map set embedding
                                              H
by max-pooling, i.e., zms =Max-pooling(zm       , zm ). After that, we use the Gating Mechanism to
fuse the map set embedding and the state embedding zo =MLP(o) of the observation information
o. For the Gating Mechanism, we use the state embedding zo and map set embedding zms to
calculate the attention to each other, that is, the gating gms =MLP(zo ) for zms and the gating
go =MLP(zms ) for zo . Gating will be used to retain attentional information, as well as fused
them, i.e. zf = concat[zo · go + zo ; zms · gms + zms ]. Finally, the fused embedding zf and map
           H                                            H
embeds {zm   , zm } will be used as key kf and query {qm  , qm }, respectively, and input into the Target
Attention module to predict the state-action value (Q-value) or the probability. We also use the fused
embedding to estimate the state value (V -value) from observations o and all meta-commands C.

                      Observation
                                                                                              Meta-Command Set 𝐶 = {𝑚" , 𝑚}
                                                                    CNN Feature
                                                                     Extraction
                                       𝑜                                                 𝑚!                                     𝑚



                         MLPs                                                                             Shared CNNs

                                                  𝑧#$
                                                                         Max              !
                𝑧"    State Embed            Map Set Embed                               𝑧#    Map Embed           Map Embed    𝑧#
                                                                        Pooling

                         MLP                     MLP
                                                                                                          Shared MLPs

                𝑔#$    Map Gate                State Gate    𝑔"
                                                                                           !
         Gating                                                            Target         𝑞#      query         𝑞#      query
        Mechanism                                                         Attention


                                                                              𝑘%
                         𝑧%     Fused Embed                  MLP                   key


                                     MLP
                                                                                    𝑸 𝒐, 𝑪, 𝒎𝑯 𝒐𝒓 𝝅(𝒎𝑯 |𝒐, 𝑪)

                                    𝑽 𝒐, 𝑪                                                                   𝑸 𝒐, 𝑪, 𝒎 𝒐𝒓 𝝅(𝒎|𝒐, 𝑪)


                                              Figure 13: The CS model structure.


B.6     D ETAILS AND A NALYSIS OF C OMPONENTS

B.6.1    M ETA -C OMMAND
Command Converter Function f cc . The f cc extracts the corresponding location and event informa-
tion from human messages. Specifically, the game engine converts rough messages from the in-game
signaling system into predefined protocol buffers (PB), and then the MCC framework uses the f cc
to extract the location and event information from the received PB to construct the corresponding
meta-command.
Command Extraction Function f ce . The f ce directly extracts the agent’s location from the current
state (the position feature in Table 6), which is used to obtain the intrinsic rewards by calculating the
"distance" from the agent to the currently executed meta-command.

B.6.2    CEN
Training Data. We extract meta-commands from expert game replay authorized by the game provider,
which consist of high-level (top 1% player) license game data without identity information. The
input features of CEN are shown in Table 5. The game replay consists of multiple frames, and the
information of each frame is shown in Figure 8. We divide the location L of meta-commands in the
map into 144 grids. And we set the event E to be all units (103 in total) in the game. For setting
T mc , we counted the player’s completion time for meta-commands from expert game replay, and the


                                                                   19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


results are shown in Figure. 14. We can see that 80% meta-commands can be completed within the
time of 20 seconds in Honor of Kings. Thus, T mc is set to 300 time steps (20 seconds).


               Figure 14: Time statistics of humans completing meta-commands in real games.

Given a state st in the trajectory, we first extract the observation ot for each hero. Then, we use
a hand-crafted command extraction function f ce to extract the meta-command mt = f ce (st+T mc )
corresponding to the future state st+T mc . By setting up labels in this way, we expect the CEN
πϕ (m|o) to learn the mapping from the observation ot to its corresponding meta-command mt .
The detailed training data extraction process is as follows:

• First, extract the trajectory τ = (s0 , . . . , st , . . . , st+T mc , . . . , sN ) from the game replay, where N
  is the total number of frames.
• Second, randomly sample some frames {t|t ∈ {0, 1, . . . , N }} from the trajectory τ .
• Third, extract feature ot from state st for each frame {t|t ∈ {0, 1, . . . , N }}.
• Fourth, extract the location Lt and the event Et from the state st+T mc in frame t + T mc .
• Fifth, use Lt and Et to construct the label mt =< Lt , Et , T mc >.
• Finally, < ot , mt > is formed into a pair as a sample in the training data.

Optimization Objective. After obtaining the dataset {< o, m >}, we train the CEN πϕ (m|o)
via supervised learning (SL). Due to the imbalance of samples at different locations of the meta-
commands, we use the focal loss (Lin et al., 2017) to alleviate this problem. Thus, the optimization
objective is:
   LSL (ϕ) = EO,M −αm(1 − πϕ (o))γ log(πϕ (o)) − (1 − α)(1 − m)πϕ (o)γ log(1 − πϕ (o)) ,


where α = 0.75 is the balanced weighting factor for positive class (m = 1) and γ = 2 is the tunable
focusing parameter. Adam (Kingma & Ba, 2014) is adopted as the optimizer with an initial learning
rate of 0.0001. Especially, We compute the focal loss for L and E, respectively.
Experimental Results. Figure 15 shows the meta-command distributions of the initial CEN, the
converged CEN, and high-level humans. We see that the meta-commands predicted by the CEN
gradually converge from chaos to the meta-commands with important positions. The Kullback-Leibler
(KL) divergence of the meta-command distribution between the CEN and high-level humans decreases
from 4.96 to 0.44 as training converges. The distribution of the converged CEN in Figure 15(b) is
close to the distribution of high-level humans in Figure 15(c), suggesting that the CEN can simulate
the generation of human meta-commands in real games.

B.6.3    MCCAN
Training Environment. We use a similar training environment as the WuKong agent and the OpenAI
Five agent, i.e., the agent interacts with the environment in a self-play manner. Specifically, for


                                                        20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


              (a)                                 (b)                                   (c)


Figure 15: The meta-command distributions of CEN and high-level humans. (a) The meta-command
distribution of the initial CEN. (b) The meta-command distribution of the converged CEN. (c) The meta-
command distribution of high-level humans.


the MCCAN training, each of the 10 agents always executes its own meta-command generated
by the CEN. And for each agent, every T mc time steps, the pre-trained CEN πϕ (m|o) generates a
meta-command mt based on its observation ot . The meta-command mt is then kept for T mc time
steps and sent to the MCCAN continuously. During the interval [t, t + T mc ], the MCCAN predicts a
sequence of actions based on ot and mt for the agent to perform.
Optimization Objective. The MCCAN is trained with the goal of achieving a higher completion
rate for the meta-commands generated by the pre-trained CEN while ensuring that the win rate is not
reduced. To achieve this, we introduce extrinsic rewards (including individual and team rewards) and
intrinsic rewards
                      rtint (st , mt , st+1 ) = f ce (st ) − mt − f ce (st+1 ) − mt ,
where f ce extracts the agent’s location from state st , and f ce (st ) − mt is the distance between the
agent’s location and the meta-command’s location in time step t. Intuitively, the intrinsic rewards are
adopted to guide the agent to the location L of the meta-command and stay at L to do some event E.
The extrinsic rewards are adopted to guide the agent to perform optimal actions to reach L and do the
optimal event at L. Overall, the optimization objective is maximizing        the expectation over extrinsic
                                                             hP
                                                                  ∞      i
                                                                                    PT mc j int i
and intrinsic discounted total rewards Gt = Es∼dπθ ,a∼πθ          i=0  γ   rt+i + α   j=0 γ rt+j , where

dπ (s) = limt→∞ P st = s | s0 , π is the probability when following π for t steps from s0 . We
use α to weigh the intrinsic rewards and the extrinsic rewards. The experimental results about the
influence of α on the performance of the MCCAN are shown in Figure 16.
Training Process. The MCCAN is trained by fine-tuning a pre-trained WuKong model (Ye et al.,
2020a) conditioned on the meta-command sampled from the pre-trained CEN. Note that the WuKong
model is the State-Of-The-Art (SOTA) model in Honor of Kings, which can easily beat the high-level
human players 1 2 .
We also modified the Dual-clip PPO algorithm (Ye et al., 2020a) to introduce the meta-command
m into the policy πθ (at |ot , mt ) and the advantage estimation At = A(at , ot , mt ). The Dual-clip
PPO algorithm introduces another clipping parameter c to construct a lower bound for rt (θ) =
 πθ (at |ot ,mt )
πθold
     (at |ot ,mt ) when At < 0 and rt (θ) ≫ 0. Thus, the policy loss is:

               Lπ (θ) = Es,m,a [max(cAt , min(clip(rt (θ), 1 − τ, 1 + τ )At , rt (θ)At )],
where τ is the original clip parameter in PPO. And the multi-head value loss is:
                               X                                     X
             LV (θ) = Es,m [       (Gkt − Vθk (ot , mt ))], Vtotal =   wk Vθk (ot , mt ),
                               headk                                  headk

where wk is the weight of the k-th head and Vtk (ot , mt ) is the k-th value.
   1
     Wukong AI beats human players to win Honour Of Kings mobile game, https://www.thestar.co
m.my/tech/tech-news/2019/08/07/tencent039s-ai-beats-human-players-to-win
-honour-of-kings-mobile-game
   2
     Honor of Kings Wukong AI 3:1 defeated the human team, https://www.sportsbusinessjourna
l.com/Esports/Sections/Technology/2021/07/HoK-AI-Battle.aspx?hl=KPL&sc=0


                                                    21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                  70.00%
                                  60.00%
                                  50.00%                                               α=0


                       Win Rate
                                  40.00%                                               α=4

                                  30.00%                                               α=8

                                  20.00%                                               α=16
                                                                                       α=32
                                  10.00%
                                                                                       α=64
                                   0.00%
                                       20.00%   40.00%   60.00%   80.00%   100.00%
                                                    Completion Rate

Figure 16: The win rate and completion rate of MCCAN with different α. The opponent is the pre-trained action
network, i.e., MCCAN with α=0.


Experimental Results. We conducted experiments to explore the influence of the extrinsic and
intrinsic reward trade-off parameter α on the performance of MCCAN. The win rate and completion
rate results are shown in Figure 16. As α increases, the completion rate of MCCAN gradually
increases, and the win rate of MCCAN first increases and then decreases rapidly. Notably, we can
train an agent with a completion rate close to 100% by increasing α, but this will significantly reduce
the win rate because the meta-command executed is not necessarily optimal and may result in the
death of agents.
When α = 16, the completion rate of the trained agent for meta-commands is 82%, which is close
to the completion rate of humans (80%). And the win rate of the trained agent against the SOTA
agents (Ye et al., 2020a; Gao et al., 2021) is close to 50%. Thus, we finally set α = 16 .

B.6.4    CS
Additional Results in Agent-Only Collaboration Testing. To eliminate the transitivity of WR, we
added additional experiments to compare the MCC agent and baseline agents to the WuKong (SOTA)
agent for each 600 matches in Test I Environment. The WRs (P1 versus P2) are shown in Table 9.
We see that the effective CS mechanism in the MCC agent enables the agents to communicate and
collaborate effectively, which improves the WR compared to the WuKong agent (SOTA).

     Table 9: The WRs of the MCC agent and baseline agents against the WuKong agent (P1 versus P2).

                            P2\P1           MC-Base      MC-Rand      MC-Rule        MCC
                            WuKong          49.2%        18.5%        39.5%          57.8%

Ablation Studies. We further investigate the influence of different components on the performance
of CS, including CNN feature extraction with the gating mechanism (w/o CNN-GM), target attention
module (w/o TA), and PPO optimization algorithm (MCC-PPO). We conduct ablation studies in
Test I with a 20 hero pool. In practical games, meta-commands with adjacent regions often have
similar intentions and values. Thus the response rate of the agent to adjacent meta-commands should
be as close as possible. Besides, the higher the agent’s response rate to meta-commands, the more
collaborative the agent’s behaviors. Thus we expect the response rate of CS to be as high as possible.
Generally, we expect CS’s Response Rate (RR) to be as high as possible while ensuring that the Win
Rate (WR) maintains.
Figure 17(a) demonstrates the WR of different CS ablation versions during the training process, and
Figure 17(b) shows the converged WR-RR results. We see that after ablating the TA module, the WR
and RR of CS reduce significantly, indicating that the TA module can improve the accuracy of CS
to meta-commands. Besides, after ablating the CNN-GM module, the RR of CS is most affected,
which is reduced by 20%. It indicates that without the CNN-GM module, the value estimation of
CS to adjacent meta-commands is not accurate enough, resulting in missing some highly valuable
meta-commands. We notice that the MCC and MCC-PPO in both metrics are close, confirming the
versatility of the CS model structure.


                                                          22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                          (a)                                                   (b)

Figure 17: Results of ablation studies. (a) The training curves of different CS ablation versions. (b) The
converged WR-RR results of different CS ablation versions. The shadow indicates the standard deviation.


C     D ETAILS OF H UMAN -AGENT C OLLABORATION T EST

C.1     E THICAL R EVIEW

The ethics committee of a third-party organization, Tencent (the parent company of Honor of Kings),
conducted an ethical review of our project. They reviewed our experimental procedures and risk
avoidance methods (see Appendix C.1.2). They believed that our project complies with the "New
Generation of AI Ethics Code" 3 of the country to which the participants belonged (China), so they
approved our study. In addition, all participants consented to the experiment and provided informed
consent (see Appendix C.1.1) for the study.

C.1.1    I NFORMED C ONSENT
All participants were told the following experiment guidelines before testing:

• This experiment is to study human-agent collaboration technology in MOBA games.
• Your identity information will not be disclosed to anyone.
• All game statistics are only used for academic research.
• You will be invited into matches where your opponents and teammates are agents.
• Your goal is to win the game as much as possible by collaborating with agent teammates.
• You can communicate and collaborate with agent teammates through the in-game signaling system.
• Agent teammates will also send you signals representing their macro-strategies, and you can judge
  whether to execute them based on your value system.
• After each test, you can report your preference over the agent teammates.
• Each game lasts 10-20 minutes.
• You may voluntarily choose whether to take the test. You can terminate the test at any time if you
  feel unwell during the test.
• After all tests are complete, you may voluntarily fill out a debrief questionnaire to tell us your
  open-ended feedback on the experiment.
• At any time, if you want to delete your data, you can contact the game provider directly to delete it.

If participants volunteer to take the test, they will first provide written informed consent, then we will
provide them with the equipment and game account, and the test will begin.
  3
    China: MOST issues New Generation of AI Ethics Code, https://www.dataguidance.com/n
ews/china-most-issues-new-generation-ai-ethics-code


                                                   23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


C.1.2    P OTENTIAL PARTICIPANT R ISKS
First, we analyze the risks of this experiment to the participants. The potential participant risks of the
experiment mainly include the leakage of identity information and the time cost. And we have taken
a series of measures to minimize these risks.
Identity Information. A series of measures have been taken to avoid this risk:
• All participants will be recruited with the help of a third party (the game provider of Honor of
  Kings), and we do not have access to participants’ identities.
• We make a risk statement for participants and sign an identity information confidentiality agreement
  under the supervision of a third party.
• We only use unidentifiable game statistics in our research, which are obtained from third parties.
• Special equipment and game accounts are provided to the participants to prevent equipment and
  account information leakage.
• The identity information of all participants is not disclosed to the public.
Time Cost. We will pay participants to compensate for their time costs. Participants receive $5
at the end of each game test, and the winner will receive an additional $2. Each game test takes
approximately 10 to 20 minutes, and participants can get about an average of $20 an hour.

C.2     E XPERIMENTAL D ETAILS

C.2.1    PARTICIPANT D ETAILS
We contacted the game provider and got a test authorization. The game provider helped us recruit 30
experienced participants with personal information stripped, including 15 high-level (top1%) and
15 general-level (top30%) participants. All participants have more than three years of experience in
Honor of Kings and promise to be familiar with all mechanics in the game, including the in-game
signaling system in Figure 9.
And special equipment and game accounts are provided to each participant to prevent equipment and
account information leakage. The game statistics we collect are only for experimental purposes and
are not disclosed to the public.

C.2.2    E XPERIMENTAL D ESIGN
We used a within-participant design: m Human + n Agent (mH + nA) team mode to evaluate the
performance of agents teaming up with different numbers of participants, where m + n = 5. Each
participant is asked to randomly team up with three different types of agents, including the MC-Base
agents, the MC-Rand agents, and the MCC agents. For fair comparisons, participants were not told
the type of their agent teammates. The MC-Base agent team was adopted as the fixed opponent for
all tests. Participants tested 20 matches for the 1H + 4A team mode. High-level participants tested
additional 10 matches for the 2H + 3A and the 3H + 2A team modes, respectively. After each game
test, participants reported their preference over the agent teammates.
We prohibit communication between agents to eliminate the effects of collaboration. Thus the
agents can only communicate with their human teammates. In each game test, humans can send the
converted meta-commands whenever they think their macro-strategies are important. Furthermore,
to make the agent behave like humans (at most one human sends his/her meta-command at a time
step), we restricted agents from sending their meta-commands, i.e., only one agent sends a valuable
meta-command to human teammates from the agents’ current meta-commands. Specifically, this
process consists of several steps: (1) The MCC framework randomly chooses a human teammate (note
that human and agent observations are shared); (2) The MCC framework uses his/her observation
and all agents’ meta-commands as the input of the CS, and obtained the estimated values of these
meta-commands; (3) The MCC framework selects the meta-command with the highest value; (4) The
MCC framework selects the corresponding agent to send the meta-command. The above process is
executed at an interval of 20 seconds.
In addition, as mentioned in Ye et al. (2020a); Gao et al. (2021), the response time of agents is usually
set to 193ms, including observation delay (133ms) and response delay (60ms). The average APM of


                                                   24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


agents and top e-sport players are usually comparable (80.5 and 80.3, respectively). To make our test
results more accurate, we adjusted the agents’ capability to match high-level humans’ performance by
increasing the observation delay (from 133ms to 200ms) and response delay (from 60ms to 120 ms).

C.2.3    P REFERENCE D ESCRIPTION
After each test, participants gave scores on several subjective preference metrics to evaluate their agent
teammates, including the Reasonableness of H2A (how well agents respond to the meta-commands
sent by participants), the Reasonableness of A2H (how reasonable the meta-commands sent by
agents are), and the Overall Preference for agent teammates.
For each metric, we provide a detailed problem description and a description of the reference scale
for the score. Participants rated their agent teammates based on how well their subjective feelings
matched the descriptions in the test. The different metrics are described as follows:

• For the Reasonableness of H2A, "Do you think the agent teammates respond reasonably to your
  commands? Please evaluate the reasonableness according to the following scales."
    1) Terrible: No response, or totally unreasonable.
    2) Poor: Little response, or mostly unreasonable.
    3) Normal: Response, but some unreasonable.
    4) Good: Response, mostly reasonable.
    5) Perfect: Response, and perfect.
• For the Reasonableness of A2H, "Do you think the commands sent by the agent teammates are
  reasonable? Please evaluate the reasonableness according to the following scales. Note that if you
  don’t receive any commands, please ignore this question."
    1) Terrible: Totally unreasonable.
    2) Poor: Low reasonable.
    3) Normal: Some reasonable.
    4) Good: Mostly reasonable.
    5) Perfect: Totally reasonable.
• For the Overall Preference, "What is your overall preference for the agent teammates collaborating
  with you? Please rate the following words according to your subjective feelings: 1) Terrible; 2)
  Poor; 3) Normal; 4) Good; 5) Perfect".

C.2.4    A DDITIONAL S UBJECTIVE P REFERENCE R ESULTS
Detailed subjective preference statistics are presented in Table 10. Compared with no collaboration
(MC-Base) and random collaboration (MC-Rand), the participants preferred reasonable collaboration
(MCC).
Reasonableness of H2A. Participants prefer MC-Rand over MC-Base, suggesting that they expect
the agent to respond more to their commands. Nonetheless, the score of MCC is much higher than
MC-Rand, indicating that participants prefer their commands to get reasonable rather than incorrect
responses.
Reasonableness of A2H. Participants express a significant preference for MCC over MC-Rand,
demonstrating that they agree with MCC’s commands and are more willing to collaborate. The results
are consistent with Figure 7, where participants believe the commands sent from MCC align more
with their own value system. Note that the non-collaborative setting prohibits MC-Base from sending
any commands, so we made no statistics.
Overall Preference. Participants are satisfied with the MCC agent over other agents and give the
highest score. By comparing MC-Base and MCC, we can observe that human-agent collaboration
based on meta-command communication can bring a better impression of the human-agent team
in the MOBA game. However, while MC-Rand is higher than MC-Base in the Reasonableness of
H2A metric, it is lower than MC-Base in the Overall Preference metric. Therefore, collaboration is
important but not as necessary as winning. This metric further confirms the reasonableness of MCC
in human-agent collaboration.


                                                   25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Table 10: The subjective preference results of all participants in the Human-Agent Collaboration Test, including
mean scores and variances (in parentheses).

        Participant Preference Metrics                                         Type of Agent
                                           Human Teammate
        (from terrible to perfect, 1∼5)                           MC-Base        MC-Rand      MCC
                                              General-level       2.3 (0.38)     2.7 (0.24) 4.0 (0.60)
           Reasonableness of H2A
                                               High-level         2.2 (0.21)     2.5 (0.41) 4.1 (0.55)
                                              General-level            -         1.9 (0.35) 4.3 (0.31)
           Reasonableness of A2H
                                               High-level              -         1.7 (0.24) 4.4 (0.35)
                                              General-level       2.7 (0.41)     1.3 (0.27) 4.3 (0.40)
              Overall Preference
                                               High-level         2.5 (0.21)     1.2 (0.17) 4.5 (0.41)


D     D ISCUSSION
Limitations and future work. First, the training process of the MCC agent consumes vast computing
resources like other SOTA MOBA agents. Thus, we will optimize the training process of existing
MOBA agents, aiming to lower the threshold for researchers to study and reproduce work in MOBA
games. Second, the meta-commands we proposed are generic to MOBA games and cannot be directly
extended to other types of games, such as FPS and Massively Multiplayer Online (MMO). We will
design a more general meta-command representation, such as natural language, and extend the MCC
framework to other games. Third, we will apply the MCC agents to the friendly bots in the teaching
mode of Honor of Kings. All in all, we would hope that this work can not only offer new ideas to
researchers but also bring a better human-agent collaboration experience in practical applications.


                                                      26
