Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


D IRECT E MBEDDING OF T EMPORAL N ETWORK E DGES
VIA T IME -D ECAYED L INE G RAPHS

               Sudhanshu Chanpuriya1 , Ryan A. Rossi2 , Sungchul Kim2 , Tong Yu2 ,
               Jane Hoffswell2 , Nedim Lipka2 , Shunan Guo2 , and Cameron Musco1
     1
         University of Massachusetts Amherst, {schanpuriya,cmusco}@cs.umass.edu
     2
         Adobe Research, {ryrossi,sukim,tyu,jhoffs,lipka,sguo}@adobe.com



                                              A BSTRACT
           Temporal networks model a variety of important phenomena involving timed
           interactions between entities. Existing methods for machine learning on temporal
           networks generally exhibit at least one of two limitations. First, many methods
           assume time to be discretized, so if the time data is continuous, the user must
           determine the discretization and discard precise time information. Second, edge
           representations can only be calculated indirectly from the nodes, which may be
           suboptimal for tasks like edge classification. We present a simple method that
           avoids both shortcomings: construct the line graph of the network, which includes a
           node for each interaction, and weigh the edges of this graph based on the difference
           in time between interactions. From this derived graph, edge representations for the
           original network can be computed with efficient classical methods. The simplicity
           of this approach facilitates explicit theoretical analysis: we can constructively show
           the effectiveness of our method’s representations for a natural synthetic model
           of temporal networks. Empirical results on real-world networks demonstrate our
           method’s efficacy and efficiency on both link classification and prediction.


1    I NTRODUCTION
Temporal networks, which are graphs augmented with a time value for each edge, model a variety of
important phenomena involving timed interactions between entities, including financial transactions,
flights, and web browsing. Common tasks for machine learning on temporal networks include classi-
fication of the temporal edges, as well as temporal link prediction, which involves predicting future
links given some links in the past. These tasks yield various applications, such as recommendation
systems (Zhou et al., 2021) and detection of illicit financial transactions (Pareja et al., 2020). As with
most machine learning for graphs, the key to learning for temporal networks is creating effective
vector representations, also called embeddings, for the network’s components, namely the nodes and
edges. These embeddings can either be made as part of an end-to-end framework, or created then
passed to off-the-shelf classifiers for downstream tasks; for example, for the edge classification task,
a logistic regression classifier can be trained using the training edges’ embedding vectors and class
labels, then applied at inference time on the test edges’ vectors.
The node embedding task, in particular, has seen great interest, and many methods for ‘static’
(i.e., non-temporal) networks have been proposed over the years (Belkin & Niyogi, 2001; Perozzi
et al., 2014; Grover & Leskovec, 2016). Edge embedding has seen less interest; there are some
exceptions (Li et al., 2017b; Bandyopadhyay et al., 2019), but generally, edge embeddings are created
by first making node embeddings, then aggregating them, e.g., by taking the entrywise product of
the two endpoint nodes’ embeddings. There are a wide variety of methods for temporal network
embedding, including ones based on matrix/tensor factorization (Dunlavy et al., 2011; Li et al.,
2017a; Zhang et al., 2018), random walks (Yu et al., 2018; Nguyen et al., 2018), graph convolutional
networks (Pareja et al., 2020), and deep autoencoders (Goyal et al., 2018; Rahman et al., 2018; Goyal
et al., 2020), but generally, these methods can be seen as variants of those for static networks.
These prior methods overall present some limitations, which we now summarize. With some
exceptions, especially in more recent work (Nguyen et al., 2018; Trivedi et al., 2019; Rossi et al.,


                                                     1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                     N ODE R EPRESENTATION - BASED     E DGE R EPRESENTATION - BASED

                                      TIMERS (Zhang et al., 2018)
                 D ISCRETE T IME     EvolveGCN (Pareja et al., 2020)   DyLink2Vec (Rahman et al., 2018)
                                                  ···
                                      CTDNE (Nguyen et al., 2018)
               C ONTINUOUS T IME       DyRep (Trivedi et al., 2019)               This work
                                                  ···

                                   Table 1: Problem studied in this work.

2020; Wang et al., 2021), these methods often do not work directly with the continuous-valued
times of temporal edges, but rather assume that the times are discretized, yielding a sequence of
static graphs. Since most datasets have continuous-timed edges, this assumption requires the user to
manually determine the discretization and discard precise time information. Second, prior methods
generally return embeddings of nodes rather than edges, so edge embeddings can only be calculated
indirectly from the nodes, which may be suboptimal for tasks like edge classification. Given that
timestamps are associated with edges rather than nodes, and that there are few public datasets where
the nodes rather than edges are associated with a time-series of attributes or classes, it is intuitively
more natural to derive edge embeddings directly.
We present a simple but novel framework to address these issues: construct the line graph of the
network, which converts each edge (timed interaction) of the network into a node, and connects
interactions that share an endpoint node. Then, set the edge weights in this line graph based on
differences in time between interactions, with interactions that occur closer together in time being
connected with higher weights. From this derived graph, which directly represents topological
proximity (i.e., adjacency of edges) and temporal proximity, temporal edge representations for the
original network can be computed and exploited with efficient classical methods. To our knowledge,
ours is the first method that directly forms embeddings for continuous-time temporal edges without
supervision and without aggregating node embeddings - see Table 1. Our method is significantly
simpler than recent prior work, particularly compared to deep methods, allowing for more direct
theoretical analysis: we propose the union of Gaussian-timed stochastic block models (UGT-SBM),
which naturally extends the well-known stochastic block model (SBM) for static networks to temporal
networks, and we show that our method can exploit time and community information in UGT-SBMs
to form effective representations. Practically, our method’s simplicity makes it easy to implement,
yet it is accurate and efficient: in experiments on five benchmark real-world temporal networks, our
approach achieves superior predictive and runtime performance relative to prior methods.

2   M ETHODOLOGY
Our approach starts with a sequence of timestamped edges:
Definition 1 (Temporal Graph). A temporal graph G = (V, E) is a set of vertices V and a set of
temporal edges E, where E ⊆ V × V × R. t is the time of the temporal edge (u, v, t).

Our approach centers around our proposed notion of ‘time-decayed line graphs’ (TDLGs) which are
derived from temporal graphs. Our notion of TDLGs extends the well-established idea of line graphs,
which are derived from static (i.e., non-temporal), undirected graphs; the line graph of an undirected,
unweighted graph is another undirected, unweighted graph that represents adjacencies between edges
in the original graph. We propose to incorporate time information by using it to set the weights of the
resulting line graph. Specifically, given a temporal graph G, we construct a TDLG, which is a static
weighted line graph LTD (G), as follows in Definition 2.
Definition 2 (Time-Decayed Line Graph). Given a temporal graph G = (V, E), the associated time-
decayed line graph is LTD (G) = (VL , EL , w), where VL = E, EL = {((u, v, t1 ), (v, z, t2 )) :
(u, v, t1 ), (v, z, t2 ) ∈ E}, and the  edge weight function     w : EL → R+ evaluated on edge
                                              1            2
((u, v, t1 ), (v, z, t2 )) is given by exp − 2σ2 (t1 − t2 ) for some fixed σt > 0.
                                                 t


Thus, proximity of two temporal edges in the TDLG incorporates both topological proximity in the
original graph as well as proximity in time. The parameter σt controls how quickly proximity in the
TDLG decays as difference in time grows. For a graph with n nodes and m edges, we can construct
the weighted adjacency matrix A ∈ Rm×m   +    of the TDLG as follows. Given the incidence matrix


                                                          2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


B ∈ {0, 1}n×m , each column vector of which is n-dimensional, corresponds to an edge, and is 1 for
the edge’s two endpoint nodes and 0 elsewhere; and also given the vector of times of the temporal
edges t ∈ Rm :
                                                         (ti − tj )2

                               Aij = b⊤

                                           b
                                         i j    · exp  −               ,                        (1)
                                                             2σt2
where bi and bj denote columns i and j of B. Note that A is symmetric. While self-loops in line
graphs are generally removed, we keep them here for simplicity. The choice of Gaussian weight
decay is somewhat arbitrary, and, in theory, the TDLG concept would also work with, e.g., Laplacian
weight decay. We use Gaussian decay since it is well known and effective in practice.
We now describe our approach for temporal edge embedding, classification, and link prediction.

Temporal edge embedding and classification For downstream tasks, we seek temporal edge
embeddings, that is, an informative real-valued vector for each temporal edge that can be provided
to a classifier. For temporal edge i, we simply return the ith row of the TDLG adjacency matrix A.
This returns an m-dimensional sparse vector as the feature vector. Note that we could reduce the
dimensionality of these vectors, e.g., via eigendecomposition, but we find that this is not necessary. We
use the standard supervised learning pipeline for edge classification. Given training data comprising
a set of temporal edges and the class labels of some fraction of these edges, the TDLG matrix A is
created using all of the edges, then a logistic regression classifier is trained using the edges for which
the classes are known and the corresponding rows of A as feature vectors. After this, the classifier
can be used on the remaining rows to make predictions for the remaining edges.

Temporal link prediction We describe the full experimental setup for temporal link prediction in
Section 6, but essentially, it amounts to binary temporal edge classification where the classes are +1
for true/positive edges (ui , vi , ti ) and −1 for false/negative edges (u′i , vi′ , t′i ). The difference is that
for temporal link prediction, we must additionally be able to form representations for negative edges,
as well as for test edges (which are not given when training the classifier). Let subscripts r and e
denote training and test edges, respectively. We deal with negative edges exactly the same as positive
edges besides the class labels: the positive and negative training edges are concatenated, producing
the training incidence matrix Br ∈ {0, 1}n×mr and times vector tr ∈ Rmr , from which we construct
the training TDLG adjacency matrix Arr ∈ Rmr ×mr according to Equation 1. The classifier can then
be trained using the rows of Arr as feature vectors and the edge labels (i.e., positive/negative edge).
Now feature vectors for the test edges must each be mr -dimensional and consider only proximity
to training edges. Letting the test incidence matrix and test times vector be Be ∈ {0, 1}n×me and
te ∈ Rme , the test edge feature vectors will be the rows of the matrix Aer ∈ Rme ×mr , the (i, j)-th
entry of which is given by
                                                           (te i − tr j )2

                                    (be i · br j ) · exp −                   ,
                                                                 2σt2
which can be passed to the classifier for inference.

3    D EMONSTRATIVE E XAMPLE
To demonstrate the power of our TDLG method at capturing latent structure in temporal graphs,
we introduce a simple, natural model for temporal networks based on the stochastic block model
(SBM) (Holland et al., 1983). Our model is called the union of Gaussian-timed SBMs (UGT-SBM).
As the name suggests, it comprises the union of several SBMs, where a normal distribution is
attached to each SBM, and the edges drawn from an SBM are given a time which is sampled from its
distribution. The formal defintion follows in Definition 3.
Definition 3 (UGT-SBM). Consider a set of n nodes partitioned into two equal-sized communities
{U, V }. For some integer ∆ > 0 and real numbers 0 < α1 , α2 < 1, construct a random temporal
edge set over this graph as follows: Let there be ∆·n
                                                   2 temporal edges in each of two time periods; the
times associated with edges in each time period are drawn from the normal distributions N (µ1 , σ12 )
and N (µ2 , σ22 ), respectively. Of the edges in time period 1, let (1 − α1 ) · ∆·n
                                                                                 2 edges be drawn
uniformly at random from U × V , and let the remaining α1 · ∆·n   2  edges be  drawn half each from
                                                                           ∆·n
U × U and V × V . Similarly, of the edges in time period 2, let (1 − α2 ) · 2 edges be drawn from
U × V , and the remaining α2 · ∆·n 2 edges be drawn half each from U × U and V × V .


                                                        3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Here ∆ is the expected degree of each node in each of the two SBMs (so the total degree of each
node is 2 · ∆), and α1 , α2 represent the fraction of edges in each SBM which are intra-community as
opposed to inter-community. This definition can generalize straightforwardly to a union of an arbitrary
number of SBMs, potentially with unequal community sizes. We note some related prior models with
more sophisticated temporal dependencies based on point processes: the Hawkes IRM (Blundell et al.,
2012), the block point process (BPP) model (Junuthula et al., 2019), and the community Hawkes
independent pairs (CHIP) model (Arastuie et al., 2020); the latter two in particular are also based
on SBMs. Also related is the model from Barbillon et al. (2017), which extends SBMs not to the
temporal setting, but rather to the multiplex setting (i.e., multiple graphs over the same set of nodes).
We first construct a UGT-SBM where it is impossible to distinguish any community structure if one
ignores temporal information. This UGT-SBM is visualized in Figure 1. The graph has n = 100
                                                                                                    2
                       degrees ∆ = 40, and the time distributions of the two SBMs are N −1, ( /2)
nodes, with expected                                                                            1
                   2
and N +1, (1/2) ; the distributions have the same variance, but one occurs earlier on average. We
set α1 = 9/10 and α2 = 1/10, so that the mean fraction of intra-community edges is α1 +α   2
                                                                                              2
                                                                                                = 1/2;
this ensures that it is impossible to retrieve community structure without considering time, as is best
illustrated in Figure 1 in the union of the two SBMs, which is simply an Erdős–Rényi graph.

             Early                    Late                          Union               Time Distribution
         0    50      100         0    50       100             0    50     100
    0                        0                             0
                                                                                  250
                                                                                  200
                                                                                  150
    50                      50                            50
                                                                                  100
                                                                                  50                    Early
                                                                                                        Late
                                                                                   0
 100                        100                           100                           2      0            2

Figure 1: The motivating synthetic temporal network. The adjacency matrix of the early and late
edges, as well as their union, then the distribution of times separated by the early and late edges. Note
that the early edges are mostly in-group, whereas the late edges are mostly out-group.

We will show that our TDLG method can utilize the time information to recover the node communi-
ties. Since our method produces embeddings for temporal edges, to demonstrate recovery of node
communities, we must aggregate the edge embeddings into node embeddings. Node embeddings can
be straightforwardly constructed from edge embeddings as follows: for each node, return the mean of
the embeddings of all edges incident on that node. This is described formally in Definition 4:
Definition 4 (Mean-Edge Node Embeddings). Suppose a network has n nodes and m edges, with
incidence matrix B ∈ Rn×m . Let B̃ be the matrix that results from dividing each row of B by
its sum. Given a matrix of k-dimensional edge embeddings Y ∈ Rm×k , produce a matrix of node
embeddings X ∈ Rn×k via the matrix product X = B̃Y .

In Figure 2, we show the result of applying our method to this UGT-SBM. In particular, we construct
the TDLG with σt = 1/2 and show the TDLG adjacency matrix, temporal edge embeddings generated
from this matrix, and node embeddings generated by Definition 4. Note that while we generally use
the raw rows of the TDLG adjacency matrix as edge embeddings (which produces sparse vectors),
only in this section, for visualization purposes, we instead use dense eigenvector embeddings. The
embedding visualizations show that our method is recovering the community structure: The edge
embeddings roughly separate the 6 kinds of edges (i.e., edges in U × U , V × V , and U × V occurring
in each of the two time periods), and further, the node embeddings linearly separate the two node
communities U and V .

4        T HEORETICAL D ISCUSSION
We now discuss our theoretical results, which concern the action of our TDLG method on the
proposed UGT-SBM family of synthetic graphs. We present these results not only to show the
power of the TDLG approach, but also to contrast with deep methods, the complexity of which often
precludes explicit analysis. In particular, under certain strong assumptions, our approach’s simplicity
allows us to give the exact expectation for the TDLG adjacency matrix A for UGT-SBMs. Further,


                                                      4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


            Raw Line Graph                     Time Decayed                  Edge Embedding            Node Embedding
        0        2000        4000          0       2000       4000   0.6
   0                                  0                                                         0.30

                                                                     0.3                        0.15

 2000                               2000                             0.0                        0.00
                                                                     0.3
                                                                                                0.15
 4000                               4000                                   0.25   0.00   0.25            0.00     0.08

Figure 2: Applying our method to the motivating synthetic network of Figure 1. The line graph is
ordered so that the early edges appear first. The embedding plots show the top second and third
eigenvectors (by eigenvalue magnitude) of the TDLG adjacency. Note that edge types are roughly
separated in the edge embeddings, and node types are linearly separated in the node embeddings.

we can show constructively that the TDLG method is able to preserve and disentangle the node
community structure of the UGT-SBM: specifically, taking the temporal edge embeddings returned
by our method and aggregating them into node embeddings via averaging over a node’s incident
edges (as in Definition 4) yields node embeddings which can distinguish the two node communities.
The assumptions for these two results are as follows: we analyze using the expected TDLG adjacency
matrix and the expected incidence matrix, and we assume zero time variance within time periods of
the UGT-SBM; these assumptions all simplify the analysis by reducing variance, though perhaps via
concentration bounds one could extend such results to the sampled setting (Spielman, 2012). Also,
we will consider UGT-SBMs in the limit as n → ∞ for simplicity of the resulting constant values,
but the following analysis would carry through in general with different values.
Proposition 4.1 (Structure of TDLG Adjacency Matrix for UGT-SBMs). Suppose A ∈ Rm×m is the
expected TDLG adjacency matrix of a UGT-SBM graph with node communities {U, V }, time periods
{1, 2}, and zero time variance (σ12 = σ22 = 0). A has a 6 × 6 block structure where each block is
constant-valued, that is, a multiple of an all-ones matrix J of some dimensionality. Letting subscripts
denote time period, the block matrix is indexed by 6 edge sets: (U × U )1 , (V × V )1 , (U × V )1 ,
(U × U )2 , (V × V )2 , and (U × V )2 . In the limit as n → ∞, the constant values of each block are
given by the Kronecker product
                                                    
                    U ×U      8/n       0       4/n
                                       8        4             1     1       γ
                    V ×V      0        /n       /n      ⊗ 2                     ,
                              4/n      4/n      4/n                 γ       1
                    U ×V

                        −µ2 )2
where γ = exp − (µ12σ     2     .
                                t


Note that writing A as a Kronecker product involves some abuse of notation, and the actual sizes
of the edge sets (and hence the sizes of the blocks) are as given in Definition 3. In the order of
Proposition 4.1, these sizes are α1 · ∆·n      ∆·n          ∆·n      ∆·n      ∆·n              ∆·n
                                       4 , α1 · 4 , (1−α1 )· 2 , α2 · 4 , α2 · 4 , and (1−α2 )· 2 .

Proof. We calculate an entry Aij of this matrix. We first consider the effect of the time decay, then
the effect of edge adjacency (i.e., b⊤
                                     i bj ). Given the assumption of zero time variance, there are only
two possible values for each temporal edge’s time, µ1 and µ2 . This means effect of time decay on
each entry of A is multiplication by either 1, if i and j occur at the same time, or otherwise γ.
Second, we calculate the expected value of b⊤      i bj , that is, the expected number of endpoint nodes
shared between edges i and j. Suppose both i and j are in U × U . Since there are n/2 nodes in U , the
probability of any two random nodes in U being the same is 2/n. There are 4 pairs of endpoints in U
between i and j; in the assumed n → ∞ limit, the 4 events of these pairs each having the same two
nodes tend toward independence, so bi · bj = 4 · 2/n = 8⁄n. By similar logic, if i is in U × U and j is
in U × V , there are 2 pairs of endpoints that could be identical (each of i’s nodes in U with the single
node of j in U ), so bi · bj = 2 · 2/n = 4⁄n. The same holds if both i and j are in U × V . Finally, if i is
in U × U and j is in V × V , there is zero chance of a shared endpoint. Remaining combinations
follow by symmetry. Combining the terms for time decay and edge adjacency, the expected TDLG
adjacency matrix has the specified 6 × 6 block structure.                                                 ■

We now state the second result, about the ability to distinguish UGT-SBM node communities using
the TDLG method. This result requires that it is not the case that α1 = α2 = 1/2; in this case of


                                                                 5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


UGT-SBM, the SBMs at both time periods are Erdős–Rényi, so there is no community structure to
recover.
Proposition 4.2 (TDLG Embedding Recovers Communities from UGT-SBMs). Suppose A ∈ Rm×m
is the expected TDLG adjacency matrix of a UGT-SBM graph with node communities {U, V }, time
periods {1, 2}, and zero time variance (σ12 = σ22 = 0). Let X ∈ Rn×m be the mean-edge node
embeddings resulting from treating the rows of A as edge embeddings. Assuming that γ ̸= 1 and it is
not the case that α1 = α2 = 1/2, the node communities are distinguishable in X.

For brevity, the proof is deferred to Appendix A.1. It essentially involves the same flavor of counting-
based arguments as Proposition 4.1, though it is much more involved. As part of this proof, we
provide a description of part of the expected block structure of the resulting node embeddings X,
similar to the preceding description of the TDLG adjacency matrix A. When time decay is not
applied (i.e., by setting γ = 1), we find that nodes in U and V become indistinguishable in the derived
embeddings for UGT-SBMs with α1 + α2 = 1, as opposed to just when α1 = α2 = 1/2. These are
UGT-SBMs like the one from Figure 1, which do have community structure when considering time,
but become Erdős–Rényi graphs when ignoring time.

5   R ELATED W ORK
Node embeddings Many methods have been proposed over the years for the node embedding task.
The best understood are the classical ‘spectral’ methods based on eigendecomposition of the graph’s
adjacency matrix or Laplacian (Roweis & Saul, 2000; Belkin & Niyogi, 2001). Perhaps the most
famous non-spectral method is DeepWalk (Perozzi et al., 2014), which takes random walks on the
graph, then, using a nonlinear, probabilistic objective, increases the similarity of the embeddings of
nodes which frequently co-occur in the walks. Similar methods include node2vec (Grover & Leskovec,
2016), which adds bias to the random walks, and LINE (Tang et al., 2015), which increases scalability.
GraRep (Cao et al., 2015) and NetMF (Qiu et al., 2018) incorporate both matrix factorization like the
classical methods and nonlinear objectives like the recent ones, yielding good speed and performance.
Unsupervised deep learning approaches, like VGAE (Kipf & Welling, 2016) and SDNE (Wang et al.,
2016), involve deep autoencoders; besides this, there is a wide array of supervised deep models
which implicitly form node representations, including graph convolutional networks (GCNs) (Kipf &
Welling, 2017) and graph attention networks (GATs) (Veličković et al., 2018).

Edge embeddings The task of creating vector representations for each edge, rather than each node,
has seen less exploration. A common strategy is to simply create node embeddings, then process
them into edge embeddings by aggregating the embeddings of the two endpoints of an edge. In
particular, this is done by taking the mean, entrywise product, cross product, or concatenation of
the two node embedding vectors. Notably, node2vec uses this strategy for link prediction; Shi et al.
(2018) and Verma et al. (2019) are more examples where this is part of a larger framework. More
along the lines of our method, though still not involving temporal networks, Bandyopadhyay et al.
(2019) produce edge representations in an unsupervised manner by embedding the nodes of the line
graph of the original network. The method of Li et al. (2017b) implicitly takes a similar approach by
taking a random walk on the edges and iteratively updating edge embeddings, as DeepWalk does for
node embeddings. Some graph deep learning approaches (Monti et al., 2018; Gong & Cheng, 2019)
include layers which form edge embeddings, but do so as part of a supervised framework; by contrast,
Zhou et al. (2018b) propose an unsupervised deep method based on generative adversarial networks,
though their approach is fairly complicated. Also of note, though not directly applicable to the
standard or temporal edge setting, several works in the area of knowledge graphs form embeddings
of relations between entities (Bordes et al., 2013; Yang et al., 2014; Chen & Quirk, 2019).

Embeddings for temporal networks Many methods for temporal network embedding can be seen
as variants of those for static graphs. Dunlavy et al. (2011) propose a variant of factorization-based
approaches, intended for a dynamic network comprising snapshots of static graphs at consecutive
intervals of time. It directly incorporates time information by stacking adjacency matrices of different
time steps and employing tensor factorization. DANE (Li et al., 2017a) is another factorization
approach, though it only factorizes matrices. To boost efficiency, rather than computing node
embeddings from scratch for each snapshot, DANE iteratively updates the embeddings from the
previous time step according to the change in the network; TIMERS (Zhang et al., 2018) is a similar
approach which analyzes the growth of the error over iterative updates to determine when it is


                                                   6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                       Table 2: Statistics of datasets used in our experiments.
                      Dataset            # Nodes       # Edges   Time Span (days)
                      BITCOINALPHA          3783        24186               1901
                      BITCOINOTC            5881        35592               1903
                      ESCORTS              10106        50632               2232
                      WIKIELECT             7118       107071               1378
                      EPINIONS            131828       841372                943


necessary to re-embed from scratch. NetWalk (Yu et al., 2018) is a variant of random walk-based
methods like DeepWalk; along the same lines, it saves time by efficiently updating embeddings at
each snapshot using warm starts and reservoir sampling. CTDNE (Nguyen et al., 2018) is another
random walk method which incorporates time information using the constraint that the walks must
obey time. Notably, like our method, CTDNE is designed for networks with continuous time rather
than just snapshots of different time intervals.
Among unsupervised deep approaches, DynGEM (Goyal et al., 2018) is an autoencoder method
which again uses warm starts for each snapshot, both for speed and to encourage embeddings to
be approximately preserved across time steps; DynGraph2Vec (Goyal et al., 2020) more directly
allows information at different snapshots to be integrated by employing an RNN to evolve repre-
sentations across time steps. The similarly-named DyLink2Vec (Rahman et al., 2018) is another
deep autoencoder approach, which also integrates information across time steps; notably, like our
method, it yields embeddings for links rather than nodes, though it works on snapshots rather than
continuous time. More recently, EvolveGCN (Pareja et al., 2020) proposes the interesting idea of
using an RNN to evolve not the node embeddings, but the weights of a GCN model which gener-
ates embeddings for each snapshot. Some deep methods also handle continuous time: using point
processes, Know-Evolve (Trivedi et al., 2017), HTNE (Zuo et al., 2018), and DyRep (Trivedi et al.,
2019) model the occurrence of temporal edges, while Dynamic-Triad (Zhou et al., 2018a) aims to
capture structural information by modeling the closure of wedges into triangles over time. More
recent methods handling continuous-time include TGAT (Xu et al., 2020), TGNs (Rossi et al., 2020),
MeTa (Wang et al., 2021), and PINT (Souza et al., 2022); these methods adapt and integrate various
recent deep learning modules and concepts into the temporal network setting, such as self-attention,
memory, data augmentation, and positional embedding. The PINT paper in particular performs an
analysis of the continuous-time and discrete-time settings, proving that the latter setting reduces to
the former without loss of information, whereas the converse is not always true, and hence the class
of methods handling continuous-time directly is theoretically more powerful in this sense.
Of the many approaches for temporal networks that we have discussed, most are principally node
embedding methods from which edge embeddings can be generated by aggregation; to our knowledge,
ours is the first work which directly forms embeddings for continuous-time temporal edges without
supervision and without aggregating node embeddings.

6     E XPERIMENTS
We evaluate our method on two kinds of tasks, edge classification and temporal link prediction, on a
collection of five real-world temporal network datasets. The statistics for these networks are provided
in Table 2, but we defer discussion of these datasets to Appendix A.2.

6.1   E DGE CLASSIFICATION
Experimental setup We use a logistic regression classifier to which the input is a feature vector for
each edge of the network and the target is a binary edge class. We make random 70%/30% splits of
training/test data, and report test AUC of binary classification across 10 trials with 10 random splits.
In addition to results for our TDLG method’s sparse embeddings, we report results for several other
methods. We compare to results for some prior methods applied to these datasets: 1) CTDNE (Nguyen
et al., 2018); 2) TIMERS (Zhang et al., 2018); 3) EvolveGCN (Pareja et al., 2020); 4) DynGEM (Goyal
et al., 2018); 5) GCRN (Seo et al., 2018); and 6) VGRNN (Hajiramezanali et al., 2019). Note that
these methods output 128-dimensional dense embeddings, unlike our TDLG method, which outputs
m-dimensional sparse embeddings; for an additional, direct comparison, we also report results


                                                   7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                     100
                              BitcoinAlpha               BitcoinOTC                      Escorts                    WikiElect                    Epinions
                                                                                                          90                           90
                      90                         90
                                                                             70                           80                           80
 Test AUC (%)         80                         80
                                                                             60                           70                           70
                      70                         70                                                       60                           60
                      60                         60                          50
                                                                                                          50                           50
                      50                         50                          40                           40                           40
                           TDL CTD TIM EGC DGM        TDL CTD TIM EGC DGM          TDL CTD TIM EGC DGM         TDL CTD TIM EGC DGM          TDL CTD TIM

Figure 3: Test AUC on the edge classification task for real-world datasets using our TDLG method,
CTDNE, TIMERS, EvolveGCN, and DynGEM.

for using the top 128 eigenvectors (i.e., those with highest magnitude eigenvalues) of the TDLG
adjacency matrix (‘TDLG Dense’). With the exception of the methods we introduce and CTDNE, all
other methods do not directly handle the continuous time stamps of the datasets; for these methods,
we slot the edges into discrete snapshots by evenly dividing the full time span into 20 intervals. All
experiments are run on an Xeon Gold 6130 CPU and Tesla v100 16GB GPU; only the latter four
methods (i.e., the deep methods) use the GPU, and we are unable to run these four methods on
E PINIONS due to GPU memory limitations. We release code in the form of a Jupyter notebook (Pérez
& Granger, 2007) demo which is available at github.com/schariya/tdlg.

 Hyperparameter selection For all embedding methods, we use the scikit-learn (Pedregosa et al.,
 2011) implementation of logistic regression; we increase the maximum iterations to 103 , and, since
 the edge classes are generally imbalanced across the datasets, we set the class weight option to
‘balanced,’ which adjusts loss weights inversely in proportion to class frequency. We keep otherwise
 default options. For our TDLG method, we set the time scale hyperparameter σt as ratio of the
 standard deviation of the edges’ times; calling this standard deviation be σT , we use σt = 10−1 · σT ,
which is chosen by informal tuning. In Appendix A.3, we explore the impact of varying σt .We
 use the implementation of Liu et al. (2020) for TIMERS and all deep methods, all with default
 hyperparameters. For the E PINIONS dataset only, for our TDLG method, we modify the solver for
 sparse logistic regression to the ‘saga’ solver, which is more scalable than the default ‘lbfgs’ solver,
 and reduce the maximum number of iterations to 100 (the default value).

Results We first plot mean AUC and 95% confidence intervals for selected methods - our TDLG,
CTDNE, TIMERS, EvolveGCN, and DynGEM - on all datasets in Figure 3. Our TDLG method
achieves higher performance than the comparison methods on all datasets, often by a large margin.

                     90
                                    Temporal Edge Classification                  100
                                                                                         Interpolative Link Prediction    80
                                                                                                                                Extrapolative Link Prediction
 Mean Test AUC (%)


                                                                                   90                                     70
                     80
                                                                                   80                                     60
                     70                                                            70                                     50
                                                                                   60                                     40
                     60
                                                                                   50                                     30
                     50                                                            40                                     20
                           TDLG TDLG    CTDNE TIMERS Evolve Dyn GCRN VGRNN              TDLG    CTDNE TIMERS Evolve Dyn         TDLG    CTDNE TIMERS Evolve Dyn
                                Dense                 GCN GEM                                                 GCN GEM                                 GCN GEM

Figure 4: Test AUC on all three tasks, aggregated across datasets: mean performance over the
evaluated real-world datasets, excluding E PINIONS.

To compactly compare all 9 of the methods across these datasets, we aggregate the performance
across the datasets as follows: we plot the mean across all datasets, excluding E PINIONS, of each
method’s test AUC. We exclude E PINIONS since we are unable to run some methods on this dataset.
See Figure 4 (left). TDLG achieves the highest performance out of all these methods on all datasets;
the dense variant of TDLG, which perhaps provides more direct comparison with other methods, sees
reduced performance, but also outperforms all prior methods. Tables of full experimental results are
deferred to Appendix A.5.

Runtime We evaluate the time efficiency of our approach against the selected baseline methods. For
this, we report the mean runtime in seconds for one trial of edge classification. Runtime constitutes
one trial of learning embeddings, learning a logistic regression classifier on training data, and
predicting on test data. See Figure 5. Across all five datasets, our TDLG method is the fastest, often
by a significant margin. We discuss the scalability of our method in Appendix A.4.


                                                                                         8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                 104
                          BitcoinAlpha            BitcoinOTC             Escorts               WikiElect             Epinions
                 103
 Runtime (sec)
                 102
                 101
                 100
                       TDL CTD TIM EGC DGM    TDL CTD TIM EGC DGM   TDL CTD TIM EGC DGM   TDL CTD TIM EGC DGM   TDL CTD TIM

                                         Figure 5: Runtime (seconds) on the edge classification task.

6.2                    L INK P REDICTION

Experimental setup Given the dataset of actual, ‘positive’ edge tuples (ui , vi , ti ), we generate
an equal-sized set of fake, ‘negative’ edges by independently shuffling the three columns (i.e.,
independently shuffling the set of first nodes, the set of second nodes, and the times). Note that this
preserves the distribution nodes/times in of each of the columns. The task is to distinguish positive
edges from negative ones. We evaluate two different settings for link prediction. In the first, which
we call temporal link outlier detection, the test edges are in the same time interval as the training
edges. In the second, which we call temporal link prediction, the test edges are in an interval of
time following that of the training data. We also call these settings ‘interpolative’ and ‘extrapolative,’
respectively. Prior work generally focuses on the latter setting, since it is more applicable, e.g., for
predicting future events/behavior, but we also evaluate the former mainly out of scientific interest.
 Specifically, given that we are splitting the data into 20 intervals, we consider intervals 1-19 to be
‘early’ data and interval 20 to be ‘late’ data. To share computational effort across the two settings, we
 train both classifiers on 70% of edges (both positive and negative) from the early intervals. For the
 interpolative setting, the test data comprises the remaining 30% of edges from the early intervals. For
 the extrapolative setting, the test data comprises all edges from the late interval. Evaluating the link
 prediction task has greater computational cost compared to edge classification since the input graph
 changes across trials rather than just train/test splits of labels, requiring new embeddings to be made
 for each trial. For this reason, we only test the 5 selected methods from the previous section. We
 report mean AUC and 95% confidence intervals across 5 trials, each trial having different random
 shuffles producing different negative edges, as well as different 70%/30% train/test splits.

Hyperparameter selection We generally use the same hyperparameters as for edge classification,
with one exception: since there is an equal number of positive and negative edges, we no longer set
the class weight option to ‘balanced,’ and all edges are given equal weight.

Results As for edge classification, we plot the aggregated (mean) performance across the datasets
in Figure 4 (right), for both the interpolative and extrapolative settings of link prediction. For brevity,
we defer non-aggregated and tabular results to Figure 8 in Appendix A.5. In both settings, across
all datasets, our TDLG method achieves the highest performance, often by a large margin. We do
find that the deep methods EvolveGCN and DynGEM generally perform better than CTDNE and
TIMERS, and EvolveGCN in particular is competitive with TDLG on some datasets.

7                  C ONCLUSION
We present a novel framework for temporal edge embedding called the time-decayed line graph
(TDLG). Unlike some prior methods, our method works directly with continuous timestamps rather
than requiring discretization of times, and directly generates temporal edge embeddings rather than
requiring aggregation of node embeddings. Also in contrast to many prior methods, ours has a
simple concept and high ease of implementation, since it essentially just creates a sparse matrix of
proximities between temporal edges. Despite its simplicity, our method achieves superior performance
for several downstream tasks on benchmark temporal network datasets, while requiring less runtime.
Its simplicity also facilitates theoretical guarantees of its effectiveness on our proposed UGT-SBM
family of networks. Future directions include extensions of our approach to more general scenarios
involving, for example, streaming input data or inductive learning; an approach for the latter could be
as straightforward as running an inductive method on the TDLG of the input graph as opposed to the
raw graph itself. Broadly, this work highlights the potential of methods involving engineered features,
as opposed to learned ones, to achieve solid performance by directly invoking simple inductive priors.


                                                                         9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Cameron Musco and Sudhanshu Chanpuriya were partially supported by an Adobe Research grant.

R EFERENCES
Makan Arastuie, Subhadeep Paul, and Kevin Xu. Chip: a hawkes process model for continuous-time
 networks with scalable and consistent estimation. Advances in Neural Information Processing
 Systems, 33:16983–16996, 2020.
Sambaran Bandyopadhyay, Anirban Biswas, M Narasimha Murty, and Ramasuri Narayanam. Beyond
  node embedding: A direct unsupervised edge representation framework for homogeneous networks.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:1912.05140, 2019.
Pierre Barbillon, Sophie Donnet, Emmanuel Lazega, and Avner Bar-Hen. Stochastic block models
  for multiplex networks: an application to a multilevel network of researchers. Journal of the Royal
  Statistical Society: Series A (Statistics in Society), 180(1):295–314, 2017.
Mikhail Belkin and Partha Niyogi. Laplacian eigenmaps and spectral techniques for embedding and
 clustering. Advances in neural information processing systems, 14, 2001.
Charles Blundell, Jeff Beck, and Katherine A Heller. Modelling reciprocating relationships with
  hawkes processes. Advances in Neural Information Processing systems, 25, 2012.
Antoine Bordes, Nicolas Usunier, Alberto Garcia-Duran, Jason Weston, and Oksana Yakhnenko.
 Translating embeddings for modeling multi-relational data. Advances in Neural Information
 Processing Systems, 26, 2013.
Shaosheng Cao, Wei Lu, and Qiongkai Xu. Grarep: Learning graph representations with global
  structural information. In Proceedings of the 24th ACM International on Conference on Information
  and Knowledge Management, pp. 891–900, 2015.
Muhao Chen and Chris Quirk. Embedding edge-attributed relational hierarchies. In Proceedings
 of the 42nd International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information
 Retrieval, pp. 873–876, 2019.
Daniel M Dunlavy, Tamara G Kolda, and Evrim Acar. Temporal link prediction using matrix and
  tensor factorizations. ACM Transactions on Knowledge Discovery from Data (TKDD), 5(2):1–27,
  2011.
Liyu Gong and Qiang Cheng. Exploiting edge features for graph neural networks. In Proceedings of
  the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 9211–9219, 2019.
Palash Goyal, Nitin Kamra, Xinran He, and Yan Liu. Dyngem: Deep embedding method for dynamic
  graphs. In IJCAI Workshop on Representation Learning for Graphs, 2018.
Palash Goyal, Sujit Rokka Chhetri, and Arquimedes Canedo. dyngraph2vec: Capturing network
  dynamics using dynamic graph representation learning. Knowledge-Based Systems, 187:104816,
  2020.
Aditya Grover and Jure Leskovec. node2vec: Scalable feature learning for networks. In Proceedings
  of the 22nd ACM SIGKDD international conference on Knowledge discovery and data mining, pp.
  855–864, 2016.
Ehsan Hajiramezanali, Arman Hasanzadeh, Krishna Narayanan, Nick Duffield, Mingyuan Zhou, and
  Xiaoning Qian. Variational graph recurrent neural networks. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 32, 2019.
Paul W Holland, Kathryn Blackmond Laskey, and Samuel Leinhardt. Stochastic blockmodels: First
  steps. Social networks, 5(2):109–137, 1983.
Ruthwik Junuthula, Maysam Haghdan, Kevin S Xu, and Vijay Devabhaktuni. The block point process
  model for continuous-time event-based dynamic networks. In The World Wide Web Conference,
  pp. 829–839, 2019.


                                                 10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Thomas N Kipf and Max Welling. Variational graph auto-encoders. arXiv preprint arXiv:1611.07308,
  2016.
Thomas N Kipf and Max Welling. Semi-supervised classification with graph convolutional networks.
  International Conference on Learning Representations, 2017.
Srijan Kumar, Francesca Spezzano, VS Subrahmanian, and Christos Faloutsos. Edge weight pre-
  diction in weighted signed networks. In Data Mining (ICDM), 2016 IEEE 16th International
  Conference on, pp. 221–230. IEEE, 2016.
Srijan Kumar, Bryan Hooi, Disha Makhija, Mohit Kumar, Christos Faloutsos, and VS Subrahmanian.
  Rev2: Fraudulent user prediction in rating platforms. In Proceedings of the Eleventh ACM
  International Conference on Web Search and Data Mining, pp. 333–341. ACM, 2018.
Jure Leskovec and Rok Sosič. Snap: A general-purpose network analysis and graph-mining library.
  ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology (TIST), 8(1):1, 2016.
Jure Leskovec, Daniel Huttenlocher, and Jon Kleinberg. Signed networks in social media. In
  Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, pp. 1361–1370.
  ACM, 2010.
Jundong Li, Harsh Dani, Xia Hu, Jiliang Tang, Yi Chang, and Huan Liu. Attributed network
  embedding for learning in a dynamic environment. In Proceedings of the 2017 ACM on Conference
  on Information and Knowledge Management, pp. 387–396, 2017a.
Suxue Li, Haixia Zhang, Dalei Wu, Chuanting Zhang, and Dongfeng Yuan. Edge representation
  learning for community detection in large scale information networks. In International Workshop
  on Mobility Analytics for Spatio-temporal and Social Data, pp. 54–72. Springer, 2017b.
Jingxin Liu, Chang Xu, Chang Yin, Weiqiang Wu, and You Song. K-core based temporal graph con-
   volutional network for dynamic graphs. IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering,
   2020.
Federico Monti, Oleksandr Shchur, Aleksandar Bojchevski, Or Litany, Stephan Günnemann, and
  Michael M Bronstein. Dual-primal graph convolutional networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1806.00770,
  2018.
Giang Hoang Nguyen, John Boaz Lee, Ryan A Rossi, Nesreen K Ahmed, Eunyee Koh, and Sungchul
  Kim. Continuous-time dynamic network embeddings. In Companion Proceedings of the The Web
  Conference 2018, pp. 969–976, 2018.
Aldo Pareja, Giacomo Domeniconi, Jie Chen, Tengfei Ma, Toyotaro Suzumura, Hiroki Kanezashi,
  Tim Kaler, Tao Schardl, and Charles Leiserson. Evolvegcn: Evolving graph convolutional networks
  for dynamic graphs. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 34,
  pp. 5363–5370, 2020.
F. Pedregosa, G. Varoquaux, A. Gramfort, V. Michel, B. Thirion, O. Grisel, M. Blondel, P. Pretten-
   hofer, R. Weiss, V. Dubourg, J. Vanderplas, A. Passos, D. Cournapeau, M. Brucher, M. Perrot, and
   E. Duchesnay. Scikit-learn: Machine learning in Python. Journal of Machine Learning Research,
   12:2825–2830, 2011.
Fernando Pérez and Brian E. Granger. IPython: a system for interactive scientific computing.
  Computing in Science and Engineering, 9(3):21–29, May 2007. ISSN 1521-9615. doi: 10.1109/
  MCSE.2007.53. URL https://ipython.org.
Bryan Perozzi, Rami Al-Rfou, and Steven Skiena. Deepwalk: Online learning of social representa-
  tions. In Proceedings of the 20th ACM SIGKDD international conference on Knowledge discovery
  and data mining, pp. 701–710, 2014.
Jiezhong Qiu, Yuxiao Dong, Hao Ma, Jian Li, Kuansan Wang, and Jie Tang. Network embedding as
   matrix factorization: Unifying deepwalk, line, pte, and node2vec. In Proceedings of the Eleventh
   ACM International Conference on Web Search and Data Mining, pp. 459–467, 2018.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Mahmudur Rahman, Tanay Kumar Saha, Mohammad Al Hasan, Kevin S Xu, and Chandan K Reddy.
 Dylink2vec: Effective feature representation for link prediction in dynamic networks. arXiv
 preprint arXiv:1804.05755, 2018.
Emanuele Rossi, Ben Chamberlain, Fabrizio Frasca, Davide Eynard, Federico Monti, and Michael
 Bronstein. Temporal graph networks for deep learning on dynamic graphs. In ICML 2020 Workshop
 on Graph Representation Learning, 2020.
Ryan A. Rossi and Nesreen K. Ahmed. The network data repository with interactive graph analytics
  and visualization. In AAAI, 2015. URL https://networkrepository.com.
Sam T Roweis and Lawrence K Saul. Nonlinear dimensionality reduction by locally linear embedding.
  science, 290(5500):2323–2326, 2000.
Youngjoo Seo, Michaël Defferrard, Pierre Vandergheynst, and Xavier Bresson. Structured sequence
  modeling with graph convolutional recurrent networks. In International Conference on Neural
  Information Processing, pp. 362–373. Springer, 2018.
Jianbo Shi and Jitendra Malik. Normalized cuts and image segmentation. IEEE Transactions on
   pattern analysis and machine intelligence, 22(8):888–905, 2000.
Yu Shi, Qi Zhu, Fang Guo, Chao Zhang, and Jiawei Han. Easing embedding learning by compre-
  hensive transcription of heterogeneous information networks. In Proceedings of the 24th ACM
  SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery & Data Mining, pp. 2190–2199,
  2018.
Amauri H Souza, Diego Mesquita, Samuel Kaski, and Vikas Garg. Provably expressive temporal
 graph networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.15059, 2022.
Daniel Spielman. Spectral graph theory. Combinatorial Scientific Computing, 18, 2012.
Jian Tang, Meng Qu, Mingzhe Wang, Ming Zhang, Jun Yan, and Qiaozhu Mei. Line: Large-scale
   information network embedding. In Proceedings of the 24th international conference on world
   wide web, pp. 1067–1077, 2015.
Rakshit Trivedi, Hanjun Dai, Yichen Wang, and Le Song. Know-evolve: Deep temporal reasoning
  for dynamic knowledge graphs. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 3462–3471.
  PMLR, 2017.
Rakshit Trivedi, Mehrdad Farajtabar, Prasenjeet Biswal, and Hongyuan Zha. Dyrep: Learning
  representations over dynamic graphs. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2019.
Petar Veličković, Guillem Cucurull, Arantxa Casanova, Adriana Romero, Pietro Lio, and Yoshua
  Bengio. Graph attention networks. International Conference on Learning Representations, 2018.
Janu Verma, Srishti Gupta, Debdoot Mukherjee, and Tanmoy Chakraborty. Heterogeneous edge
  embedding for friend recommendation. In European Conference on Information Retrieval, pp.
  172–179. Springer, 2019.
Daixin Wang, Peng Cui, and Wenwu Zhu. Structural deep network embedding. In Proceedings of
  the 22nd ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, pp.
 1225–1234, 2016.
Yiwei Wang, Yujun Cai, Yuxuan Liang, Henghui Ding, Changhu Wang, Siddharth Bhatia, and Bryan
  Hooi. Adaptive data augmentation on temporal graphs. Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 34:1440–1452, 2021.
Da Xu, Chuanwei Ruan, Evren Korpeoglu, Sushant Kumar, and Kannan Achan. Inductive repre-
  sentation learning on temporal graphs. International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2020.
Bishan Yang, Wen-tau Yih, Xiaodong He, Jianfeng Gao, and Li Deng. Embedding entities and
  relations for learning and inference in knowledge bases. arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.6575, 2014.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Wenchao Yu, Wei Cheng, Charu C Aggarwal, Kai Zhang, Haifeng Chen, and Wei Wang. Netwalk: A
 flexible deep embedding approach for anomaly detection in dynamic networks. In Proceedings of
 the 24th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery & Data Mining, pp.
 2672–2681, 2018.
Ziwei Zhang, Peng Cui, Jian Pei, Xiao Wang, and Wenwu Zhu. Timers: Error-bounded svd restart on
  dynamic networks. In Thirty-second AAAI conference on artificial intelligence, 2018.
Huachi Zhou, Qiaoyu Tan, Xiao Huang, Kaixiong Zhou, and Xiaoling Wang. Temporal augmented
  graph neural networks for session-based recommendations. In Proceedings of the 44th International
 ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval, pp. 1798–1802,
  2021.
Lekui Zhou, Yang Yang, Xiang Ren, Fei Wu, and Yueting Zhuang. Dynamic network embedding by
  modeling triadic closure process. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence,
  volume 32, 2018a.
Yang Zhou, Sixing Wu, Chao Jiang, Zijie Zhang, Dejing Dou, Ruoming Jin, and Pengwei Wang.
  Density-adaptive local edge representation learning with generative adversarial network multi-
  label edge classification. In 2018 IEEE International Conference on Data Mining (ICDM), pp.
  1464–1469. IEEE, 2018b.
Yuan Zuo, Guannan Liu, Hao Lin, Jia Guo, Xiaoqian Hu, and Junjie Wu. Embedding temporal
  network via neighborhood formation. In Proceedings of the 24th ACM SIGKDD international
  conference on knowledge discovery & data mining, pp. 2857–2866, 2018.


                                                13
