Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


E DGE G UIDED GAN S WITH C ONTRASTIVE L EARNING
FOR S EMANTIC I MAGE S YNTHESIS

 Hao Tang1 , Xiaojuan Qi2 , Guolei Sun1 , Dan Xu3 , Nicu Sebe4 , Radu Timofte1,5 , Luc Van Gool1
 1
   ETH Zurich, 2 University of Hong Kong, 3 HKUST, 4 University of Trento, 5 University of Wurzburg



                                            A BSTRACT

         We propose a novel edge guided generative adversarial network with contrastive
         learning (ECGAN) for the challenging semantic image synthesis task. Although
         considerable improvement has been achieved, the quality of synthesized images is
         far from satisfactory due to three largely unresolved challenges. 1) The semantic
         labels do not provide detailed structural information, making it difficult to synthe-
         size local details and structures. 2) The widely adopted CNN operations such as
         convolution, down-sampling, and normalization usually cause spatial resolution
         loss and thus cannot fully preserve the original semantic information, leading to
         semantically inconsistent results (e.g., missing small objects). 3) Existing seman-
         tic image synthesis methods focus on modeling “local” semantic information from
         a single input semantic layout. However, they ignore “global” semantic infor-
         mation of multiple input semantic layouts, i.e., semantic cross-relations between
         pixels across different input layouts. To tackle 1), we propose to use edge as an in-
         termediate representation which is further adopted to guide image generation via
         a proposed attention guided edge transfer module. Edge information is produced
         by a convolutional generator and introduces detailed structure information. To
         tackle 2), we design an effective module to selectively highlight class-dependent
         feature maps according to the original semantic layout to preserve the semantic
         information. To tackle 3), inspired by current methods in contrastive learning,
         we propose a novel contrastive learning method, which aims to enforce pixel em-
         beddings belonging to the same semantic class to generate more similar image
         content than those from different classes. Doing so can capture more semantic
         relations by explicitly exploring the structures of labeled pixels from multiple in-
         put semantic layouts. Experiments on three challenging datasets show that our
         ECGAN achieves significantly better results than state-of-the-art methods.



1   I NTRODUCTION

Semantic image synthesis refers to generating photo-realistic images conditioned on pixel-level se-
mantic labels. This task has a wide range of applications such as image editing and content genera-
tion (Chen & Koltun, 2017; Isola et al., 2017; Guo et al., 2022; Gu et al., 2019; Bau et al., 2019a;b;
Liu et al., 2019; Qi et al., 2018; Jiang et al., 2020). Although existing methods conducted inter-
esting explorations, we still observe unsatisfactory aspects, mainly in the generated local structures
and details, as well as small-scale objects, which we believe are mainly due to three reasons: 1)
Conventional methods (Park et al., 2019; Wang et al., 2018; Liu et al., 2019) generally take the
semantic label map as input directly. However, the input label map provides only structural infor-
mation between different semantic-class regions and does not contain any structural information
within each semantic-class region, making it difficult to synthese rich local structures within each
class. Taking label map S in Figure 1 as an example, the generator does not have enough structural
guidance to produce a realistic bed, window, and curtain from only the input label (S). 2) The classic
deep network architectures are constructed by stacking convolutional, down-sampling, normaliza-
tion, non-linearity, and up-sampling layers, which will cause the problem of spatial resolution losses
of the input semantic labels. 3) Existing methods for this task are typically based on global image-
level generation. In other words, they accept a semantic layout containing several object classes and
aim to generate the appearance of each one using the same network. In this way, all the classes are


                                                  1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 1: Overview of the proposed ECGAN. It consists of a parameter-sharing encoder E, an edge
generator Ge , an image generator Gi , an attention guided edge transfer module Gt , a label generator
Gl , a similarity loss module, a contrastive learning module Gc (not shown for brevity), and a multi-
modality discriminator D. Ge and Gi are connected by Gt from two levels, i.e., edge feature-level
and content-level, to generate realistic images. Gs is proposed to preserve the semantic information
of the input semantic labels. Gl aims to transfer the generated image back to the label for calculating
the similarity loss. Gc tries to capture more semantic relations by explicitly exploring the structures
of labeled pixels from multiple input semantic layouts. D aims to distinguish the outputs from two
modalities, i.e., edge and image. The symbol ⃝   c denotes channel-wise concatenation.

treated equally. However, because different semantic classes have distinct properties, using specified
network learning for each would intuitively facilitate the complex generation of multiple classes.
To address these three issues, in this paper, we propose a novel edge guided generative adversarial
network with contrastive learning (ECGAN) for semantic image synthesis. The overall framework
of the proposed ECGAN is shown in Figure 1.
To tackle 1), we first propose an edge generator to produce the edge features and edge maps. Then
the generated edge features and edge maps are selectively transferred to the image generator and
improve the quality of the synthesized image by using our attention guided edge transfer module.
To tackle 2), we propose an effective semantic preserving module, which aims at selectively high-
lighting class-dependent feature maps according to the original semantic layout. We also propose
a new similarity loss to model the relationship between semantic categories. Specifically, given a
generated label S ′′ and corresponding ground truth S, similarity loss constructs a similarity map to
supervise the learning.
To tackle 3), a straightforward solution would be to model the generation of different image classes
individually. By so doing, each class could have its own generation network structure or parameters,
thus greatly avoiding the learning of a biased generation space. However, there is a fatal disad-
vantage to this. That is, the number of parameters of the network will increase linearly with the
number of semantic classes N , which will cause memory overflow and make it impossible to train
the model. If we use pe and pd to denote the number of parameters of the encoder and decoder,
respectively, then the total number of the network parameter should be pe +N ×pd since we need a
new decoder for each class. To further address this limitation, we introduce a pixel-wise contrastive
learning approach that elevates the current image-wise training method to a pixel-wise method. By
leveraging the global semantic similarities present in labeled training layouts, this method leads to
the development of a well-structured feature space. In this case, the total number of the network pa-
rameter only is pe +pd . Moreover, we explore image generation from a class-specific context, which
is beneficial for generating richer details compared to the existing image-level generation methods.
A new class-specific pixel generation strategy is proposed for this purpose. It can effectively han-
dle the generation of small objects and details, which are common difficulties encountered by the
global-based generation.
With the proposed ECGAN, we achieve new state-of-the-art results on Cityscapes (Cordts et al.,
2016), ADE20K (Zhou et al., 2017), and COCO-Stuff (Caesar et al., 2018) datasets, demonstrating
the effectiveness of our approach in generating images with complex scenes, and showing signifi-
cantly better results compared with state-of-the-art methods.


                                                  2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


2   R ELATED W ORK

Edge Guided Image Generation. Edge maps are usually adopted in image inpainting (Ren et al.,
2019; Nazeri et al., 2019a; Li et al., 2019) and image super-resolution (Nazeri et al., 2019b) tasks
to reconstruct the missing structure information of the inputs. For example, Nazeri et al. (2019a)
proposed an edge generator to hallucinate edges in the missing regions given edges, which can be re-
garded as an edge completion problem. Using edge images as the structural guidance, EdgeConnect
(Nazeri et al., 2019a) achieves good results even for some highly structured scenes. Unlike previ-
ous works, including EdgeConnect, we propose a novel edge generator to perform a new task, i.e.,
semantic label-to-edge translation. To the best of our knowledge, we are the first to generate edge
maps from semantic labels. Then the generated edge maps, with more local structure information,
can be used to improve the quality of the image results.
Semantic Image Synthesis aims to generate a photo-realistic image from a semantic label map
(Chen & Koltun, 2017; Park et al., 2019; Liu et al., 2019; Bansal et al., 2019; Zhu et al., 2020a;
Ntavelis et al., 2020; Zhu et al., 2020b; Sushko et al., 2021; Tan et al., 2021b;a; Zhu et al., 2020b).
With semantic information as guidance, existing methods have achieved promising performance.
However, we can still observe unsatisfying aspects, especially on the generation of the small-scale
objects, which we believe is mainly due to the problem of spatial resolution losses associated with
deep network operations such as convolution, normalization, down-sampling, etc. To solve this
problem, Park et al. (2019) proposed GauGAN, which uses the input semantic labels to modulate
the activations in normalization layers through a spatially-adaptive transformation. However, the
spatial resolution losses caused by other operations, such as convolution and down-sampling, have
not been resolved. Moreover, we observe that the input label map has only a few semantic classes
in the entire dataset. Thus the generator should focus more on learning these existing semantic
classes rather than all the semantic classes. To tackle both limitations, we propose a novel semantic
preserving module, which aims to selectively highlight class-dependent feature maps according to
the input labels for generating semantically consistent images. We also propose a new similarity
loss to model the intra-class and inter-class semantic dependencies.
Contrastive Learning. Recently, the most compelling methods for learning representations without
labels have been unsupervised contrastive learning (Oord et al., 2018; Hjelm et al., 2018; Pan et al.,
2021; Wu et al., 2018; Chen et al., 2020), which significantly outperform other pretext task-based al-
ternatives (Gidaris et al., 2018; Doersch et al., 2015; Noroozi & Favaro, 2016). Contrastive learning
aims to learn the general features of unlabeled data by teaching and guiding the model which data
points are different or similar. For example, Hu et al. (2021) designed a region-aware contrastive
learning to explore semantic relations for the specific semantic segmentation problem. Zhao et al.
(2021) and Wang et al. (2021) also proposed two new contrastive learning-based strategies for the
semantic segmentation task. However, we propose a novel pixel-wise contrastive learning method
for semantic image synthesis in this paper. The semantic image synthesis task is very different from
the semantic segmentation task, which requires us to tailor the network structure and loss function
to our generation task. Specifically, we propose a new training protocol that explores global pixel
relations in labeled layouts for regularizing the generation embedding space.

3   E DGE G UIDED GAN S WITH C ONTRASTIVE L EARNING

Framework Overview. Figure 1 shows the overall structure of ECGAN for semantic image synthe-
sis, which consists of a semantic and edge guided generator G and a multi-modality discriminator
D. The generator G consists of eight components: (1) a parameter-sharing convolutional encoder
E is proposed to produce deep feature maps F ; (2) an edge generator Ge is adopted to generate
edge maps Ie′ taking as input deep features from the encoder; (3) an image generator Gi is used
to produce intermediate images I ′ ; (4) an attention guided edge transfer module Gt is designed to
forward useful structure information from the edge generator to the image generator; (5) the se-
mantic preserving module Gs is developed to selectively highlight class-dependent feature maps
according to the input label for generating semantically consistent images I ′′ ; (6) a label genera-
tor Gl is employed to produce the label from I ′′ ; (7) the similarity loss is proposed to calculate
the intra-class and inter-class relationships. (8) the contrastive learning module Gc aims to model
global semantic relations between training pixels, guiding pixel embeddings towards cross-image
category-discriminative representations that eventually improve the generation performance.


                                                  3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 2: Structure of the proposed edge generator Ge , attention guided edge transfer module Gt ,
and image generator Gi . Ge selectively transfers useful local structure information to Gi using the
proposed attention guided transfer module Gt . The symbols ⊕, ⊗, and ⃝       σ denote element-wise
addition, element-wise multiplication, and Sigmoid activation function, respectively.

Meanwhile, to effectively train the network, we propose a multi-modality discriminator D that dis-
tinguishes the outputs from both modalities, i.e., edge and image.

3.1   E DGE G UIDED S EMANTIC I MAGE S YNTHESIS

Parameter-Sharing Encoder. The backbone encoder E can employ any deep network architecture,
e.g., the commonly used AlexNet (Krizhevsky et al., 2012), VGG (Simonyan & Zisserman, 2015),
and ResNet (He et al., 2016). We directly utilize the feature maps from the last convolutional layer
as deep feature representations, i.e., F =E(S), where E represents the encoder; S∈RN ×H×W is
the input label, with H and W as width and height of the input semantic labels, and N as the total
number of semantic classes. Optionally, one can always combine multiple intermediate feature maps
to enhance the feature representation. The encoder is shared by the edge generator and the image
generator. Then, the gradients from the two generators all contribute to updating the parameters of
the encoder. This compact design can potentially enhance the deep representations as the encoder
can simultaneously learn structure representations from the edge generation branch and appearance
representations from the image generation branch.
Edge Guided Image Generation. As discussed, the lack of detailed structure or geometry guidance
makes it extremely difficult for the generator to produce realistic local structures and details. To
overcome this limitation, we propose to adopt the edge as guidance. A novel edge generator Ge
is designed to directly generate the edge maps from the input semantic labels. This also facilitates
the shared encoder to learn more local structures of the targeted images. Meanwhile, the image
generator Gi aims to generate photo-realistic images from the input labels. In this way, the encoder
is boosted to learn the appearance information of the targeted images.
Previous works (Park et al., 2019; Liu et al., 2019; Qi et al., 2018; Chen & Koltun, 2017; Wang
et al., 2018) directly use deep networks to generate the target image, which is challenging since the
network needs to simultaneously learn appearance and structure information from the input labels.
In contrast, the proposed method learns structure and appearance separately via the proposed edge
generator and image generator. Moreover, the explicit guidance from the ground truth edge maps
can also facilitate the training of the encoder. The framework of both edge and image generators
is illustrated in Figure 2. Given the feature maps from the last convolutional layer of the encoder,
i.e., F ∈RC×H×W , where H and W are the width and height of the features, and C is the number
of channels, the edge generator produces edge features and edge maps which are further utilized to
guide the image generator to generate the intermediate image I ′ . The edge generator Ge contains n
convolution layers and correspondingly produces n intermediate feature maps Fe ={Fej }nj=1 . After
that, another convolution layer with Tanh non-linear activation is utilized to generate the edge map
Ie′ ∈R3×H×W . Meanwhile, the feature maps F is also fed into the image generator Gi to generate n


                                                 4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 3: Left: Overview of the proposed semantic preserving module Gs , which aims at capturing
the semantic information and predicts scaling factors conditioned on the combined feature maps F.
These learned factors selectively highlight class-dependent feature maps, which are visualized in
different colors. The symbols ⊕, ⊗, and ⃝   σ denote element-wise addition, element-wise multiplica-
tion, and Sigmoid activation function, respectively. Right: Visualization of three different feature
channels in F ′ on Cityscapes, i.e., road, car, and vegetation.

intermediate feature maps Fi ={Fij }nj=1 . Then another convolution operation with Tanh non-linear
activation is adopted to produce the intermediate image Ii′ ∈R3×H×W . In addition, the intermediate
edge feature maps Fe and the edge map Ie′ are utilized to guide the generation of the image feature
maps Fi and the intermediate image I ′ via the Attention Guided Edge Transfer as detailed below.
Attention Guided Edge Transfer. We further propose a novel attention guided edge transfer mod-
ule Gt to explicitly employ the edge structure information to refine the intermediate image repre-
sentations. The architecture of the proposed transfer module Gt is illustrated in Figure 2. To trans-
fer useful structure information from edge feature maps Fe ={Fej }nj=1 to the image feature maps
Fi ={Fij }nj=1 , the edge feature maps are firstly processed by a Sigmoid activation function to gen-
erate the corresponding attention maps Fa =Sigmoid(Fe )={Faj }nj=1 . The attention aims to provide
structural information (which cannot be provided by the input label map) within each semantic class.
Then, we multiply the generated attention maps with the corresponding image feature maps to obtain
the refined maps, which incorporate local structures and details. Finally, the edge refined features are
element-wisely summed with the original image features to produce the final edge refined features,
which are further fed to the next convolution layer as Fij =Sigmoid(Fej )×Fij +Fij (j=1, · · · , n). In
this way, the image feature maps also contain the local structure information provided by the edge
feature maps. Similarly, to directly employ the structure information from the generated edge map
Ie′ for image generation, we adopt the attention guided edge transfer module to refine the generated
image directly with edge information as
                                    I ′ = Sigmoid(Ie′ ) × Ii′ + Ii′ ,                               (1)
where Ia′ =Sigmoid(Ie′ ) is the generated attention map. We also visualize the results in Figure 10.

3.2   S EMANTIC P RESERVING I MAGE E NHANCEMENT

Semantic Preserving Module. Due to the spatial resolution loss caused by convolution, normal-
ization, and down-sampling layers, existing models (Wang et al., 2018; Park et al., 2019; Qi et al.,
2018; Chen & Koltun, 2017) cannot fully preserve the semantic information of the input labels as
illustrated in Figure 7. For instance, the small “pole” is missing, and the large “fence” is incom-
plete. To tackle this problem, we propose a novel semantic preserving module, which aims to select
class-dependent feature maps and further enhance them through the guidance of the original seman-
tic layout. An overview of the proposed semantic preserving module Gs is shown in Figure 3(left).
Specifically, the input of the module denoted as F, is the concatenation of the input label S, the
generated intermediate edge map Ie′ and image I ′ , and the deep feature F produced from the shared
encoder E. Then, we apply a convolution operation on F to produce a new feature map Fc with the
number of channels equal to the number of semantic categories, where each channel corresponds
to a specific semantic category (a similar conclusion can be found in Fu et al. (2019)). Next, we
apply the averaging pooling operation on Fc to obtain the global information of each class, followed
by a Sigmoid activation function to derive scaling factors γ ′ as in γ ′ =Sigmoid(AvgPool(Fc )),
where each value represents the importance of the corresponding class. Then, the scaling factor
γ ′ is adopted to reweight the feature map Fc and highlight corresponding class-dependent feature
maps. The reweighted feature map is further added with the original feature Fc to compensate for
information loss due to multiplication, and produces Fc′ =Fc ×γ ′ +Fc , where Fc′ ∈RN ×H×W .
After that, we perform another convolution operation on Fc′ to obtain the feature map
F ′ ∈R(C+N +3+3)×H×W to enhance the representative capability of the feature. In addition, F ′


                                                   5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 4: Current semantic image synthesis methods learn to map pixels to an embedding space but
ignore intrinsic structures of labeled training data (i.e., inter-layout relations among pixels from the
same class, marked with the same color). Our proposed approach, pixel-wise contrastive learning,
fosters a new training strategy by explicitly addressing intra-class compactness and inter-class dis-
persion. By pulling pixels of the same class closer and pushing pixels from different classes apart,
our method can create a better-structured embedding space, which leads to the same class generating
more similar image content and improves the performance of semantic image synthesis.

has the same size as the original input one F, which makes the module flexible and can be plugged
into other existing architectures without modifications of other parts to refine the output. In Fig-
ure 3(right), we visualize three channels in F ′ on Cityscapes, i.e., road, car, and vegetation. We can
easily observe that each channel learns well the class-level deep representations.
Finally, the feature map F ′ is fed into a convolution layer followed by a Tanh non-linear activation
layer to obtain the final result I ′′ . Our semantic preserving module enhances the representational
power of the model by adaptively recalibrating semantic class-dependent feature maps and shares
similar spirits with style transfer (Huang & Belongie, 2017), and SENet (Hu et al., 2018) and EncNet
(Zhang et al., 2018a). One intuitive example of the utility of the module is for the generation of small
object classes: these classes are easily missed in the generation results due to spatial resolution loss,
while our scaling factor can put an emphasis on small objects and help preserve them.
Similarity Loss. Preserving semantic information from isolated pixels is very challenging for deep
networks. To explicitly enforce the network to capture the relationship between semantic categories,
a new similarity loss is introduced. This loss forces the network to consider both intra-class and inter-
class pixels for each pixel in the label. Specifically, a state-of-the-art pretrained model (i.e., Seg-
Former (Xie et al., 2021)) is used to transfer the generated image I ′′ back to a label S ′′ ∈RN ×H×W ,
where N is the total number of semantic classes, and H and W represent the width and height of
the image, respectively. A conventional method uses the cross entropy loss between S ′′ and S to
address this problem. However, such a loss only considers the isolated pixel while ignoring the
semantic correlation with other pixels.
To address this limitation, we construct a similarity map from S∈RN ×H×W . Firstly, we reshape S
to Ŝ∈RN ×M , where M =HW . Next, we perform a matrix multiplication to obtain a similarity map
A=Ŝ Ŝ ⊤ ∈RM ×M . This similarity map encodes which pixels belong to the same category, meaning
that if the j-th pixel and the i-th pixel belong to the same category, then the value of the j-th row
and the i-th column in A is 1; otherwise, it is 0. Similarly, we can obtain a similarity map A′′ from
the label S ′′ . Finally, we calculate the binary cross entropy loss between the two similarity maps
{am ∈A, m∈[1, M 2 ]} and {a′′m ∈A′′ , m∈[1, M 2 ]} as
                                            2
                                    M
                            ′′    1 X
                 Lsim (S, S ) = − 2   (am log a′′m + (1 − am ) log(1 − a′′m )).                      (2)
                                 M m=1
This similarity loss explicitly captures intra-class and inter-class semantic correlation, leading to
better generation results.

3.3   C ONTRASTIVE L EARNING FOR S EMANTIC I MAGE S YNTHESIS

Pixel-Wise Contrastive Learning. Existing semantic image synthesis models use deep networks
to map labeled pixels to a non-linear embedding space. However, these models often only take


                                                   6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


into account the “local” context of pixel samples within an individual input semantic layout, and
fail to consider the “global” context of the entire dataset, which includes the semantic relationships
between pixels across different input layouts. This oversight raises an important question: what
should the ideal semantic image synthesis embedding space look like? Ideally, such a space should
not only enable accurate categorization of individual pixel embeddings, but also exhibit a well-
structured organization that promotes intra-class similarity and inter-class difference. That is, pixels
from the same class should generate more similar image content than those from different classes
in the embedding space. Previous approaches to representation learning propose that incorporating
the inherent structure of training data can enhance feature discriminativeness. Hence, we conjecture
that despite the impressive performance of existing algorithms, there is potential to create a more
well-structured pixel embedding space by integrating both the local and global context.
The objective of unsupervised representation learning is to train an encoder that maps each training
semantic layout S to a feature vector v=B(S), where B represents the backbone encoder network.
The resulting vector v should be an accurate representation of S. To accomplish this task, contrastive
learning approaches use a training method that distinguishes a positive from multiple negatives,
based on the similarity principle between samples. The InfoNCE (Oord et al., 2018; Gutmann &
Hyvärinen, 2010) loss function, a popular choice for contrastive learning, can be expressed as
                                                     exp(v · v+ /τ )
                      LS = − log                        P                       ,                   (3)
                                       exp(v · v+ /τ ) + v− ∈NS exp(v · v− /τ )

where v+ represents an embedding of a positive for S, and NS includes embeddings of negatives.
The symbol “·” refers to the inner (dot) product, and τ >0 is a temperature hyper-parameter. It is
worth noting that the embeddings used in the loss function are normalized using the L2 method.
One limitation of this training objective design is that it only penalizes pixel-wise predictions inde-
pendently, without considering the cross-relationship between pixels. To overcome this limitation,
we take inspiration from (Wang et al., 2021; Khosla et al., 2020) and propose a contrastive learning
method that operates at the pixel level and is intended to regularize the embedding space while also
investigating the global structures present in the training data (see Figure 4). Specifically, our con-
trastive loss computation uses training semantic layout pixels as data samples. For a given pixel i
with its ground-truth semantic label c, the positive samples consist of other pixels that belong to the
same class c, while the negative samples include pixels belonging to other classes C\c. As a result,
the proposed pixel-wise contrastive learning loss is defined as follows
                          1 X                      exp(i · i+ /τ )
                  Li =         − log                  P                       .                     (4)
                         |Pi |       exp(i · i+ /τ ) + i− ∈Ni exp(i · i− /τ )
                              i+ ∈Pi

For each pixel i, we use Pi and Ni to represent the pixel embedding collections of positive and
negative samples, respectively. Importantly, the positive and negative samples and the anchor i are
not required to come from the same layout. The goal of this pixel-wise contrastive learning approach
is to create an embedding space in which same-class pixels are pulled closer together, and different-
class pixels are pushed further apart. The result of this process is that pixels with the same class
generate image contents that are more similar, which can lead to superior generation performance.
Class-Specific Pixel Generation. To overcome the challenges posed by training data imbalance
between different classes and size discrepancies between different semantic objects, we introduce
a new approach that is specifically designed to generate small object classes and fine details. Our
proposed method is a class-specific pixel generation approach that focuses on generating image
content for each semantic class. By doing so, we can avoid the interference from large object
classes during joint optimization, and each subgeneration branch can concentrate on a specific class
generation, which in turn results in similar generation quality for different classes and yields richer
local image details.
An overview of the class-specific pixel generation method is provided in Figure 4. After the pro-
posed pixel-wise contrastive learning, we obtain a class-specific feature map for each pixel. Then,
the feature map is fed into a decoder for the corresponding semantic class, which generates an output
image Iˆi . Since we have the proposed contrastive learning loss, we can use the parameter-shared
decoder to generate all classes. To better learn each class, we also utilize a pixel-wise L1 recon-
                                                    PN
struction loss, which can be expressed as LL1 = i=1 EIi ,Iˆi [||Ii −Iˆi ||1 ]. The final output Ig from


                                                     7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 5: Existing SOTA method (i.e., OASIS) vs. our proposed ECGAN on three datasets.
Cityscapes: left; ADE20K: top right two; COCO-Stuff: bottom right two.
Table 1: User study on Cityscapes, ADE20K, and COCO-Stuff. The numbers indicate the percent-
age of users who favor the results of the proposed method over the competing methods.
           AMT ↑                                        Cityscapes    ADE20K      COCO-Stuff
           Ours vs. CRN (Chen & Koltun, 2017)           88.8 ± 3.4   94.8 ± 2.7    95.3 ± 2.1
           Ours vs. Pix2pixHD (Wang et al., 2018)       87.2 ± 2.9   93.6 ± 3.1    93.9 ± 2.4
           Ours vs. SIMS (Qi et al., 2018)              85.3 ± 3.8        -             -
           Ours vs. GauGAN (Park et al., 2019)          84.7 ± 4.3   88.4 ± 3.7    90.8 ± 2.5
           Ours vs. DAGAN (Tang et al., 2020a)          81.8 ± 3.9   86.2 ± 3.6         -
           Ours vs. CC-FPSE (Liu et al., 2019)          79.5 ± 4.2   85.1 ± 3.9    86.7 ± 2.8
           Ours vs. LGGAN (Tang et al., 2020b)          78.4 ± 4.7   82.7 ± 4.5         -
           Ours vs. OASIS (Sushko et al., 2021)         76.7 ± 4.8   80.6 ± 4.5    82.5 ± 3.1

the pixel generation network can be obtained by performing an element-wise addition of all the
class-specific outputs: Ig =Ig1 ⊕ Ig2 ⊕ · · · ⊕ IgN .


4   E XPERIMENTS

Datasets and Evaluation Metrics. We follow GauGAN (Park et al., 2019) and conduct experiments
on three datasets, i.e., Cityscapes (Cordts et al., 2016), ADE20K (Zhou et al., 2017), and COCO-
Stuff (Caesar et al., 2018). We employ the mean Intersection-over-Union (mIoU), Pixel Accuracy
(Acc), and Fréchet Inception Distance (FID) (Heusel et al., 2017) as the evaluation metrics.
State-of-the-Art Comparisons. We adopt GauGAN as the encoder E to validate the effectiveness
of the proposed method. Visual comparison results on all three datasets with the SOTA method
are shown in Figure 5. ECGAN achieves visually better results with fewer visual artifacts than the
SOTA method. For instance, on scene datasets such as Cityscapes and ADE20K, ECGAN generates
sharper images than the baseline, especially at local structures and details.
Moreover, we follow the same evaluation protocol as GauGAN and conduct a user study. Specif-
ically, we provide the participants with an input layout and two generated images from different
models and ask them to choose the generated image that looks more like a corresponding image
of the layout. The users are given unlimited time to make the decision. For each comparison, we
randomly generate 400 questions for each dataset, and each question is answered by 10 different par-
ticipants. For other methods, we use the public code and pretrained models provided by the authors
to generate images. As shown in Table 1, users favor our synthesized results on all three datasets
compared with other competing methods, further validating that the generated images by ECGAN
are more natural. Although the user study is more suitable for evaluating the quality of the generated
images, we also follow previous works and use mIoU, Acc, and FID for quantitative evaluation. The


                                                    8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Table 2: Quantitative comparison of different methods on Cityscapes, ADE20K, and COCO-Stuff.
                                                Cityscapes                      ADE20K                   COCO-Stuff
 Method
                                        mIoU ↑     Acc ↑      FID ↓    mIoU ↑    Acc ↑   FID ↓   mIoU ↑     Acc ↑     FID ↓
 CRN (Chen & Koltun, 2017)               52.4       77.1      104.7     22.4      68.8    73.3    23.7       40.4      70.4
 SIMS (Qi et al., 2018)                  47.2       75.5      49.7       -         -       -       -          -         -
 Pix2pixHD (Wang et al., 2018)           58.3       81.4       95.0     20.3      69.2    81.8    14.6       45.8     111.5
 GauGAN (Park et al., 2019)              62.3       81.9       71.8     38.5      79.9    33.9    37.4       67.9      22.6
 DPGAN (Tang & Sebe, 2021)               65.2       82.6       53.0     39.2      80.4    31.7     -          -         -
 DAGAN (Tang et al., 2020a)              66.1       82.6       60.3     40.5      81.6    31.9     -          -         -
 SelectionGAN (Tang et al., 2019)        83.8       82.4       65.2     40.1      81.2    33.1     -          -         -
 SelectionGAN++ (Tang et al., 2022b)     64.5       82.7       63.4     41.7      81.5    32.2     -          -         -
 LGGAN (Tang et al., 2020b)              68.4       83.0       57.7     41.6      81.8    31.6     -          -         -
 LGGAN++ (Tang et al., 2022a)            67.7       82.9       48.1     41.4      81.5    30.5     -          -         -
 CC-FPSE (Liu et al., 2019)              65.5       82.3       54.3     43.7      82.9    31.7    41.6       70.7      19.2
 OASIS (Sushko et al., 2021)             69.3        -         47.7     48.8       -      28.3    44.1        -        17.0
 RESAIL (Shi et al., 2022)               69.7       83.2      45.5      49.3      84.8    30.2    44.7       73.1     18.3
 SAFM (Lv et al., 2022)                  70.4       83.1       49.5     50.1      86.6    32.8    43.3       73.4      24.6
 ECGAN (Ours)                            72.2       83.1      44.5      50.6      83.1    25.8    46.3       70.5      15.7

        Table 3: Ablation study of the proposed ECGAN on Cityscapes, ADE20K, and COCO-Stuff.
                                               Cityscapes                      ADE20K                    COCO-Stuff
    #     Setting
                                       mIoU ↑     Acc ↑      FID ↓    mIoU ↑    Acc ↑    FID ↓   mIoU ↑     Acc ↑     FID ↓
 B1       E+Gi                          58.6      81.4       65.7      36.9      78.5    38.2     36.8      65.1      24.5
 B2       E+Gi +Ge                      60.2      81.7       61.0      38.7      79.2    36.3     37.5      66.3      22.9
 B3       E+Gi +Ge +Gt                  61.5      82.0       59.0      40.6      80.3    34.6     39.1      67.0      21.7
 B4       E+Gi +Ge +Gt +Gs              64.5      82.5       57.1      42.0      82.0    32.4     41.4      68.2      19.8
 B5       E+Gi +Ge +Gt +Gs +Gl          66.8      82.7       52.2      45.8      82.4    29.9     43.7      69.1      17.6
 B6       E+Gi +Ge +Gt +Gs +Gl +Gc      72.2      83.1       44.5      50.6      83.1    25.8     46.3      70.5      15.7

results of the three datasets are shown in Table 2. The proposed ECGAN outperforms other leading
methods by a large margin on all three datasets, validating the effectiveness of the proposed method.
Ablation Study. We conduct extensive ablation studies on three datasets to evaluate different com-
ponents of the proposed ECGAN. Our method has six baselines (i.e., B1, B2, B3, B4, B5, B6) as
shown in Table 3: B1 means only using the encoder E and the proposed image generator Gi to
synthesize the targeted images. B2 means adopting the proposed image generator Gi and edge gen-
erator Ge to simultaneously produce both edge maps and images. B3 connects the image generator
Gi and the edge generator Ge by using the proposed attention guided edge transfer module Gt . B4
employs the proposed semantic preserving module Gs to further improve the quality of the final
results. B5 uses the proposed label generator Gl to produce the label from the generated image and
then calculate the similarity loss between the generated label and the real one. B6 is our full model
and uses the proposed pixel-wise contrastive learning and class-specific pixel generation methods to
capture more semantic relations by explicitly exploring the structures of labeled pixels from multiple
input semantic layouts. As shown in Table 3, each proposed module improves the performance on
all three metrics, validating the effectiveness. We also provide more ablation analysis in Appendix.

5        C ONCLUSION
We propose a novel ECGAN for semantic image synthesis. It introduces four core components:
edge guided image generation strategy, attention guided edge transfer module, semantic preserving
module, and contrastive learning module. The first one is employed to generate edge maps from
input semantic labels. The second one is used to selectively transfer the useful structure information
from the edge branch to the image branch. The third one is adopted to alleviate the problem of
spatial resolution losses caused by different operations in the deep nets. The last one is utilized
to investigate global semantic relations between training pixels, guiding pixel embeddings towards
cross-image category-discriminative representations. Extensive experiments on three datasets show
that ECGAN achieves significantly better results than existing models.

6        ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was partly supported by ETH General Fund, the Alexander von Humboldt Foundation,
and the EU H2020 project AI4Media under Grant 951911.


                                                               9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


R EFERENCES
Aayush Bansal, Yaser Sheikh, and Deva Ramanan. Shapes and context: in-the-wild image synthesis
  & manipulation. In CVPR, 2019. 3
David Bau, Hendrik Strobelt, William Peebles, Jonas Wulff, Bolei Zhou, Jun-Yan Zhu, and Antonio
  Torralba. Semantic photo manipulation with a generative image prior. ACM TOG, 38(4):1–11,
  2019a. 1
David Bau, Jun-Yan Zhu, Hendrik Strobelt, Bolei Zhou, Joshua B Tenenbaum, William T Freeman,
  and Antonio Torralba. Gan dissection: Visualizing and understanding generative adversarial net-
  works. In ICLR, 2019b. 1
Holger Caesar, Jasper Uijlings, and Vittorio Ferrari. Coco-stuff: Thing and stuff classes in context.
  In CVPR, 2018. 2, 8
John Canny. A computational approach to edge detection. IEEE TPAMI, (6):679–698, 1986. 13
Qifeng Chen and Vladlen Koltun. Photographic image synthesis with cascaded refinement networks.
  In ICCV, 2017. 1, 3, 4, 5, 8, 9
Ting Chen, Simon Kornblith, Mohammad Norouzi, and Geoffrey Hinton. A simple framework for
  contrastive learning of visual representations. In ICML, 2020. 3
Marius Cordts, Mohamed Omran, Sebastian Ramos, Timo Rehfeld, Markus Enzweiler, Rodrigo
 Benenson, Uwe Franke, Stefan Roth, and Bernt Schiele. The cityscapes dataset for semantic
 urban scene understanding. In CVPR, 2016. 2, 8
Carl Doersch, Abhinav Gupta, and Alexei A Efros. Unsupervised visual representation learning by
  context prediction. In ICCV, 2015. 3
Jun Fu, Jing Liu, Haijie Tian, Yong Li, Yongjun Bao, Zhiwei Fang, and Hanqing Lu. Dual attention
  network for scene segmentation. In CVPR, 2019. 5
Spyros Gidaris, Praveer Singh, and Nikos Komodakis. Unsupervised representation learning by
  predicting image rotations. In ICLR, 2018. 3
Ian Goodfellow, Jean Pouget-Abadie, Mehdi Mirza, Bing Xu, David Warde-Farley, Sherjil Ozair,
  Aaron Courville, and Yoshua Bengio. Generative adversarial nets. In NeurIPS, 2014. 14
Shuyang Gu, Jianmin Bao, Hao Yang, Dong Chen, Fang Wen, and Lu Yuan. Mask-guided portrait
  editing with conditional gans. In CVPR, 2019. 1
Jiaxian Guo, Jiachen Li, Huan Fu, Mingming Gong, Kun Zhang, and Dacheng Tao. Alleviating se-
   mantics distortion in unsupervised low-level image-to-image translation via structure consistency
   constraint. In CVPR, 2022. 1
Michael Gutmann and Aapo Hyvärinen. Noise-contrastive estimation: A new estimation principle
 for unnormalized statistical models. In AISTATS, 2010. 7
Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image recog-
  nition. In CVPR, 2016. 4
Martin Heusel, Hubert Ramsauer, Thomas Unterthiner, Bernhard Nessler, and Sepp Hochreiter.
 Gans trained by a two time-scale update rule converge to a local nash equilibrium. In NeurIPS,
 2017. 8
R Devon Hjelm, Alex Fedorov, Samuel Lavoie-Marchildon, Karan Grewal, Phil Bachman, Adam
  Trischler, and Yoshua Bengio. Learning deep representations by mutual information estimation
  and maximization. In ICLR, 2018. 3
Hanzhe Hu, Jinshi Cui, and Liwei Wang. Region-aware contrastive learning for semantic segmen-
  tation. In ICCV, 2021. 3
Jie Hu, Li Shen, and Gang Sun. Squeeze-and-excitation networks. In CVPR, 2018. 6


                                                 10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Xun Huang and Serge Belongie. Arbitrary style transfer in real-time with adaptive instance normal-
  ization. In ICCV, 2017. 6
Phillip Isola, Jun-Yan Zhu, Tinghui Zhou, and Alexei A Efros. Image-to-image translation with
  conditional adversarial networks. In CVPR, 2017. 1
Liming Jiang, Changxu Zhang, Mingyang Huang, Chunxiao Liu, Jianping Shi, and Chen Change
  Loy. Tsit: A simple and versatile framework for image-to-image translation. In ECCV, 2020. 1
Prannay Khosla, Piotr Teterwak, Chen Wang, Aaron Sarna, Yonglong Tian, Phillip Isola, Aaron
  Maschinot, Ce Liu, and Dilip Krishnan. Supervised contrastive learning. NeurIPS, 2020. 7
Diederik P Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. In ICLR, 2015.
  14
Alex Krizhevsky, Ilya Sutskever, and Geoffrey E Hinton. Imagenet classification with deep convo-
  lutional neural networks. In NeurIPS, 2012. 4
Jingyuan Li, Fengxiang He, Lefei Zhang, Bo Du, and Dacheng Tao. Progressive reconstruction of
   visual structure for image inpainting. In ICCV, 2019. 3
Xihui Liu, Guojun Yin, Jing Shao, Xiaogang Wang, et al. Learning to predict layout-to-image
  conditional convolutions for semantic image synthesis. In NeurIPS, 2019. 1, 3, 4, 8, 9
Zhengyao Lv, Xiaoming Li, Zhenxing Niu, Bing Cao, and Wangmeng Zuo. Semantic-shape adaptive
  feature modulation for semantic image synthesis. In CVPR, 2022. 9
Takeru Miyato, Toshiki Kataoka, Masanori Koyama, and Yuichi Yoshida. Spectral normalization
  for generative adversarial networks. In ICLR, 2018. 13
Kamyar Nazeri, Eric Ng, Tony Joseph, Faisal Qureshi, and Mehran Ebrahimi. Edgeconnect: Struc-
  ture guided image inpainting using edge prediction. In ICCV Workshops, 2019a. 3
Kamyar Nazeri, Harrish Thasarathan, and Mehran Ebrahimi. Edge-informed single image super-
  resolution. In ICCV Workshops, 2019b. 3
Mehdi Noroozi and Paolo Favaro. Unsupervised learning of visual representations by solving jigsaw
 puzzles. In ECCV, 2016. 3
Evangelos Ntavelis, Andrés Romero, Iason Kastanis, Luc Van Gool, and Radu Timofte. Sesame:
  Semantic editing of scenes by adding, manipulating or erasing objects. In ECCV, 2020. 3
Aaron van den Oord, Yazhe Li, and Oriol Vinyals. Representation learning with contrastive predic-
  tive coding. arXiv preprint arXiv:1807.03748, 2018. 3, 7
Tian Pan, Yibing Song, Tianyu Yang, Wenhao Jiang, and Wei Liu. Videomoco: Contrastive video
  representation learning with temporally adversarial examples. In CVPR, 2021. 3
Taesung Park, Ming-Yu Liu, Ting-Chun Wang, and Jun-Yan Zhu. Semantic image synthesis with
  spatially-adaptive normalization. In CVPR, 2019. 1, 3, 4, 5, 8, 9, 14, 15
Xiaojuan Qi, Qifeng Chen, Jiaya Jia, and Vladlen Koltun. Semi-parametric image synthesis. In
  CVPR, 2018. 1, 4, 5, 8, 9
Yurui Ren, Xiaoming Yu, Ruonan Zhang, Thomas H Li, Shan Liu, and Ge Li. Structureflow: Image
  inpainting via structure-aware appearance flow. In ICCV, 2019. 3
Yupeng Shi, Xiao Liu, Yuxiang Wei, Zhongqin Wu, and Wangmeng Zuo. Retrieval-based spatially
  adaptive normalization for semantic image synthesis. In CVPR, 2022. 9
Karen Simonyan and Andrew Zisserman. Very deep convolutional networks for large-scale image
  recognition. In ICLR, 2015. 4
Vadim Sushko, Edgar Schönfeld, Dan Zhang, Juergen Gall, Bernt Schiele, and Anna Khoreva. You
  only need adversarial supervision for semantic image synthesis. In ICLR, 2021. 3, 8, 9, 15


                                               11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Zhentao Tan, Menglei Chai, Dongdong Chen, Jing Liao, Qi Chu, Bin Liu, Gang Hua, and Nenghai
  Yu. Diverse semantic image synthesis via probability distribution modeling. In CVPR, 2021a. 3
Zhentao Tan, Dongdong Chen, Qi Chu, Menglei Chai, Jing Liao, Mingming He, Lu Yuan, Gang
  Hua, and Nenghai Yu. Efficient semantic image synthesis via class-adaptive normalization. IEEE
  TPAMI, 2021b. 3
Hao Tang and Nicu Sebe. Layout-to-image translation with double pooling generative adversarial
  networks. IEEE TIP, 30:7903–7913, 2021. 9
Hao Tang, Dan Xu, Nicu Sebe, Yanzhi Wang, Jason J Corso, and Yan Yan. Multi-channel attention
  selection gan with cascaded semantic guidance for cross-view image translation. In CVPR, 2019.
  9, 13
Hao Tang, Song Bai, and Nicu Sebe. Dual attention gans for semantic image synthesis. In ACM
  MM, 2020a. 8, 9
Hao Tang, Dan Xu, Yan Yan, Philip HS Torr, and Nicu Sebe. Local class-specific and global image-
  level generative adversarial networks for semantic-guided scene generation. In CVPR, 2020b. 8,
  9
Hao Tang, Ling Shao, Philip HS Torr, and Nicu Sebe. Local and global gans with semantic-aware
  upsampling for image generation. IEEE TPAMI, 45(1):768–784, 2022a. 9
Hao Tang, Philip HS Torr, and Nicu Sebe. Multi-channel attention selection gans for guided image-
  to-image translation. IEEE TPAMI, (01):1–16, 2022b. 9
Ting-Chun Wang, Ming-Yu Liu, Jun-Yan Zhu, Andrew Tao, Jan Kautz, and Bryan Catanzaro. High-
  resolution image synthesis and semantic manipulation with conditional gans. In CVPR, 2018. 1,
  4, 5, 8, 9
Wenguan Wang, Tianfei Zhou, Fisher Yu, Jifeng Dai, Ender Konukoglu, and Luc Van Gool. Explor-
 ing cross-image pixel contrast for semantic segmentation. In ICCV, 2021. 3, 7
Zhirong Wu, Yuanjun Xiong, Stella X Yu, and Dahua Lin. Unsupervised feature learning via non-
  parametric instance discrimination. In CVPR, 2018. 3
Tete Xiao, Yingcheng Liu, Bolei Zhou, Yuning Jiang, and Jian Sun. Unified perceptual parsing for
  scene understanding. In ECCV, 2018. 14
Enze Xie, Wenhai Wang, Zhiding Yu, Anima Anandkumar, Jose M Alvarez, and Ping Luo. Seg-
  former: Simple and efficient design for semantic segmentation with transformers. NeurIPS, 2021.
  6
Saining Xie and Zhuowen Tu. Holistically-nested edge detection. In ICCV, 2015. 17
Fisher Yu, Vladlen Koltun, and Thomas Funkhouser. Dilated residual networks. In CVPR, 2017. 14
Hang Zhang, Kristin Dana, Jianping Shi, Zhongyue Zhang, Xiaogang Wang, Ambrish Tyagi, and
  Amit Agrawal. Context encoding for semantic segmentation. In CVPR, 2018a. 6
Richard Zhang, Phillip Isola, Alexei A Efros, Eli Shechtman, and Oliver Wang. The unreasonable
  effectiveness of deep features as a perceptual metric. In CVPR, 2018b. 15
Xiangyun Zhao, Raviteja Vemulapalli, Philip Andrew Mansfield, Boqing Gong, Bradley Green, Lior
  Shapira, and Ying Wu. Contrastive learning for label efficient semantic segmentation. In ICCV,
  2021. 3
Bolei Zhou, Hang Zhao, Xavier Puig, Sanja Fidler, Adela Barriuso, and Antonio Torralba. Scene
  parsing through ade20k dataset. In CVPR, 2017. 2, 8
Peihao Zhu, Rameen Abdal, Yipeng Qin, and Peter Wonka. Sean: Image synthesis with semantic
  region-adaptive normalization. In CVPR, 2020a. 3
Zhen Zhu, Zhiliang Xu, Ansheng You, and Xiang Bai. Semantically multi-modal image synthesis.
  In CVPR, 2020b. 3

                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Appendix

A     M ODEL T RAINING
Multi-Modality Discriminator. To facilitate the training of the proposed method for high-quality
edge and image generation, a novel multi-modality discriminator is developed to simultaneously
distinguish outputs from two modality spaces, i.e., edge and image. Since the edges and RGB
images share the same structure, they can be learned using the multi-modality discriminator. In
the preliminary experiment, we also tried to use two discriminators (i.e., an edge discriminator
and an image discriminator), but no performance improvement was observed while increasing the
model complexity. Thus, we use the proposed multi-modality discriminator. The framework of the
multi-modality discriminator is shown in Figure 1, which is capable of discriminating both real/fake
images and edges. To discriminate real/fake edges, the discriminator loss considering the semantic
label S and the generated edge Ie′ (or the real edge Ie ) is as
               LCGAN (Ge , D) = ES,Ie [log D(S, Ie )] + ES,Ie′ [log(1 − D(S, Ie′ ))] ,                  (5)
which guides the model to distinguish real edges from fake generated edges. Further, to discriminate
real/fake images, the discriminator loss regarding semantic label S and the generated images I ′ , I ′′
(or the real image I) is as Eq. 6, which guides the model to discriminate real/fake images,
           LCGAN (Gi , Gs , D) = (λ + 1)ES,I [log D(S, I)] + ES,I ′ [log(1 − D(S, I ′ ))]
                                                                                                        (6)
                                     + λES,I ′′ [log(1 − D(S, I ′′ ))] ,
where λ controls the losses of the two generated images. The inclusion of I ′ and I ′′ is a cascaded
coarse-to-fine generation strategy (Tang et al., 2019), i.e., I ′ is the coarse result, while I ′′ is the
refined result. The intuition is that I ′′ will be better generated based on I ′ , so we provide I ′ to the
discriminator to ensure that I ′ is also realistic.
Optimization Objective. Equipped with the multi-modality discriminator, we elaborate on the
training objective for the proposed method as follows. Five different losses, i.e., the multi-modality
adversarial loss, the similarity loss, the contrastive learning loss, the discriminator feature matching
loss Lf , and the perceptual loss Lp are used to optimize the proposed ECGAN,
    min max L = λc (LCGAN (Ge , D)+LCGAN (Gi , Gs , D)) +λs Lsim (S, S ′ ) + Lsim (S, S ′′ )
     G   D         |               {z                 }     |              {z             }
                                 Multi-Modality Adversarial Loss                      Similarity Loss

               + λl        Li + LL1               +λf (Lf (Ie , Ie ) + Lf (I, I ) + λLf (I, I ′′ ))
                                                                 ′             ′
                           | {z }                      |                      {z                    }   (7)
                      Contrastive Learning Loss               Discriminator Feature Matching Loss

               + λp (Lp (Ie , Ie′ )+Lp (I, I ′ )+λLp (I, I )),    ′′
                    |                   {z                  }
                                       Perceptual Loss

where λc , λs , λl , λf , and λp are the parameters of the corresponding loss that contributes to the
total loss L; where Lf matches the discriminator intermediate features between the generated im-
ages/edges and the real images/edges; where Lp matches the VGG extracted features between the
generated images/edges and the real images/edges. By maximizing the discriminator loss, the gen-
erator is promoted to simultaneously generate reasonable edge maps that can capture the local-aware
structure information and generate realistic images semantically aligned with the input labels.

B     I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS
For both the image generator Gi and edge generator Ge , the kernel size and padding size of con-
volution layers are all 3×3 and 1 for preserving the feature map size. We set n=3 for generators
Gi , Gs , and Gt . The channel size of feature F is set to C=64. For the semantic preserving module
Gs , we adopt an adaptive average pooling operation. Spectral normalization (Miyato et al., 2018) is
applied to all the layers in both the generator and discriminator. We adopt the Canny edge detector
(Canny, 1986) to extract edge maps for training. During the testing phase, we do not need to use
additional data. Thus the comparison with existing methods is fair. When calculating the contrastive
learning loss, we found that the more layouts are used, the better the performance is. When more


                                                            13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


than 8 layouts are used as input, the performance improvement is not obvious, but the training of the
whole model will become slow. Therefore, considering the balance between performance and time,
we finally choose 8 layouts as input to calculate the contrastive learning loss.
Also, we follow the training procedures of GANs (Goodfellow et al., 2014) and alternatively train the
generator G and discriminator D, i.e., one gradient descent step on the discriminator and generator
alternately. We use the Adam solver (Kingma & Ba, 2015) and set β1 =0, β2 =0.999. λc , λs , λl , λf ,
and λp in Eq. 7 is set to 1, 1, 1, 10, and 10, respectively. All λ in both Eq. 6 and 7 are set to 2. We
conduct the experiments on an NVIDIA DGX1 with 8 V100 GPUs.


C    A DDITIONAL R ESULTS


               Figure 6: Edge and attention maps generated by the proposed method.

Visualization of Edge and Attention Maps. We also visualize the generated edge and attention
maps in Figure 6. We observe that the proposed method can generate reasonable edge maps accord-
ing to the input labels. Thus the generated edge maps can be used to provide more local structure
information for generating more photo-realistic images.
Visualization of Segmentation Maps. We follow GauGAN and apply pre-trained segmentation
networks (Yu et al., 2017; Xiao et al., 2018) on the generated images to produce segmentation maps.
Results compared with the baseline method are shown in Figure 7. We observe that the proposed
method consistently generates better semantic labels than the baseline on both datasets.


Figure 7: Segmentation labels generated by the baseline and our proposed method. “Ours I” and
“Ours II” stand for I ′ and I ′′ , respectively.

Multi-Modal Image and Edge Synthesis. We follow GauGAN (Park et al., 2019) and apply a style
encoder and a KL-Divergence loss with a loss weight of 0.05 to enable multi-modal image and edge
synthesis. As shown in Figure 8, our model generates different edges and images from the same
input layout, which we believe will benefit other tasks, e.g., image inpainting and super-resolution.


                                                  14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


 Figure 8: Results generated by the proposed method for multi-modal image and edge synthesis.

                     Table 4: Multi-modal synthesis evaluation on ADE20K.
                     Method                         Multi-Modal LPIPS ↑
                     GauGAN+ (Park et al., 2019)          Encoder       0.16
                     GauGAN+ (Park et al., 2019)          3D Noise      0.50
                     OASIS (Sushko et al., 2021)          3D Noise      0.35
                     ECGAN (Ours)                         Encoder       0.18
                     ECGAN (Ours)                         3D Noise      0.52

                          Table 5: mIoU of small objects on Cityscapes.
     mIoU ↑                         Pole Light Sign Rider Mbike                 Bike   Overall
     OASIS (Sushko et al., 2021)     23.4    32.6       14.9   27.3   31.2      26.6    26.0
     ECGAN (Ours)                    26.2    36.7       17.4   30.2   33.5      28.7    28.8


Moreover, we follow OASIS (Sushko et al., 2021) and use LPIPS (Zhang et al., 2018b) to evaluate
the variation in the multi-model image synthesis on the ADE20K dataset. Following in OASIS, we
generate 20 images and compute the mean pairwise scores, and then average over all label maps.
The higher the LPIPS scores, the more diverse the generated images are. We follow OASIS and
GauGAN, and employ two settings (i.e., encoder and 3D noise) to evaluate multi-modal image syn-
thesis. Table 4 shows that the proposed ECGAN achieves better results than OASIS and GauGAN
in both settings. Note that existing methods (e.g., OASIS (Sushko et al., 2021) and GauGAN (Park
et al., 2019)) can only achieve multi-modal image synthesis.
Evaluation Focused on Small Objects. We report mIoU on six small object categories of
Cityscapes (i.e., pole, light, sign, rider, mbike, and bike) in Table 5. Our ECGAN generates better
mIoU than the SOTA method (i.e., OASIS (Sushko et al., 2021)) on all these small object classes.
We also show visualization results in Figure 9, clearly confirming that the proposed method is highly
capable of preserving small objects in the output.


                      Figure 9: Visualization of small objects on Cityscapes.


D    A DDITIONAL A BLATION S TUDY

The ablation study results are shown in Table 3.


                                                   15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


       Figure 10: Visualization of the differences after the edge-guided refinement in Eq. 1.



Effect of Edge Guided Generation Strategy. When using the edge generator Ge to produce the
corresponding edge map from the input label, performance on all evaluation metrics is improved.
We also provide several visualization results of the differences (see Eq. 1) after the edge-guided
refinement in Figure 10.
Effect of Attention Guided Edge Transfer Module. We observe that the implicitly learned edge
structure information by the “E+Gi +Ge ” baseline is not enough for such a challenging task. Thus
we further adopt the transfer module Gt to transfer useful edge structure information from the edge
generation branch to the image generation branch. We observe that performance gains are obtained
on the mIoU, Acc, and FID metrics in all three datasets. This means that Gt indeed learns rich
feature representations with more convincing structure cues and details and then transfers them
from the generator Ge to the generator Gi .
Effect of Semantic Preserving Module. By adding Gs , the overall performance is further boosted
on all the three datasets. This means Gs indeed learns and highlights class-specific semantic feature
maps, leading to better generation results. In Figure 7, we show some samples of the generated
semantic maps. We observe that the semantic maps produced by the results with Gs (i.e., “Label by
Ours II” in Figure 7) are more accurate than those without using Gs (“Label by Ours I” in Figure
7). Moreover, we visualize three channels in F ′ on Cityscapes in Figure 3(right), i.e., road, car, and
vegetation. Each channel learns well the class-level deep representations.
Effect of Similarity Loss. By adding the proposed label generator Gl and similarity loss, the overall
performance is further boosted on all three metrics. This means the proposed similarity loss indeed
captures more intra-class and inter-class semantic dependencies, leading to better semantic layouts
in the generated images.
Effect of Contrastive Learning. When adopting the proposed pixel-wise contrastive learning and
class-specific pixel generation methods to produce the results, the performance is significantly im-
proved on all three datasets on all three evaluation metrics. This means that the model does indeed
learn a more discriminative class-specific feature representation, confirming the superiority of our
design.


                            Figure 11: HED vs. Canny edge extraction.


                                                  16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Effect of Edge Extraction Methods. We also conduct experiments on Cityscapes with HED (Xie
& Tu, 2015), leading to the following results: 56.7 (FID), 64.5 (mIoU), and 82.3 (Acc), which are
slightly worse than the results of Canny in Table 3. The reason is that the edges from HED are very
thick and cannot accurately represent the edge of objects. It also ignores some local details since
it focuses on extracting the contours of objects. Thus, HED is unsuitable for our setting as we aim
to generate more local details/structures. Moreover, we see that the generated HED edges contain
artifacts, as indicated in the red boxes in Figure 11, which makes the generated images tend to have
blurred edges.


                                                17
