Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


P ROVABLY E FFICIENT L IFELONG R EINFORCEMENT
L EARNING WITH L INEAR R EPRESENTATION
 Sanae Amani                                                      Lin F. Yang
 University of California, Los Angeles                            University of California, Los Angeles
 samani@ucla.edu                                                  linyang@ee.ucla.edu

 Ching-An Cheng
 Microsoft Research, Redmond
 chinganc@microsoft.com



                                               A BSTRACT

          We theoretically study lifelong reinforcement learning (RL) with linear representa-
          tion in a regret minimization setting. The goal of the agent is to learn a multi-task
          policy based on a linear representation while solving a sequence of tasks that may
          be adaptively chosen based on the agent’s past behaviors. We frame the problem as
          a linearly parameterized contextual Markov decision process (MDP), where each
          task is specified by a context and the transition dynamics is context-independent,
          and we introduce a new completeness-style assumption on the representation which
          is sufficient to ensure the optimal multi-task policy is realizable under the linear
          representation. Under this assumption, we propose an algorithm, called UCB Life-
          long Value Distillation (UCBlvd), that provably achieves sublinear regret for any
          sequence of tasks while using only sublinear planning calls. Specifically,
                                                                           p          for K task
          episodes of horizon H, our algorithm has a regret bound Õ( (d3 + d0 d)H 4 K)
          based on O(dH log(K)) number of planning calls, where d and d0 are the feature
          dimensions of the dynamics and rewards, respectively. This theoretical guarantee
          implies that our algorithm can enable a lifelong learning agent to learn to internalize
          experiences into a multi-task policy and rapidly solve new tasks.


1    I NTRODUCTION
Recently, there has been a surging interest in designing lifelong learning agents that can continuously
learn to solve multiple sequential decision making problems in their lifetimes (Thrun & Mitchell,
1995; Khetarpal et al., 2020; Silver et al., 2013; Xie & Finn, 2021). This scenario is in particular
motivated by building multi-purpose embodied intelligence, such as robots working in a weakly
structured environment (Roy et al., 2021). Typically, curating all tasks beforehand for such problems
is nearly infeasible, and the problems the agent is tasked with may be adaptively selected based on the
agent’s past behaviors. Consider a household robot as an example. Since each household is unique, it
is difficult to anticipate upfront all scenarios the robot would encounter. Moreover, the tasks the robot
faces are not independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.). Instead, what the robot has done before
can affect the next task and its starting state; e.g., if the robot fails to bring a glass of water and breaks
it, then the user is likely to command the robot to clean up the mess. Thus, it is critical that the agent
continuously improves and generalizes learned abilities to different tasks, regardless of their order.
In this work, we theoretically study lifelong reinforcement learning (RL) in a regret minimization
setting (Thrun & Mitchell, 1995; Ammar et al., 2015), where the agent needs to solve a sequence
of tasks using rewards in an unknown environment while balancing exploration and exploitation.
Motivated by the embodied intelligence scenario, we suppose that tasks differ in rewards, but share
the same state and action spaces and transition dynamics (Xie & Finn, 2021).To be realistic, we make
no assumptions on how the tasks and initial states are selected1 ; generally we allow them to be chosen
from a continuous set by an adversary based on the agent’s past behaviors. Once a task is specified
    1
      We adopt a stricter definition of lifelong RL here to distinguish it from multi-task RL, while there are
existing works on lifelong RL (e.g. Brunskill & Li (2014); Lecarpentier et al. (2021)) assuming i.i.d. tasks.


                                                      1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


and revealed, the agent has one chance (i.e., executing one rollout from its current state) to complete
the task and then it moves to the next task.
The agent’s goal is to perform near optimally for the tasks it faces, despite the online nature of the
problem. This means that the accumulated regret of the learner compared with the best policy for
each task should be sublinear in its lifetime. We assume that there is no memory constraint; this
is usually the case for robotics applications where real-world interactions are the main bottleneck
(Xie & Finn, 2021). Nonetheless, we require that the agent eventually learns to make decisions
without frequent deliberate planning, because planning is time consuming and creates undesirable
wait time for user-interactive scenarios. In other words, the agent needs to learn a multi-task policy,
generalizing from not only past samples but also past computation, to solve new tasks.
Formally, we consider an episodic setup based on the framework of contextual Markov decision
process (CMDP) (Abbasi-Yadkori & Neu, 2014; Hallak et al., 2015). It repeats the following steps:
1) At the beginning of an episode, the agent is set to an initial state and receives a context specifying
the task reward, both of which can be arbitrarily chosen. 2) When needed, the agent uses its past
experiences to plan for the current task. 3) The agent runs a policy in the environment for a fixed
horizon in an attempt to solve the assigned task and gains experience from its policy execution. The
agent’s performance is measured as the regret with respect to the optimal policy of the corresponding
task. We require that, for any task sequence, both the agent’s overall regret and number of planning
calls to be sublinear in the number of episodes.
While lifelong RL is not new, the realistic need of simultaneously achieving 1) sublinear regret and
2) sublinear number of planning calls for 3) a potentially adversarial sequence of tasks and initial
states makes the setup considered here particularly challenging. To our knowledge, existing works
only address a strict subset of these requirements; especially, the computation aspect is often ignored.
Most provable works in lifelong RL make the assumption that the tasks are finitely many (Ammar
et al., 2015; Zhan et al., 2017; Brunskill & Li, 2015), or are i.i.d. (Ammar et al., 2014; Brunskill &
Li, 2014; Abel et al., 2018a;b; Lecarpentier et al., 2021), while others considering similar setups to
ours do not provide regret guarantees (Isele et al., 2016; Xie & Finn, 2021). On the technical side, the
closest lines of work are Modi & Tewari (2020); Abbasi-Yadkori & Neu (2014); Hallak et al. (2015);
Modi et al. (2018); Kakade et al. (2020) for contextual MDP and Wu et al. (2021); Abels et al. (2019)
for the dynamic setting of multi-objective RL, which study the sample complexity for arbitrary task
sequences; however, they either assume the problem is tabular or require a model-based planning
oracle with unknown complexity. Importantly, none of the existing works properly addresses the need
of sublinear planning calls, which creates a large gap between the abstract setup and practice need.
In this paper, we aim to establish a foundation for designing agents meeting these three practically
important requirements, a problem which has been overlooked in the literature. As the first step, here
we study lifelong RL with linear representation. We suppose that the contextual MDP is linearly
parameterized (Yang & Wang, 2019; Jin et al., 2020) and the agent needs to learn a multi-task
policy based on this linear representation. To make this possible, we introduce a new completeness-
style assumption on the representation which is sufficient to ensure the optimal multi-task policy is
realizable under the linear representation. Under these assumptions, we propose the first provably
efficient lifelong RL algorithm, Upper Confidence Bound Lifelong Value Distillation (UCBlvd,
                                            p all three desired qualities. Specifically, for K episodes
pronounced as “UC Boulevard”), that possesses
of horizon H, we prove a regret bound Õ( (d3 + d0 d)H 4 K) using Õ(dH log(K)) planning calls,
where d and d0 are the feature dimensions of the dynamics and rewards, respectively.
From a high-level viewpoint, UCBlvd uses a linear structure to identify what to transfer and operates
by interleaving 1) independent planning for a set of representative tasks and 2) distilling the planned
results into a multi-task value-based policy. UCBlvd also constantly monitors whether the new
experiences it gained are sufficiently significant, based on a doubling schedule, to avoid unnecessary
planning. On the technical side, UCBlvd’s design is inspired by single-task LSVI-UCB (Jin et al.,
2020), however, we introduce a novel distillation step based on QCQP, along with a new completeness
assumption, to enable computation sharing across tasks; we also extend the low-switching cost
technique (Abbasi-Yadkori et al., 2011; Gao et al., 2021; Wang et al., 2021) for single-task RL to the
lifelong setup to achieve sublinear number of planning calls.
Notation. Throughout the paper, we use lower-case letters for scalars, lower-case bold letters for
vectors, and upper-case bold letters for matrices. The Euclidean-norm of x is denoted bykxk2 . We
denote the transpose of a vector x by x> . For any vectors x and y, we use hx, yi to denote their


                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


inner product. We denote the Kronecker product by A ⊗ B. Let A ∈ Rd×d be a positive      √     definite
            d                                                                               >
and ν ∈ R . The weighted 2-norm of ν with respect to A is defined bykνkA := ν Aν. For a
positive integer n, [n] denotes the {1, 2, . . . , n}. For a real number α, we denote {α}+ = max{α, 0}.
Finally, we use the notation Õ for big-O notation that ignores logarithmic factors.
2       P RELIMINARIES
We formulate lifelong RL as a regret minimization problem in contextual MDP (Abbasi-Yadkori &
Neu, 2014; Hallak et al., 2015) with adversarial context and initial state sequences. We suppose that
a context determines the task reward but does not affect the dynamics. Such a context dependency is
common for the lifelong learning scenario where an embodied agent consecutively solves multiple
tasks. Below we give the formal problem definition.
Finite-horizon contextual MDP. We consider a finite-horizon contextual MDP denoted by M =
(S, A, W, H, P, r), where S is the state space, A is the action space, W is the task context space, H is
the horizon (length of each episode), P = {Ph }H  h=1 are the transition probabilities, and r = {rh }h=1
                                                                                                        H

are the reward functions. We allow S and W to be continuous or infinitely large, while we assume
A is finite such that maxa∈A can be performed easily. For h ∈ [H], rh (s, a, w) denotes the reward
function whose range is assumed to be in [0, 1], and Ph (s0 |s, a) denotes the probability of transitioning
to state s0 upon playing action a at state s. In short, a contextual MDP can be viewed as an MDP
with state space S × W and action space A where the context part of the state remains constant in an
episode.2 To simplify the notation, for any function f , we write Ph [f ](s, a) := Es0 ∼Ph (.|s,a) [f (s0 )].
Policy and value functions. In a finite-horizon contextual MDP, a policy π = {πh }Hh=1 is a sequence
where πh : S ×W → A determines the agent’s action at time-step h. Given    π, we define its state value
               π
                               PH
function as Vh (s, w) := E[ h0 =h rh0 sh0 , πh0 (sh0 , w), w)|sh = s and its action-value function
as Qπh (s, a, w) := rh (s, a, w) + Ph [Vh+1
                                        π
                                            (., w)](s, a), where QπH+1 = 0. We denote the optimal
                                                           ∗             ∗
policy as πh (s, w) := supπ Vh (s, w), and let Vh∗ := Vhπ and Q∗h := Qπh denote the optimal value
             ∗                  π

functions. Lastly, we recall the Bellman equation of the optimal policy:
            Q∗h (s, a, w) = rh (s, a, w) + Ph [Vh+1
                                                ∗
                                                    (., w)](s, a),     Vh∗ (s, w) = max Q∗h (s, a, w).      (1)
                                                                                     a∈A

Interaction protocol of lifelong RL. The agent interacts with a contextual MDP M in episodes.
For presentation simplicity, we assume that the reward functions r are known, while the transition
probabilities P are unknown and must be learned online; we will discuss how reward learning can be
naturally incorporated in Section 4.3. At the beginning of episode k, the agent receives a task context
wk ∈ W and is set to an initial state sk1 , both of which can be adversarially chosen. The agent can
use past experiences to plan for the current task, if needed. Then the agent executes its policy π k : at
each time-step h ∈ [H], it observes the state skh , plays an action akh = πhk (skh , wk ), observes a reward
rhk := rh (skh , akh , wk ), and goes to the next state skh+1 according to Ph (.|skh , akh ). Let K be the total
number of episodes. The agent’s goal is to achieve sublinear regret, where the regret is defined as
                                           PK                       k
                                  RK := k=1 V1∗ (sk1 , wk ) − V1π (sk1 , wk ).                               (2)
As the comparator policy above (namely π ∗ that defines V1∗ ) also knows the task context, achieving
sublinear regret implies that the agent would attain near task-specific optimal performance on average.
Linear Model Representation. We focus on MDPs with linear transition kernels and reward
functions (Jin et al., 2020; Yang & Wang, 2019) that are encapsulated in the following assumption.
Assumption 1 (Linear MDPs). M = (S, A, H, P, r, W) is a linear MDP with feature maps φ :
                                                   0
S × A → Rd and ψ : S × A × W → Rd . That is, for any h ∈ [H], there exist a vector
η h and d measures µh := [µh (1) , . . . , µh (d) ]> over S such that Ph (.|s, a) = µh (.), φ(s, a)
and rh (s, a, w) = η h , ψ(s, a, w) , for all (s, a, w) ∈ S × A × W. Without loss of generality,
                                                        √                  √
 φ(s, a) 2 ≤ 1, ψ(s, a, w) 2 ≤ 1, µh (s) 2 ≤ d, and kη h k2 ≤ d0 for all (s, a, w, h) ∈
S × A × W × [H].
In real-world problems, we can use the context to model the task specification of a problem. For
example, if we want to design household robots to assist humans with a series of tasks like cooking,
cleaning, washing dishes, lawn mowing, vacuuming, we can treat the the context as a natural language
    2
        In general, a context-dependent dynamics would take the form Ph (s0 |s, a, w).


                                                          3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


instruction that the human user would give to the robot, and we can view the representations ψ and φ
as the embedding of a deep neural network model that has been pre-trained.
Example 1 (Weighted Rewards). An interesting and common special case is ψ(s, a, w) = φ(s, a) ⊗
ρ(w), for some mapping ρ : W → Rm . In this case, it holds that d0 = md and rh (s, a, w) =
 ρ(w), rh (s, a) , where rh (s, a) = Ah φ(s, a) ∈ Rm , for some Ah ∈ Rm×d , is the vector reward
functions at time-step h. We can view rh (s, a, w) as a weighted reward with weights ρ(w) that
depend on task w. This setting is closely related to Multi-Objective RL studied for tabular case in Wu
et al. (2021), which studies the case where ρ(w) = w ∈ Rm along with tabular S and A.

3     A WARM - UP ALGORITHM FOR LIFELONG RL
We first present a warm-up algorithm based on linear representation, termed Lifelong Least-Squares
Value Iteration (Lifelong-LSVI), in Algorithm 1, which is a straightforward extension of the single-
task LSVI-UCB algorithm proposed by Jin et al. (2020) to the lifelong learning setting. The motivation
of this warm-up algorithm is to give intuitions on how the problem structure in Assumption 1 can be
used to achieve small regret and discuss the computational difficulty in lifelong learning.
We will show that Lifelong-LSVI has a sublinear regret bound, which matches the minimax optimal
rate in the special case studied by Wu et al. (2021) in terms of number of objectives, m (see Example
1). However, we will also show that Lifelong-LSVI is not computationally efficient, in the sense
that the number of planning calls it requires grows linearly with the number of episodes, which
would mean the overall computational complexity grows quadratically. This high computation cost is
because the agent never learns to internalize the task solving skills but requires going though all past
experiences for planning every time a new task arrives. Importantly, we will discuss why it cannot be
made computationally efficient in an easy manner without further assumptions on the representation.
This drawback motivates our new completeness assumption and our main algorithm, UCBlvd, which
is provably efficient in terms of both regret and number of planning calls, in Section 4.
We remark that Lifelong-LSVI is only a warm-up algorithm that guides the reader to understand the
mechanisms used for addressing the problem, motivates the need for UCBlvd, and shows what regret
bound is possible when computational complexity is not a concern (though being impractical).

3.1   A LGORITHMIC NOTATIONS
To begin, we introduce the template and the notations that will be used commonly in presenting the
warm-up algorithm, Lifelong-LSVI, and later our main algorithm, UCBlvd. For each algorithm, first
we will define an algorithm-specific action-value function Qkh : S × A × W → R, which determines
the agent’s policy at time-step h in episode k; then we present the full algorithm and its analysis
using the quantities below, which are defined with respect to each algorithm’s definition of Qkh .
Given {Qkh }h∈[H] , we define state value functions and their backups as
                                                                   Z
        Vhk (s, w) := min max Qkh (s, a, w), H , θ kh (w) :=             k
                                                                      Vh+1 (s0 , w)dµh (s0 ),         (3)
                               a∈A                                     S
Thanks to the linear MDP structure in Assumption 1, it holds that
                             h            i        D                 E
                                k
                          Ph Vh+1   (., w) (s, a) = θ kh (w), φ(s, a) .                               (4)
Let λ > 0 be a constant. We define the λ-regularized least squares estimator of θ kh (w) as
                  k
                             −1 k−1                                               k−1
                                                                                              >
                                  X                                               X
               θ̃ h (w) := Λkh         φτh Vh+1
                                            k
                                                (sτh+1 , w), where Λkh := λId +        φτh φτh ,       (5)
                                  τ =1                                            τ =1
       k                                    Pk−1                                                 2
and θ̃ h (w) is the solution to minθ∈Rd τ =1 (hθ, φ(sτh , aτh )i − Vh+1 k
                                                                           (sτh+1 , w))2 + λkθk2 , φτh :=
φ(sτh , aτh ), and Id ∈ Rd×d is the identity matrix.

3.2   D ETAILS OF L IFELONG -LSVI AND ITS THEORETICAL GUARANTEES
We define the upper confidence bound (UCB) style action-value function of Lifelong-LSVI as follows:

                k                               k
              Qh (s, a, w) := rh (s, a, w) + θ̃ h (w), φ(s, a) + β φ(s, a) (Λk )−1 ,            (6)
                                                                                    h


                                                    4
    Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


    Algorithm 1: Lifelong-LSVI
1 Set: QkH+1 (., ., .) = 0, ∀k ∈ [K]
2 for episodes k = 1, . . . , K do
3     Observe the initial state sk1 and the task context wk .
4     for time-steps h = H, . . . , 1 do
                        k
5           Compute θ̃ h (wk ) as in (5) using Qkh+1 defined in (6).
6       for time-steps h = 1, . . . , H do
7           Compute Qkh (skh , a, wk ) for all a ∈ A as in (6).
8           Play akh = arg maxa∈A Qkh (skh , a, wk ) and observe skh+1 and rhk .



                              k
    where QkH+1 = 0 and θ̃ h (w) and Λkh are defined in (5). Here, β is an exploration factor that will be
    appropriately chosen in Theorem 1. At episode k, given wk , Lifelong-LSVI first performs planning
                                                      k
    backward in time based on past data to compute θ̃ h (wk ) in (5) using Qkh+1 defined in (6) (Lines 4-
                                      k
    5). Then, in execution, it uses θ̃ h (wk ) to compute Qkh (skh , a, wk ) for the current state and all a ∈ A
    (Line 7) and executes the action with the highest value (Line 8).
    We show that Lifelong-LSVI achieves sublinear regret for our lifelong RL setup. The complete proof
    is reported in Appx. A, which follows the ideas of LSVI-UCB (Jin et al., 2020).
    Theorem 1. Let T = KH. Under Assumption 1, there exists       an absolute constant c > 0 such that
                                                                  √  p
    for any fixed δ ∈ (0, 0.5), if we set λ = 1 and β = cH d + d0          log(dd0 T /δ) in Algorithm 1,
                                                                  p
    then with probability at least 1 − 2δ, it holds that RK ≤ Õ    (d3 + dd0 )H 3 T .

    Before introducing our main algorithm in Section 4, we make a few remarks on the regret and number
    of planning calls of Lifelong-LSVI. First, Theorem 1 implies that for the special
                                                                                 √ case studied by Wu
    et al. (2021) (Example 1), the regret bound of Lifelong-LSVI becomes Õ( md3 H 3 T ). This rate
    is optimal in terms of its dependency on m, as shown in Wu et al. (2021). Furthermore, this rate
    matches the LSVI-UCB’s regret dependencies on d and H for the single-task setting (Jin et al., 2020).
                                                                                       k
    While Lifelong-LSVI has a decent regret guarantee, it requires computing θ̃ h (wk ) for all h ∈ [H],
    whenever a distinct new task wk arrives. Since the number of unique tasks may be as large as K, the
    total number of planning calls required in Lifelong-LSVI is K in the worst case.
    Unfortunately, the number of planning calls of Lifelong-LSVI cannot be easily improved, because
    under Assumption 1 alone, the optimal Q-function Q∗h (s, a, w) of the CMDP can be nonlinear in the
    representation ψ. As a result, for any algorithm that represents its policy linearly based on both ψ
    and φ, in general it is necessary to recompute the coefficients for every new w to be optimal. For
                                                                          k
    Lifelong-LSVI specifically, this nonlinear dependency shows up in θ̃ h (w) of Qkh (s, a, w) in (6).
    In the next section, we discuss how placing a completeness-style assumption, which ensures
    Q∗h (s, a, w) can be linearly parameterized by ψ, would circumvent the issue of non-linear de-
    pendency of the action-value functions on w, and consequently would enable computation sharing to
    decrease the number of planning calls to O(dH log(K)).

    4    UCB L IFELONG VALUE D ISTILLATION (UCB LVD )
    In this section, we present our main algorithm, UCB Lifelong Value Distillation (UCBlvd), in
    Algorithm 2. Under new completeness-style assumption that we will introduce in Section 4.1,
    we show that UCBlvd shares the same regret bound as Lifelong-LSVI but significantly reduces
    the number of planning calls to be logarithmic in K. In contrast to Lifelong-LSVI which learns
    individual action-value function for each wk , UCBlvd learns a single action-value function for all
    w ∈ W based on ψ(s, a, w) to enable computation sharing across tasks, which is made possible by
    the extra completeness-style assumption. In general, in order to directly extend Lifelong-LSVI to only
                                 0
    use feature ψ(s, a, w) ∈ Rd with d0 ≥ d, we need a context-dependent dynamics structure, which
    would eventually increase the regret. UCBlvd maintains the same order of regret as Lifelong-LSVI


                                                         5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


by separating the planning into a novel two-step process: 1) independent planning with φ for a set
of representative task contexts and 2) distilling the planned results into a multi-task value function
parameterized by ψ. In addition, UCBlvd runs a doubling schedule to decide whether replanning is
necessary, which makes the total number of planning calls logarithmic in K.
4.1 E NABLING COMPUTATION SHARING
As lifelong RL with Assumption 1 alone would require replanning in every episode in general (see
Section 3), here we introduce new structural assumptions on ψ to enable computation sharing across
tasks. First, we define the following class of functions
      (                                                                                                           )
                                                                     o+
                                                                                            d0
                                    n
F = f : f (s, w) = min max hν, ψ(s, a, w)i + β φ(s, a) Λ−1                ,H       ,ν ∈ R        , Λ ∈ Sd++ , β ≥ 0    ,
                              a∈A

 where Sd++ denotes the set of symmetric positive definite matrices. We now state our main
completeness-style assumption.
                                                                                       0
Assumption 2 (Completeness). For any f ∈ F and h ∈ [H], there exists a vector ξ fh ∈ Rd with
          √
 ξ fh ≤ H d0 such that Ph f (., w) (s, a) = hξ fh , ψ(s, a, w)i.


This assumption says that the backups of functions in F are captured by the feature ψ with bounded
parameters. The definition of F closely models the structure of action-value function used by
                                 k
Lifelong-LSVI in (6), except hθ̃ h (w), φ(s, a)i there is replaced by functions linear in ψ(s, a, w). We
will see that the action-value function used by UCBlvd defined in the next section is contained in
F. In addition, by setting β = 0 in F and (1), we see Q∗h (s, a, w) is linearly realizable by ψ under
Assumption 2. We note that a similar notion of this assumption is mentioned in previous work for
single-task settings under the name of “optimistic closure” (Wang et al., 2020).
Inspired by Example 1, we now introduce the next assumption on the structure of ψ.
Assumption 3 (Mappings). We assume ψ(s, a, w) = φ(s, a) ⊗ ρ(w), for some mapping ρ : W →
Rm , i.e., d0 = md. We assume that there is a known set {w(1) , w(2) , . . . , w(n) } of n ≤ m task
contexts such that ρ(w) ∈ Span({ρ(w(j) )}j∈[n] ) for all w ∈ W. That is, for any w ∈ W, there exist
coefficients {cj (w)}j∈[n] such that ρ(w) = j∈[n] cj (w)ρ(w(j) ). We assume j∈[n] cj (w) ≤ L
                                           P                                    P

for all w ∈ W and some L < ∞.
Note that, for finite-dimensional representations, such set {ρ(w(j) )}j∈[n] always exists. We assume
that this set {w(1) , w(2) , . . . , w(n) } is known to the algorithm

4.2   D ETAILS OF UCB LVD
We define the UCB style action-value function of UCBlvd as follows:
                         (                                                       )+
            k                               k
          Qh (s, a, w) := rh (s, a, w) + ξ̂ h , ψ(s, a, w) + 2Lβ φ(s, a) (Λk )−1    .                            (7)
                                                                                            h

                  k
The parameter ξ̂ h is computed by solving the convex quadratically constrained quadratic program
                                                                                    (1)    (2)       (n)
(QCQP) in (8), which is defined on a set of       representative task contexts {w , w , . . . , w } in
Assumption 3 and state-action pairs D := (s, a) : φ(s, a) are d linearly independent vectors. .
         k       k(j)                        X X                                                   2
      ξ̂ h , {θ̂ h }j∈[n] = arg min                       hθ (j) , φ(s, a)i − hξ, ψ(s, a, w(j) )i        (8)
                           ξ,{θ (j) }
                                      j∈[n] j∈[n] (s,a)∈D

                                             k                                                 √
                           s.t. θ (j) − θ̃ h (w(j) )      ≤ β, ∀j ∈ [n] and kξk2 ≤ H md,
                                                     Λk
                                                      h
          k
where θ̃ h (w) and Λkh are defined in (5). In Appx. B.3, we will show that the action-value function in
(7) is an optimistic estimate of the optimal action-value function.
UCBlvd also uses the linear dependency of Qkh on ψ to reduce calls of the planning step in (8). The
agent triggers replanning only when it has gathered enough new information compared to the last
update at episode k̃. This is measured by tracking the variations in Gram matrices {Λkh }h∈[H] (Line
4 for Algorithm 2). Finally, when executing the policy at episode k, the agent chooses the action
according to Qk̃h in Line 10.


                                                     6
     Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


     Algorithm 2: UCBlvd (UCB Lifelong Value Distillation)
1 Set: QkH+1 (., ., .) = 0, ∀k ∈ [K], k̃ = 1
2 for episodes k = 1, . . . , K do
3     Observe the initial state sk1 and the task context wk .
4          if ∃h ∈ [H] such that log det Λkh − log det Λk̃h > 1 then
 5             k̃ = k
 6             for time-steps h = H, . . . , 1 do
                               k̃
 7                 Compute ξ̂ h as in (8).
8          for time-steps h = 1, . . . , H do
 9             Compute Qk̃h (skh , a, wk ) for all a ∈ A as in (7).
10             Play akh = arg maxa∈A Qk̃h (skh , a, wk ) and observe skh+1 and rhk .



     4.3     T HEORETICAL ANALYSIS OF UCB LVD
     We present our main theoretical result which shows UCBlvd achieves sublinear regret in lifelong RL
     using sublinear number of planning calls, for any sequence of tasks. The proof is given in Appx. B.
     Theorem 2. Let T = KH. Under Assumptions 1, 2, and 3, the number of planning calls in Algorithm
                                K
     2 is at most dH log(1 + dλ    ), and there exists an absolute constant c > 0 such that for any fixed
                                                         √     p
     δ ∈ (0, 0.5), if we set λ = 1 and β = cH(d +   md) log(mdT /δ)  in Algorithm 2, then with
                                                            p
     probability at least 1 − 2δ, it holds that RK ≤ Õ L (d3 + md2 )H 3 T .

     Theorem 2 shows that UCBlvd has the same regret bound as Lifelong-LSVI in Theorem 1, but
     reduces the number of planning calls from K to dH log(1 + K/dλ). As we discussed before, this is
     made possible by the unique QCQP-based distillation step of UCBlvd in (8). If we were to simply
                                                               k                   k
     perform least-squares regression to fit hψ(s, a, w), ξ̂ h i to {hφ(s, a), θ̃ h (w(j) )}j∈[n] for distillation,
                                                                              k
     we cannot guarantee the required optimism, because hφ(s, a), θ̃ h (w)i computed based on finite
     samples can be an irregular function that cannot be modelled by ψ(s, a, w).
     Remark 1. If the rewards are unknown, we can adopt a slightly different completeness assumption
     with an extra bonus in terms of ψ, and then combine tools from linear bandits (Abbasi-Yadkori et al.,
     2011) and our proof of Theorem 2. Because reward learning affects the radius of the confidence
     intervals
        √      for θ kh (w), the number of planning calls and regret would increase by factors of O(m) and
               3
     O( m) , respectively, compared to those in Theorem 2. See Appx. C for details.
     Remark 2. It is possible to eliminate the assumption that ψ(s, a, w) = φ(s, a) ⊗ ρ(w). In this case,
     our analysis would instead require a set {w(1) , w(2) , . . . , w(n) } of n tasks such that ψ(s, a, w) ∈
     Span({ψ(s, a, w(j) )}j∈[n] ) for all (s, a, w) ∈ S × A × W. In Appx. D, we provide details of this
     relaxation, and show that this version still enjoys the same planning calls and regret as in Theorem 2.
     Remark 3. We can eliminate Assumptions 1 and 3 and instead design a computation-sharing
     version of Lifelong-LSVI under a sightly different completeness assumption with a class F, whose
     exploration bonus is β ψ(s, a, w) Λ̃−1 . This assumption naturally includes settings with linear MDP
     in which dynamics also change with task context, i.e., for all h ∈ [H], it holds that Ph (.|s, a, w) =
                                                         (1)        (d0 )
     hµh (.), ψ(s, a, w)i for d0 unknown measures [µh , . . . , µh ]> . Under this assumption, a slightly
     modified version of Lifelong-LSVI would use Qkh (s, a, w) = {rh (s, a, w) + hν̃ kh , ψ(s, a, w)i +
                                                    k     Pk−1
     β ψ(s, a, w) (Λ̃k )−1 }+ , where ν̃ kh = (Λ̃h )−1 τ =1 ψ τh . min{maxa∈A Qkh+1 (sτh+1 , a, wτ ), H},
                         h
       k            Pk−1           >
     Λ̃h = λId0 + τ =1 ψ τh ψ τh , ψ τh = ψ(sτh , aτh , wτ ), and β = Õ(d0 ). However, in Appx. E, we show
     how these new algorithm and assumption result in Õ(mdH) number of planning calls and a regret
         3
           While for both settings in this remark and Remark√3, the action-value functions contain exploration bonus
     in terms of ψ,√the regret here is better by a factor of m and this is because the multiplicative factor β here
     saves a factor m compared to that in Remark 3.


                                                           7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023



                √
scaling with Õ( m3 d3 ) for settings with ψ(s, a, w) = φ(s, a) ⊗ ρ(w). These are worse than the
number of planning calls and regret in Theorem 2 of UCBlvd by a factor of O(m).
Remark 4. A natural follow-up relaxation of Assumption 2 is when    √the equalityp
                                                                                 holds up to an error of

ζ. In Appx. F, we show that this relaxation results in a regret Õ    mdT ζ + λ(d3 + md2 )H 3 T
and thepsame number of planning calls as that in Theorem 2. When ζ is sufficiently small, i.e.,
ζ = O( d2 H 3 /mT ), UCBlvd will still enjoy a regret of the same order as that in Theorem 2.

4.4            P ROOF SKETCH OF T HEOREM 2
Because the proof of planning calls’ upper bound follows standard arguments in low switching cost
analysis of Abbasi-Yadkori et al. (2011), in this section, we focus on the proof sketch for the regret
bound. We start by introducing the high probability event E1 , which is the foundation of our analysis:
                            (                                                   )
                                                               k
                                   E1 (w) :=      θ kh (w) − θ̃ h (w)                    ≤ β, ∀(h, k) ∈ [H] × [K] .                        (9)
                                                                        Λk
                                                                         h

The following lemma highlights the importance of the carefully designed planning step in (8), which
                              V∗
ensures good estimators for ξ hh+1 without the need of bonus term ψ(s, a, w)   k  −1 . This step
                                                                                                                              Λ̃h
saves a factor O(m) in planning calls and regret.
Lemma 1. Let W  f = {wτ : τ ∈ [K]} ∪ {w(j) : j ∈ [n]}. Under the setting of Theorem 2 and
conditioned on events {E1 (w)} f defined in (9), for all (s, a, w, h, k) ∈ S × A × W
                                  w∈W
                                                                                   f × [H] × [K],
                  k                      k
it holds that hξ̂ h , ψ(s, a, w)i − Ph [Vh+1 (., w)](s, a)                                       ≤ 2Lβ φ(s, a) (Λk )−1 .
                                                                                                                      h


As the final step in the regret analysis, we use Lemma 1 to prove the optimistic nature of UCBlvd, i.e.,
Qkh (s, a, wk ) ≥ Q∗h (s, a, wk ) for all (s, a, h, k) ∈ S × A × [H] × [K]. Then following the standard
analysis of single-task LSVI-UCB we derive the regret bound in Theorem 2.
4.5 E XPERIMENTS
We implemented our main algorithm UCBlvd on synthetic environments and compared its perfor-
mance with the warm-up algorithm Lifelong-LSVI, which is viewed as an idealized baseline ignoring
the computational complexity. In all the experiments, the same setting, task sequences and feature
mappings were used for both UCBlvd and Lifelong-LSVI. Figure 1a depicts per-episode rewards for
the main setup considered throughout the paper, and Figure 1b shows those for the setup in Remark 2.
The plots verify that Lifelong-LSVI and UCBlvd statistically perform almost the same while UCBlvd
uses much smaller numbers of planning calls (1000 vs ∼ 20). We remark that Lifelong-LSVI has
an overall computation complexity of O(K 2 ), which makes it not practical for the lifelong learning
setting, as its planning complexity increases linearly with the number of samples. The details on the
parameters of simulations are deferred to Appx. H.
      Per-episode reward


                                                                            Per-episode reward


                                     Episode, k                                                              Episode, k
                                                               0
      (a) Setting of Theorem 2, d = 5, m = 5, d = 25                                             (b) Setting of Remark 2, d = 5, d0 = 10

                           Figure 1: UCBlvd vs Lifelong-LSVI. The experimental results include 50 seeds.



                                                                        8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


5    R ELATED WORK
We consider the regret minimization setup of lifelong RL under the contextual MDP framework,
where the agent receives tasks specified by contexts in sequence and needs to achieve a sublinear
regret for any task sequence. Below, we contrast our work with related work in the literature.
Lifelong RL. Generally lifelong RL studies how to learn to solve a streaming sequence of tasks
using rewards. While it was originally motivated by the need of endless learning of robots (Thrun &
Mitchell, 1995), historically many works on lifelong RL (Ammar et al., 2014; Brunskill & Li, 2014;
Abel et al., 2018a;b; Lecarpentier et al., 2021) assume that the tasks are i.i.d. (similar to multi-task
RL; see below). There are works for adversarial sequences, but most of them assume finite number
of tasks (Brunskill & Li, 2015; Ammar et al., 2015; Zhan et al., 2017) or are purely empirical (Xie &
Finn, 2021). The work by Isele et al. (2016) uses contexts to enable zero-shot learning like here, but
it (as well as most works above) does not provide formal regret guarantees.4 Brunskill & Li (2015)
and Xie & Finn (2021) assume the task identity is latent, which requires additional exploration; in
this sense, their problem is harder than the setup here where the task context is revealed. Extending
the setup here to consider latent context is an important future direction.
Contextual MDP and multi-objective RL. Our setup is closely related to the exploration problem
studied in the contextual MDP literature, though contextual MDP is originally not motivated from
the lifelong learning perspective. A similar mathematical problem appears in the dynamic setup of
multi-objective RL (Wu et al., 2021; Abels et al., 2019), which can be viewed as a special case of
contextual MDP where the context linearly determines the reward function but not the dynamics.
Most contextual MDP works allow adversarial contexts and initial states, but a majority of them
focuses on the tabular setup (Abbasi-Yadkori & Neu, 2014; Hallak et al., 2015; Modi et al., 2018;
Modi & Tewari, 2020; Levy & Mansour, 2022; Wu et al., 2021), whereas our setup allows continuous
states. Kakade et al. (2020) and Du et al. (2019) allow continuous state and action spaces, but the
former assumes a planning oracle with unclear computational complexity and the latter focuses on
only LQG problems. While generally contextual MDP allows both the reward and the dynamics to
vary with contexts, we focus on the effects of context-independent dynamics similar to Kakade et al.
(2020); Wu et al. (2021). In particular, the recent work of Wu et al. (2021) is the closest to ours, but
they study the sample complexity in the tabular setup with linearly
                                                               p parameterized rewards. In view of
Example 1, their proposed algorithm has a regret bound Õ( min{m,|S|}H|S||A| K). However,
they need linear number of planning calls. On the contrary, our algorithm, UCBlvd, allows continuous
states, nonlinear context dependency, and has both sublinear regret and number of planning calls.
Multi-task RL. Another closely related line of work is multi-task RL. Compared to our setting,
multi-task RL assumes that there are beforehand known finite tasks and/or they are i.i.d. samples from
a fixed distribution. For example, in Yang et al. (2020); Hessel et al. (2019); Brunskill & Li (2013);
Fifty et al. (2021); Zhang & Wang (2021); Sodhani et al. (2021), tasks are assumed to be chosen from
a known finite set, and in Yang et al. (2020); Wilson et al. (2007); Brunskill & Li (2013); Sun et al.
(2021), tasks are sampled from a fixed distribution. By contrast, our setting provides guarantees on
regret and number of planning calls for adversarial task sequences.

6    D ISCUSSION
In this paper, we frame lifelong RL as contextual MDPs and identify a new completeness-style
assumption to enable provably efficient lifelong RL with linear representation. We propose UCBlvd,
an algorithm that simultaneously satisfies the practical need of achieving 1) sublinear regret and
2) sublinear number of planning calls for 3) any sequence of tasks and initial p states. Specifically,
for K task episodes of horizon H, we prove that UCBlvd has a regret bound Õ( (d3 + d0 d)H 4 K)
based on Õ(dH log(K)) number of planning calls, where d and d0 are the feature dimensions of the
dynamics and rewards, respectively. We believe that our results would inspire new research directions
in the literature of CMDP and multi-objective RL, as existing work to our knowledge does not cover
the computation-sharing aspect of lifelong RL. That said, our work’s limitations motivate further
investigations in the following directions: 1) extension to more general class of MDPs, potentially
using general function approximation/representation tools, 2) establishing an information-theoretic
lower bound on the number of planning calls/computation complexity.
   4
     Ammar et al. (2015) give regret bounds but only for linearized value difference; Brunskill & Li (2015) show
regret bounds only for finite number of tasks.


                                                       9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
This work is partially supported by DARPA grant HR00112190130 and NSF grant 2221871. Sanae
Amani is partially supported by Amazon science hub fellowship.

R EFERENCES
Yasin Abbasi-Yadkori and Gergely Neu. Online learning in mdps with side information. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1406.6812, 2014.
Yasin Abbasi-Yadkori, Dávid Pál, and Csaba Szepesvári. Improved algorithms for linear stochastic
  bandits. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pp. 2312–2320, 2011.
David Abel, Dilip Arumugam, Lucas Lehnert, and Michael Littman. State abstractions for lifelong
  reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 10–19. PMLR,
  2018a.
David Abel, Yuu Jinnai, Sophie Yue Guo, George Konidaris, and Michael Littman. Policy and value
  transfer in lifelong reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp.
  20–29. PMLR, 2018b.
Axel Abels, Diederik Roijers, Tom Lenaerts, Ann Nowé, and Denis Steckelmacher. Dynamic weights
  in multi-objective deep reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning,
  pp. 11–20. PMLR, 2019.
Haitham Bou Ammar, Eric Eaton, Paul Ruvolo, and Matthew Taylor. Online multi-task learning for
  policy gradient methods. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 1206–1214. PMLR,
  2014.
Haitham Bou Ammar, Rasul Tutunov, and Eric Eaton. Safe policy search for lifelong reinforcement
  learning with sublinear regret. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 2361–2369.
  PMLR, 2015.
Emma Brunskill and Lihong Li. Sample complexity of multi-task reinforcement learning. In
 Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, pp. 122–131,
 2013.
Emma Brunskill and Lihong Li. Pac-inspired option discovery in lifelong reinforcement learning. In
 International conference on machine learning, pp. 316–324. PMLR, 2014.
Emma Brunskill and Lihong Li. The online coupon-collector problem and its application to lifelong
  reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1506.03379, 2015.
Simon S Du, Ruosong Wang, Mengdi Wang, and Lin F Yang. Continuous control with contexts,
  provably. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.13614, 2019.
Chris Fifty, Ehsan Amid, Zhe Zhao, Tianhe Yu, Rohan Anil, and Chelsea Finn. Efficiently identifying
  task groupings for multi-task learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34,
  2021.
Minbo Gao, Tianle Xie, Simon S Du, and Lin F Yang. A provably efficient algorithm for linear
 markov decision process with low switching cost. arXiv preprint arXiv:2101.00494, 2021.
Assaf Hallak, Dotan Di Castro, and Shie Mannor. Contextual markov decision processes. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1502.02259, 2015.
Matteo Hessel, Hubert Soyer, Lasse Espeholt, Wojciech Czarnecki, Simon Schmitt, and Hado
 van Hasselt. Multi-task deep reinforcement learning with popart. In Proceedings of the AAAI
 Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 33, pp. 3796–3803, 2019.
David Isele, Mohammad Rostami, and Eric Eaton. Using task features for zero-shot knowledge
  transfer in lifelong learning. In IJCAI, volume 16, pp. 1620–1626, 2016.


                                                10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Chi Jin, Zhuoran Yang, Zhaoran Wang, and Michael I Jordan. Provably efficient reinforcement
  learning with linear function approximation. In Conference on Learning Theory, pp. 2137–2143,
  2020.
Sham Kakade, Akshay Krishnamurthy, Kendall Lowrey, Motoya Ohnishi, and Wen Sun. Information
  theoretic regret bounds for online nonlinear control. Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 33:15312–15325, 2020.
Khimya Khetarpal, Matthew Riemer, Irina Rish, and Doina Precup. Towards continual reinforcement
  learning: A review and perspectives. arXiv preprint arXiv:2012.13490, 2020.
Erwan Lecarpentier, David Abel, Kavosh Asadi, Yuu Jinnai, Emmanuel Rachelson, and Michael L
  Littman. Lipschitz lifelong reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on
  Artificial Intelligence, volume 35, pp. 8270–8278, 2021.
Orin Levy and Yishay Mansour. Learning efficiently function approximation for contextual mdp.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.00995, 2022.
Aditya Modi and Ambuj Tewari. No-regret exploration in contextual reinforcement learning. In
 Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, pp. 829–838. PMLR, 2020.
Aditya Modi, Nan Jiang, Satinder Singh, and Ambuj Tewari. Markov decision processes with
  continuous side information. In Algorithmic Learning Theory, pp. 597–618. PMLR, 2018.
Nicholas Roy, Ingmar Posner, Tim Barfoot, Philippe Beaudoin, Yoshua Bengio, Jeannette Bohg,
  Oliver Brock, Isabelle Depatie, Dieter Fox, Dan Koditschek, et al. From machine learning to
  robotics: Challenges and opportunities for embodied intelligence. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.15245,
  2021.
Daniel L Silver, Qiang Yang, and Lianghao Li. Lifelong machine learning systems: Beyond learning
  algorithms. In 2013 AAAI spring symposium series, 2013.
Shagun Sodhani, Amy Zhang, and Joelle Pineau. Multi-task reinforcement learning with context-
  based representations. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 9767–9779. PMLR,
  2021.
Yanchao Sun, Xiangyu Yin, and Furong Huang. Temple: Learning template of transitions for sample
  efficient multi-task rl. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 35,
  pp. 9765–9773, 2021.
Sebastian Thrun and Tom M Mitchell. Lifelong robot learning. Robotics and autonomous systems,
  15(1-2):25–46, 1995.
Tianhao Wang, Dongruo Zhou, and Quanquan Gu. Provably efficient reinforcement learning with
  linear function approximation under adaptivity constraints. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 34:13524–13536, 2021.
Yining Wang, Ruosong Wang, Simon Shaolei Du, and Akshay Krishnamurthy. Optimism in rein-
  forcement learning with generalized linear function approximation. In International Conference
  on Learning Representations, 2020.
Aaron Wilson, Alan Fern, Soumya Ray, and Prasad Tadepalli. Multi-task reinforcement learning: a
  hierarchical bayesian approach. In Proceedings of the 24th international conference on Machine
  learning, pp. 1015–1022, 2007.
Jingfeng Wu, Vladimir Braverman, and Lin Yang. Accommodating picky customers: Regret bound
   and exploration complexity for multi-objective reinforcement learning. Advances in Neural
   Information Processing Systems, 34:13112–13124, 2021.
Annie Xie and Chelsea Finn. Lifelong robotic reinforcement learning by retaining experiences. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2109.09180, 2021.
Lin Yang and Mengdi Wang. Sample-optimal parametric q-learning using linearly additive features.
  In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 6995–7004. PMLR, 2019.


                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Ruihan Yang, Huazhe Xu, Yi Wu, and Xiaolong Wang. Multi-task reinforcement learning with soft
  modularization. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:4767–4777, 2020.
Yusen Zhan, Haitham Bou Ammar, and Matthew E Taylor. Scalable lifelong reinforcement learning.
  Pattern Recognition, 72:407–418, 2017.
Chicheng Zhang and Zhi Wang. Provably efficient multi-task reinforcement learning with model
  transfer. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34, 2021.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A       P ROOFS OF SECTION 3
To prove Theorem 1, we will use the high probability event E2 defined in Lemma 3 to prove the UCB
nature of Lifelong-LSVI in Lemma 4, which is the key to controlling the regret. We first state the
following lemma that will be used in the proof of Lemma 3.
Lemma 2. Under the setting of Theorem 1, let cβ be the constant in the definition of β. Then, for a
fixed w, there is an absolute constant c0 independent of cβ , such that for all (h, k) ∈ [H] × [K], with
probability at least 1 − δ it holds that
 k−1
 X                                                                                                     √  q
        φτh . Vh+1
               k
                   (sτh+1 , w) − Ph [Vh+1
                                      k
                                          (., w)](sτh , aτh )                                ≤ c0 H d + d 0 log((cβ + 1)dd0 T /δ),
 τ =1                                                                                  −1
                                                                             (Λkh )
where c0 and cβ are two independent absolute constants.
                              √                                       √
Proof. We note that kη h k2 ≤   d0 (Assumption 1), θhk (w) 2 ≤ H d (Lemma 18), and
    −1
  Λkh     ≤ λ1 . Thus, Lemmas 19 and 21 together imply that for all (h, k) ∈ [H] × [K], with
probability at least 1 − δ it holds that
                                                                             2
 k−1
 X
        φτh Vh+1
             k
                 (sτh+1 , w) − Ph [Vh+1
                                    k
                                        (., w)](sτh , aτh )
 τ =1                                                                                  −1
                                                                             (Λkh )
                                                                                                                         √ !           
                                                                                                                  1 + 8B 2 d         1  8k 2  2

        d                    k+λ
≤ 4H 2  log                             + d0 log(1 + 4d0 / ) + d log(1 + 4Hd/ ) + d2 log                                     + log       +      .
        2                     λ                                                                                       λ 2            δ      λ
                                  √   p
If we let   = dH                    0
               k and β = cβ (d + d )H   log(dT /δ), then, there exists an absolute constant C > 0
that is independent of cβ such that
                                                                             2
 k−1
 X
        φτh        k
                       (sτh+1 , w) − Ph [Vh+1
                                          k
                                              (., w)](sτh , aτh )                           ≤ C(d0 + d2 )H 2 log (cβ + 1)dd0 T /δ .

                  Vh+1
 τ =1                                                                                  −1
                                                                             (Λkh )


Lemma 3. Let the setting of Theorem 1 holds. The event
                          (                                                                                   )
                                                           k
                          E2 (w) :=          θ kh (w) − θ̃ h (w)         ≤ β, ∀(h, k) ∈ [H] × [K] .                             (10)
                                                                    Λk
                                                                     h


holds with probability at least 1 − δ for a fixed w.

Proof.

              k
                                   −1 k−1
                                      X
θ kh (w) − θ̃ h (w) = θ kh (w) − Λkh      φτh Vh+1
                                               k
                                                   (sτh+1 , w)
                                                     τ =1
                                                                                                
                                      −1                     k−1
                                                             X
                         = Λkh             Λkh θ kh (w) −          φτh Vh+1
                                                                         k
                                                                             (sτh+1 , w)
                                                             τ =1
                                                                                                                                           
                                       −1                     −1         k−1
                                                                         X
                         = λ Λkh    θ kh (w) − Λkh                              φτh        k
                                                                                           Vh+1 (sτh+1 , w) − Ph [Vh+1
                                                                                                                   k
                                                                                                                       (., w)](sτh , aτh )  .
                           |     {z        }                             τ =1
                                 q1          |                                                       {z                                    }
                                                                                                      q2



                                                                    13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                       k
Thus, in order to upper bound θ kh (w) − θ̃ h (w)                     , we boundkq1 kΛk andkq2 kΛk separately.
                                                                                             h              h
                                                                 Λk
                                                                  h

From Lemma 18, we have
                                                                       √                       √
                           kq1 kΛk = λ θ kh (w)               −1
                                                                   ≤       λ θ kh (w)       ≤ H λd.                  (11)
                                   h                   (   Λk
                                                            h)                          2


Thanks to Lemma 2, for all (w, h, k), with probability at least 1 − δ, it holds that
               k−1
               X                                                                                            √  q
kq2 kΛk ≤             φτh Vh+1
                           k
                               (sτh+1 , w) − Ph [Vh+1
                                                  k
                                                      (., w)](sτh , aτh )                         ≤ c0 H d + d0  log((cβ + 1)dd0 T /δ),
      h
               τ =1                                                                          −1
                                                                                        (Λkh )
                                                                                                                     (12)
where c0 and cβ are two independent absolute constants.
Combining (11) and (12), for all (w, h, k), with probability at least 1 − δ, it holds that


                                          k
                                                               √  p
                            θ kh (w) − θ̃ h (w)        ≤ cH d + d0  λ log(dd0 T /δ)
                                                  Λk
                                                   h

for some absolute constant c > 0.


Lemma 4. Let W    f = {w1 , w2 , . . . , wK }. Under the setting of Theorem 1 and conditioned on
                                                  k                                   k
events {E2 (w)}w∈W  f defined in (10), and with Qh computed as in (6), it holds that Qh (s, a, w) ≥
Q∗ (s, a, w) for all (s, a, w, h, k) ∈ S × A × W
  h
                                                f × [H] × [K].

Proof. We first note that conditioned on events {E2 (w)}w∈W
                                                          f , for all (s, a, w, h, k) ∈ S × A × W ×
                                                                                                 f
[H] × [K], it holds that

                        k
                                                           h                             i
      rh (s, a, w) + θ̃ h (w), φ(s, a) − Qπh (s, a, w) − Ph Vh+1
                                                               k
                                                                   (., w) − Vh+1π
                                                                                   (., w) (s, a)

                                    k
                                                                          h           i
                                                                            k
      = rh (s, a, w) +           θ̃ h (w), φ(s, a)     − rh (s, a, w) − Ph Vh+1 (., w) (s, a)

                 k
                                    h           i
                                      k
      =       θ̃ h (w), φ(s, a) − Ph Vh+1 (., w) (s, a)

                 k
      =       θ̃ h (w) − θ kh (w), φ(s, a)

              k
      ≤ θ̃ h (w) − θ kh (w)             φ(s, a) (Λk )−1
                                                       h
                                   Λk
                                    h

      ≤ β φ(s, a) (Λk )−1 ,                                                                                     (Lemma 3)
                             h


for any policy π.
Now, we prove the lemma by induction. The statement holds for H because QkH+1 (., ., .) =
Q∗H+1 (., ., .) = 0 and thus conditioned on events {E2 (w)}w∈W
                                                             f, defined in (10), for all (s, a, w, k) ∈
S × A × W × [K], we have
           f


                                D                 E
                  rH (s, a, w) + θ kH (w), ψ(s, a) − Q∗H (s, a, w) ≤ β φ(s, a) (Λk )−1 .
                                                                                                        H


                                                                 14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Therefore, conditioned on events {E2 (w)}w∈Wf, for all (s, a, w, k) ∈ S × A × W × [K], we have
                                                                              f
                                   D                 E
     Q∗H (s, a, w) ≤ rH (s, a, w) + θ kH (w), φ(s, a) + β φ(s, a) (Λk )−1 = QkH (s, a, w).
                                                                                          H


Now, suppose the statement holds at time-step h + 1 and consider time-step h. Conditioned on events
{E2 (w)}w∈W f, for all (s, a, w, h, k) ∈ S × A × W × [H] × [K], we have
                                                  f
                   D                  E                   h                         i
0 ≤ rh (s, a, w) + θ kh (w), φ(s, a) − Q∗h (s, a, w) − Ph Vh+1
                                                             k             ∗
                                                                (., w) − Vh+1 (., w) (s, a) + β φ(s, a) (Λk )−1
                                                                                                          h
                   D                  E
                       k                    ∗
  ≤ rh (s, a, w) + θ h (w), φ(s, a) − Qh (s, a, w) + β φ(s, a) (Λk )−1 .
                                                                                    h
                                                                                              (Induction assumption)
Therefore, conditioned on events {E2 (w)}w∈W   f, for all (s, a, w, h, k) ∈ S × A × W × [H] × [K],
                                                                                    f
we have
                                    D                 E
      Q∗h (s, a, w) ≤ rh (s, a, w) + θ kh (w), φ(s, a) + β φ(s, a) (Λk )−1 = Qkh (s, a, w).
                                                                                          h

This completes the proof.


A.1    P ROOF OF T HEOREM 1
                               k
                                                        h               i
Let δhk = Vhk (skh , wk ) − Vhπ (skh , wk ) and ξh+1
                                                 k        k
                                                     = E δh+1 |skh , akh − δh+1
                                                                            k
                                                                                . Conditioned on events
{E2 (w)}w∈W  f, for all (s, a, w, h, k) ∈ S × A × W × [H] × [K], we have
                                                  f
                     k
                                                 D                 E     k
  Qkh (s, a, w) − Qπh (s, a, w) = rh (s, a, w) + θ kh (w), φ(s, a) − Qπh (s, a, w) + β φ(s, a) (Λk )−1
                                                                                                  h
                                        h                        i
                                           k            πk
                                  ≤ Ph Vh+1 (., w) − Vh+1 (., w) (s, a) + 2β φ(s, a) (Λk )−1 . (13)
                                                                                                         h

                                             k
Note that δhk ≤ Qkh (skh , akh , wk ) − Qπh (skh , akh , wk ). Thus, combining (13), Lemma 3, and a union
bound over W,f we conclude that for all (h, k) ∈ [H] × [K], with probability at least 1 − δ, it holds
that
                            δhk ≤ ξh+1
                                   k      k
                                       + δh+1 + 2β φ(skh , akh )                          .
                                                                             (Λk
                                                                               h)
                                                                                  −1


Now, we complete the regret analysis
                                K
                                X                          k
                      RK =            V1∗ (sk1 , wk ) − V1π (sk1 , wk )
                                k=1
                                K
                                X                          k
                            ≤         V1k (sk1 , wk ) − V1π (sk1 , wk )                                  (Lemma 4)
                                k=1
                                K
                                X
                            =         δ1k
                                k=1
                                K X
                                X H                    K X
                                                       X H
                            ≤               ξhk + 2β             φ(skh , akh )          −1
                                k=1 h=1                k=1 h=1
                                                                                 (Λkh )
                                  p                     p
                            ≤ 2H T log(dT /δ) + 2Hβ 2dK log(1 + K/λ)
                                  p
                            ≤ Õ    λ(d3 + dd0 )H 3 T .
The third inequality is true because of the following: we observe that {ξhk } is a martingale difference
sequence satisfying |ξhk |≤ 2H. Thus, thanks to Azuma-Hoeffding inequality, we have
                                                               
                               XK X H            p
                           P           ξhk ≤ 2H T log(dT /δ) ≥ 1 − δ.                             (14)
                                k=1 h=1



                                                         15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                          PK PH
In order to bound            k=1       h=1   φkh        −1
                                                                , note that for any h ∈ [H], we have
                                                   (Λkh )
                                      v
                     K
                     X
                                      u K
                                      u X         2
                          k
                         φh      −1
                                    ≤ tK      φkh        −1
                                                                                                (Cauchy-Schwartz inequality)
                     k=1
                            (Λh )
                              k
                                         k=1
                                                  (Λkh )
                                      v       
                                      u                      
                                                         K
                                                det   Λ
                                      u
                                      u                  h
                                    ≤ut2K log                                                                          (15)
                                                            
                                                 det Λ1h
                                      s
                                                      K
                                    ≤ 2dK log 1 +           .                                                           (16)
                                                     dλ
In inequality (15), we used the standard argument in regret analysis of linear bandits (Abbasi-Yadkori
et al., 2011, Lemma 11) as follows:
              n                                                                  n−1
            X
                           2
                                            det Vn+1                             X
                min kyt kV−1 , 1 ≤ 2 log                 where Vn = V1 +             yt yt> .     (17)
            t=1
                             t               det V 1                             t=1
                                                                      Qd
In inequality (16), we used Assumption 1 and the fact that det(A) = i=1 λi (A) ≤ (trace(A)/d)d .

B       P ROOFS OF SECTION 4
We start by introducing the high probability event E1 , which is the foundation of our analysis in the
following lemma.
Lemma 5. Follow the setting of Theorem 2. The event
                            (                                                   )
                                                            k
                          E1 (w) :=         θ kh (w) − θ̃ h (w)           ≤ β, ∀(h, k) ∈ [H] × [K] .                    (18)
                                                                     Λk
                                                                      h

holds with probability at least 1 − δ for a fixed w.
Proof of Lemma 5 is given in Appx. B.1.

B.1      P ROOF OF L EMMA 5
First, we state the following lemma that will be used in the proof of Lemma 5.
Lemma 6. Under the setting of Lemma 5, let cβ be a constant in the definition of β. Then, for a
fixed w, there is an absolute constant c0 independent of cβ , such that for all (h, k) ∈ [H] × [K], with
probability at least 1 − δ it holds that
 k−1
 X                                                                                                    √  q
        φτh . Vh+1
               k
                   (sτh+1 , w) − Ph [Vh+1
                                      k
                                          (., w)](sτh , aτh )                               ≤ c0 H d + md  log((cβ + 1)mdT /δ),
 τ =1                                                                                  −1
                                                                              (Λkh )
where c0 and cβ are two independent absolute constants.

                                        k                 √          −1
Proof. We note that η h + ξ̂ h                   ≤ (1 + H) md and Λkh   ≤ λ1 . Thus, Lemmas 19 and 22
                                             2
together imply that for all (h, k) ∈ [H] × [K], with probability at least 1 − δ it holds that
                                                                              2
 k−1
 X
        φτh        k
                  Vh+1 (sτh+1 , w) − Ph [Vh+1
                                          k
                                              (., w)](sτh , aτh )
 τ =1                                                                              −1
                                                                              (Λkh )
                                                                                                         √ !           
                                                                 √                            1 + 32L2 β 2 d         1  8k 2  2

        d                   k+λ
≤ 4H 2  log                           + md log(1 + 8H md/ ) + d2 log                                         + log       +      .
        2                    λ                                                                     λ 2               δ      λ


                                                                     16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023



                                    √     p
If we let   = dHk and β = cβ (d +     md)H log(dT /δ), then, there exists an absolute constant
C > 0 that is independent of cβ such that
                                                                                      2
 k−1
 X
        φτh Vh+1
             k
                 (sτh+1 , w) − Ph [Vh+1
                                    k
                                        (., w)](sτh , aτh )                                          ≤ C(md + d2 )H 2 log (cβ + 1)mdT /δ .

 τ =1                                                                                           −1
                                                                                      (Λkh )



Now, we begin the formal proof of Lemma 5:

              k
                                   −1 k−1
                                      X
θ kh (w) − θ̃ h (w) = θ kh (w) − Λkh      φτh Vh+1
                                               k
                                                   (sτh+1 , w)
                                                       τ =1
                                                                                                         
                                   −1                             k−1
                                                                  X
                      = Λkh              Λkh θ kh (w) −                   φτh Vh+1
                                                                                k
                                                                                    (sτh+1 , w)
                                                                  τ =1
                                                                                                                                                    
                                     −1                             −1          k−1
                                                                                X
                      = λ Λkh    θ kh (w) − Λkh                                          φτh        k
                                                                                                    Vh+1 (sτh+1 , w) − Ph [Vh+1
                                                                                                                            k
                                                                                                                                (., w)](sτh , aτh )  .
                        |     {z        }                                       τ =1
                              q1          |                                                                   {z                                    }
                                                                                                                  q2


                                                              k
Thus, in order to upper bound θ kh (w) − θ̃ h (w)                               , we boundkq1 kΛk andkq2 kΛk separately.
                                                                                                              h            h
                                                                           Λk
                                                                            h

From Lemma 18, we have
                                                                                 √                              √
                          kq1 kΛk = λ θ kh (w)                       −1
                                                                             ≤         λ θ kh (w)            ≤ H λd.                     (19)
                                     h                        (   Λk
                                                                   h   )                                 2


Thanks to Lemma 6, for all (w, h, k), with probability at least 1 − δ, it holds that
                                  k−1
                                  X
                kq2 kΛk ≤                φτh Vh+1
                                              k
                                                  (sτh+1 , w) − Ph [Vh+1
                                                                     k
                                                                         (., w)](sτh , aτh )
                          h
                                  τ =1                                                                                         −1
                                                                                                                       (Λkh )
                                        √  q
                              ≤ c0 H d + md log((cβ + 1)mdT /δ),                                                                         (20)

where c0 and cβ are two independent absolute constants.
Combining (19) and (20), for all (h, k) ∈ [H] × [K], with probability at least 1 − δ, it holds that


                                             k
                                                                      √  p
                              θ kh (w) − θ̃ h (w)             ≤ cH d + md  λ log(mdT /δ)
                                                       Λk
                                                        h


for some absolute constant c > 0.

B.2      P ROOF OF L EMMA 1
Thanks to Assumption 2 and conditioned on events {E1 (w)}w∈W f, one set of solution for (8) is
                        k
                      V
 θ kh w(j)      and ξ hh+1 with corresponding zero optimal objective value. Therefore, it holds
                  j∈[n]
that

                         k(j)                            k

                                                                                (j)
                      θ̂ h , φ(s, a)          =       ξ̂ h , ψ        s, a, w               ,        ∀(j, (s, a)) ∈ [n] × D.             (21)


                                                                           17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Let s(i) , a(i) be the i-th element of D and {c0i (s, a)}i∈[d] be the coefficients such that


                                                                X
                                             φ(s, a) =                 c0i (s, a)φ s(i) , a(i) .
                                                               i∈[d]


For any triple (s, a, j) ∈ S × A × [n], we have


                k                                           k

                                      (j)                                                  (j)
             ξ̂ h , ψ       s, a, w              =       ξ̂ h , φ(s, a) ⊗ ρ            w
                                                     *                                                                               +
                                                            k X 0

                                                                                             (i)      (i)                  (j)
                                                 =       ξ̂ h ,       ci (s, a)φ             s ,a               ⊗ρ w
                                                                i∈[d]

                                                                                 k
                                                     X
                                                 =           c0i (s, a)       ξ̂ h , ψ        (i)
                                                                                             s ,a ,w  (i)       (j)
                                                                                                                                         (Assumption 3)
                                                     i∈[d]

                                                                           k(j)
                                                     X
                                                 =           c0i (s, a) θ̂ h , φ s(i) , a(i)                                                (Eqn. (21))
                                                     i∈[d]

                                                            k(j)
                                                 =       θ̂ h , φ(s, a)            .                                                               (22)


For any (s, a, w) ∈ S × A × W, it holds that


            h           i         D                E
              k
          Ph Vh+1 (., w) (s, a) = θ kh (w), φ(s, a)                                                                                           (Eqn. (4))
                                    k
                                     V
                                = ξ hh+1 , ψ(s, a, w)                                                                                    (Assumption 2)
                                                k
                                  X              V
                                =       cj (w) ξ hh+1 , ψ s, a, w(j)                                                                     (Assumption 3)
                                                      j∈[n]
                                                      X
                                                                        k        (j)
                                                 =            cj (w)Ph Vh+1 ., w        (s, a)                                           (Assumption 2)
                                                      j∈[n]
                                                      X
                                                 =            cj (w) θ kh w(j) , φ(s, a) .                                                         (23)
                                                      j∈[n]



                                                                          18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Finally, conditioned on events {E1 (w)}w∈W f, for all (s, a, w, h, k) ∈ S × A × W × [H] × [K], it
                                                                                f
holds that

      k
                         h           i
                           k
   ξ̂ h , ψ(s, a, w) − Ph Vh+1 (., w) (s, a)
                             D
             k
                                                E
=         ξ̂ h , ψ(s, a, w) − θ kh (w), φ(s, a)

                                                                                                           !
                               k
      X
=             cj (w)        ξ̂ h , ψ       s, a, w   (j)
                                                                −       θ kh       w   (j)
                                                                                                 , φ(s, a)
      j∈[n]
                                                                                                               (Assumption 3 and Eqn. (23))
                                                                                                    !
                               k                                          k(j)
      X
≤             cj (w)        ξ̂ h , ψ s, a, w(j)                 − θ̂ h             , φ(s, a)
      j∈[n]

                        k(j)   k                              k
      X                                           X
+             cj (w) θ̂ h − θ̃ h w(j) , φ(s, a) +   cj (w) θ̃ h w(j) − θ kh w(j) , φ(s, a)
      j∈[n]                                                                            j∈[n]

                        k(j)   k                              k
      X                                           X
=             cj (w) θ̂ h − θ̃ h w(j) , φ(s, a) +   cj (w) θ̃ h w(j) − θ kh w(j) , φ(s, a)
      j∈[n]                                                                            j∈[n]
                                                                                                                                (Eqn. (22))
≤ 2Lβ φ(s, a) (Λk )−1 .                                                                                                         (Lemma 5)
                              h



B.3       P ROOF OF OPTIMISTIC NATURE OF UCB LVD

Lemma 7. Let W  f = {wτ : τ ∈ [K]} ∪ {w(j) : j ∈ [n]}. Under the setting of Theorem 2 and
                                                                 k
conditioned on events {E1 (w)}w∈W    f defined in (9), and with Qh computed as in (7), it holds that
Qk (s, a, w) ≥ Q∗ (s, a, w) for all (s, a, w, h, k) ∈ S × A × W
  h                     h
                                                               f × [H] × [K].


Proof. We first note that conditioned on events {E1 (w)}w∈W
                                                          f , for all (s, a, w, h, k) ∈ S × A × W ×
                                                                                                 f
[H] × [K], it holds that

                         k
                                                           h                             i
      rh (s, a, w) + ξ̂ h , ψ(s, a, w) − Qπh (s, a, w) − Ph Vh+1
                                                               k
                                                                  (., w) − Vh+1π
                                                                                   (., w) (s, a)

                              k
                                                                h           i
                                                                  k
          = rh (s, a, w) + ξ̂ h , ψ(s, a, w) − rh (s, a, w) − Ph Vh+1 (., w) (s, a)

                     k
                                                h           i
                                                  k
          =       ξ̂ h , ψ(s, a, w)         − Ph Vh+1 (., w) (s, a)

          ≤ 2Lβ φ(s, a) (Λk )−1 ,                                                                                               (Lemma 1)
                                       h


for any policy π.
Now, we prove the lemma by induction. The statement holds for H because QkH+1 (., ., .) =
Q∗H+1 (., ., .) = 0 and thus conditioned events {E1 (w)}w∈W
                                                          f, defined in (9), for all (s, a, w, k) ∈
S ×A×W     f × [K], we have



                                               k
                  rH (s, a, w) +            ξ̂ H , ψ(s, a, w)             − Q∗H (s, a, w) ≤ 2Lβ φ(s, a) (Λk )−1 .
                                                                                                                          H


                                                                               19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Therefore, conditioned on events {E1 (w)}w∈W f, for all (s, a, w, k) ∈ S × A × W × [K], we have
                                                                               f

                                           k
         Q∗H (s, a, w) ≤ rH (s, a, w) + ξ̂ H , ψ(s, a, w) + 2Lβ φ(s, a) (Λk )−1
                                                                                                        H
                             (                                                       )+
                                                k
                         =    rH (s, a, w) + ξ̂ H , ψ(s, a, w) + 2Lβ φ(s, a) (Λk )−1
                                                                                                            H


                         = QkH (s, a, w),
where the first equality follows from the fact that Q∗H (s, a, w) ≥ 0. Now, suppose the statement
holds at time-step h + 1 and consider time-step h. Conditioned on events {E1 (w)}w∈W       f, for all
(s, a, w, h, k) ∈ S × A × W × [H] × [K], we have
                           f

                      k
                                                          h                          i
0 ≤ rh (s, a, w) + ξ̂ h , ψ(s, a, w) − Q∗h (s, a, w) − Ph Vh+1 k           ∗
                                                                 (., w) − Vh+1 (., w) (s, a) + 2Lβ φ(s, a) (Λk )−1
                                                                                                             h

                      k
  ≤ rh (s, a, w) + ξ̂ h , ψ(s, a, w) − Q∗h (s, a, w) + 2Lβ φ(s, a) (Λk )−1 .
                                                                                              h

                                                                                                    (Induction assumption)

Therefore, conditioned on events {E1 (w)}w∈W    f, for all (s, a, w, h, k) ∈ S × A × W × [H] × [K],
                                                                                     f
we have

                                            k
          Q∗h (s, a, w) ≤ rh (s, a, w) + ξ̂ h , ψ(s, a, w) + 2Lβ φ(s, a) (Λk )−1
                                                                                                        h
                             (                                                                                  )+
                                                         k
                         =       rh (s, a, w) +       ξ̂ h , ψ(s, a, w)       + 2Lβ φ(s, a) (Λk )−1
                                                                                                            h


                         = Qkh (s, a, w),
where the first equality follows from the fact that Q∗h (s, a, w) ≥ 0. This completes the proof.

B.4   P ROOF OF T HEOREM 2
                                                                          k
First, we bound the number of times Algorithm 2 updates ξ̂ h , i.e., number of planning calls. Let P
be the total number of updates and kp be the episode at which, the agent did replanning for the p-th
                                                                          d
time. Note that det Λ1h = λd and det ΛKh  ≤  trace(Λ K
                                                     h /d)d
                                                            ≤     λ  + K
                                                                       d    , and consequently:

                                            P        k            d
                                 det ΛK         det Λhp

                                      h
                                           Y                  K
                                         =               ≤ 1+       ,
                                 det Λ1h            kp−1
                                           p=1 det Λh
                                                              dλ

and therefore


                         H                   H Y
                                               P      k                                        dH
                           det ΛK                det Λhp

                         Y
                                  h
                                             Y                                           K
                                   1     =                kp−1
                                                               ≤                   1+               .                 (24)
                             det Λ                                                       dλ
                         h=1       h         h=1 p=1 det Λh

                    k
             det Λhp
Since 1 ≤        kp−1   for all p ∈ [P ], we can deduce from (24) that
            det Λh


                                                                              det Λkh
                                    ∃h ∈ [H] such that             e<
                                                                              det Λk̃h

                                 K
happens for at most dH log 1 + dλ     number of episodes k ∈ [K]. This concludes that the number

                                          K
of planing calls in UCBlvd is dH log 1 + dλ   .


                                                           20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                                                k
Now, we prove the regret bound. Let δhk = Vhk̃ (skh , wk ) − Vhπ (skh , wk ) and ξh+1  k
                                                                                            =
 h              i
   k     k    k    k
E δh+1 |sh , ah − δh+1 . Conditioned on events {E1 (w)}w∈W
                                                         f, for all (s, a, w, h, k) ∈ S × A ×

W
f × [H] × [K], we have

                    k                                       k̃                        k
Qk̃h (s, a, w) − Qπh (s, a, w) = rh (s, a, w) +          ξ̂ h , ψ(s, a, w)       − Qπh (s, a, w) + 2Lβ φ(s, a) (Λk̃ )−1
                                                                                                                   h
                                       h                         i
                                         k̃            πk
                                   ≤ Ph Vh+1 (., w) − Vh+1 (., w) (s, a) + 4Lβ φ(s, a) (Λk̃ )−1 .
                                                                                                       h
                                                                                                               (25)
                                             k
Note that δhk ≤ Qk̃h (skh , akh , wk ) − Qπh (skh , akh , wk ). Thus, combining (25), Lemma 5, and a union
bound over W,f we conclude that for all (h, k) ∈ [H] × [K], with probability at least 1 − δ, it holds
that gives

                                 δhk ≤ ξh+1
                                        k      k
                                            + δh+1 + 4Lβ φ(skh , akh )                      .
                                                                                  (Λk̃
                                                                                    h)
                                                                                       −1



Note that for any positive semi-definite matrices A, B, and C such that A = B + C, we have:
                                    det(A) ≥ det(B), det(A) ≥ det(C),                                          (26)
and for any x 6= 0 ((Abbasi-Yadkori et al., 2011, Lemm. 12)):
                                    2                               2
                                 kxkA       det(A)              kxkB−1           det(A)
                                    2   ≤              and          2        ≤          .                      (27)
                                 kxkB       det(B)              kxkA−1           det(B)

Now, we complete the regret analysis following similar steps as those of Theorem 1’s proof:
                     K
                     X                           k
            RK =           V1∗ (sk1 , wk ) − V1π (sk1 , wk )
                     k=1
                     K
                     X                           k
                 ≤         V1k̃ (sk1 , wk ) − V1π (sk1 , wk )                                           (Lemma 7)
                     k=1
                     K
                     X
                 =         δ1k
                     k=1
                     K X
                     X H                     K X
                                             X H
                 ≤               ξhk + 4Lβ             φ(skh , akh )   k̃  −1
                                                                        Λh
                     k=1 h=1                 k=1 h=1
                                                                    v
                     K X
                       H                     K X
                                               H
                                                                    u det Λkh
                                                                    u
                     X                       X
                 ≤         ξhk + 4Lβ          φ(skh , akh )      −1
                                                                    t                                   (Eqn. (27))
                                                            (Λh )     det Λk̃h
                                                              k
                   k=1 h=1           k=1 h=1
                      p                        p
                 ≤ 2H T log(dT /δ) + 8HLβ 2dK log(1 + K/λ)
                       p
                 ≤ Õ L λ(d3 + md2 )H 3 T .

B.5   D ISCUSSION ON THE TIME COMPLEXITY OF UCB LVD AND L IFELONG -LSVI
In what follows, we clarify on how the time complexity of UCBlvd compares to that of Lifelong
                            −1
LSVI. When we compute Λkh         by the Sherman-Morrison formula, the computational complexity
of Lifelong-LSVI is dominated by Line 5 in computing maxa∈A Qkh+1 (sτh+1 , a) for all τ ∈ [k]. This
takes O(d2 |A|K) per step, which gives a total runtime O(d2 |A|HK 2 ). In UCBlvd, every planning
call takes Õ(md2 |A|K + m3 d3 ), where the second term is the time-complexity of thE convex QCQP
with m + 1 constraints and 2md variables. This gives a total runtime of Õ(H 2 (md3 |A|K + m3 d4 )).
Therefore, UCBlvd enjoys a smaller time complexity by a factor of K compared to that of Lifelong-
LSVI, which is a significant reduction in practical scenarios where K >> d0 = md.


                                                          21
     Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


     Algorithm 3: UCBlvd with Unknown Rewards
1 Set: QkH+1 (., ., .) = 0, ∀k ∈ [K], k̃ = 1
2 for episodes k = 1, . . . , K do
3     Observe the initial state sk1 and the task context wk .
                                    k             ˜k
                               det Λh         det Λh
4     if ∃h ∈ [H] such that         k̃
                                       > e or          > e then
                               det Λh             ˜ k̃
                                              det Λh
5         k̃ = k
6         for time-steps h = H, . . . , 1 do
                                              k
 7                        Compute ξ̂ h as in (30).
8          for time-steps h = 1, . . . , H do
 9             Compute Qk̃h (skh , a, wk ) for all a ∈ A as in (28).
10             Play akh = arg maxa∈A Qk̃h (skh , a, wk ) and observe skh+1 and rhk .



     C       D ETAILS OF R EMARK 1: UCB LVD WITH UNKNOWN REWARDS
     In order for our analysis to go through, we need a slightly different completeness assumption as
     below:
                                                                                                                       0
     Assumption 4. Given feature maps φ : S × A → Rd and ψ : S × A × W → Rd , consider function
     class
           (
                                   n                                                  o+
     F = f : f (s, w) = min max hν, ψ(s, a, w)i + β φ(s, a) Λ−1 + β̃ ψ(s, a, w) Λ̃−1      ,H
                                                        a∈A

                                0          0
                                                            o
             , ν ∈ Rd , Λ ∈ Sd++ , Λ̃ ∈ Sd++ , β ≥ 0, β̃ ≥ 0 .

                                                                     0             √
     Then for any f ∈ F, and h ∈ [H], there exists a vector ξ fh ∈ Rd with ξ fh ≤ H d0 such that

                                                            Ph f (., w) (s, a) = hξ fh , ψ(s, a, w)i.



     C.1          OVERVIEW

     Let ψ τh = ψ(sτh , aτh , wτ ). UCBlvd with unknown rewards works with the following action-value
     functions:
                       (                                                                            )+
                                        k
       Qkh (s, a, w) =       η̃ kh + ξ̂ h , ψ(s, a, w) + β φ(s, a) (Λk )−1 + β̃ ψ(s, a, w) (Λ̃k )−1    , (28)
                                                                                                h                           h



     where
                                                             −1 k−1                                    k−1
                                                        k       X                           k          X              >
                                      η̃ kh =         Λ̃h              ψ τh .rhτ   and Λ̃h = λImd +           ψ τh ψ τh ,            (29)
                                                                τ =1                                   τ =1

     and
                                                                                                                                !2
            k            k(j)                                    X          X           D           E
                                                                                          (j)                       (j)
         ξ̂ h ,       θ̂ h                  = arg min                                    θ , φ(s, a) − ξ, ψ s, a, w                  (30)
                                    j∈[n]    ξ,{θ (j) }
                                                        j∈[n] j∈[n] (s,a)∈D

                                                               k
                                                                                                                  √
                                             s.t. θ (j) − θ̃ h w(j)                     ≤ β, ∀j ∈ [n] and kξk2 ≤ H md,
                                                                                   Λk
                                                                                    h

                                                                       k
     D = (s, a) : φ(s, a) are d linearly independent vectors. , and θ̃ h (w) and Λkh are defined in (5).



                                                                                    22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


We
D note that compared
                   E       to (7), action-value function defined in (28) involves an extra term
     k
  η̃ h , ψ(s, a, w) + β̃ ψ(s, a, w) (Λ̃k )−1 . This term is in fact an upper bound on rh (s, a, w). Specif-
                                       h                                            √
ically, from Theorem 2 in Abbasi-Yadkori et al. (2011), we know that for β̃ = λmd, it holds that
                                              η h − η̃ kh    k
                                                                  ≤ β̃, ∀(h, k) ∈ [H] × [K].                                      (31)
                                                            Λ̃h

Theorem 3. Let T =     KH. Under
                                    Assumptions
                                                1, 3, and
                                                          4, the number of planning calls in Algorithm
                           K                         K
3 is at most dH log 1 + dλ + mdH log 1 + mdλ , and there exists an absolute constant c > 0
                                                                    p                         √
such that for any fixed δ ∈ (0, 0.5), if we set λ = 1, β = cH (md) log(mdT /δ) and β̃ = md in
Algorithm 3, then with probability at least 1 − 2δ, it holds that
                p                        √   p                           p
     RK ≤ 2H T log(dT /δ) + 4H K Lβ 2d log(1 + K/λ) + β̃ 2md log(1 + K/λ)
                 √
          ≤ Õ L m2 d3 H 3 T .

C.2      N ECESSARY ANALYSIS FOR THE PROOF OF T HEOREM 3
Lemma 8. Let cβ be a constant in the definition of β. Then, under Assumptions 1, 3, and 4, for a
fixed w, there is an absolute constant c0 independent of cβ , such that for all (h, k) ∈ [H] × [K], with
probability at least 1 − δ it holds that
 k−1
 X                                                                                                        q
        φτh . Vh+1
               k
                   (sτh+1 , w) − Ph [Vh+1
                                      k
                                          (., w)](sτh , aτh )                                 ≤ c0 mdH     log((cβ + 1)mdT /δ),
 τ =1                                                                                 −1
                                                     (Λkh )
where c0 and cβ are two independent absolute constants.
                                                                                                                             −1
                                                          √                −1
                                              k                                                                        k
Proof. We note that η̃ kh + ξ̂ h                       ≤ H md + K/λ and Λkh                            ≤ λ1 and       Λ̃h         ≤ λ1 .
                                                   2
Thus, Lemmas 19 and 23 together imply that for all (h, k) ∈ [H] × [K], with probability at least
1 − δ it holds that
                                                                                          2
              k−1
              X
                     φτh        k
                               Vh+1 (sτh+1 , w) − Ph [Vh+1
                                                       k
                                                           (., w)](sτh , aτh )
              τ =1                                                                              −1
                                                                                          (Λkh )
                                                                                                                     √ !
                                                                            √                             1 + 32L2 β 2 d

                      2 d                   k+λ                                                2
              ≤ 4H                 log                 + md log(1 + 8H md/ ) + d log
                               2              λ                                                                λ 2

                                2
                                  √    !
                                                  
                                                           2 2
                       1 + 8 β̃     md          1  + 8k   .
          +m2 d2 log                     + log
                            λ 2                 δ         λ
                                       p
If we let   = dH
               k and β = cβ (md)H        log(mdT /δ), then, there exists an absolute constant C > 0
that is independent of cβ such that
                                                                             2
 k−1
 X
        φτh        k
                       (sτh+1 , w) − Ph [Vh+1
                                          k
                                              (., w)](sτh , aτh )                         ≤ C(m2 d2 )H 2 log (cβ + 1)mdT /δ .

                  Vh+1
 τ =1                                                                             −1
                                                                             (Λkh )

                                                                                               p
Lemma 9. Under Assumptions 1, 3, and 4, if we let β = cmdH                                          λ log(mdT /δ) with an absolute
constant c > 0, then the event
                            (                                                                                 )
                                                             k
                           E3 (w) :=           θ kh (w) − θ̃ h (w)         ≤ β, ∀(h, k) ∈ [H] × [K] .                             (32)
                                                                      Λk
                                                                       h

holds with probability at least 1 − δ for a fixed w.


                                                                      23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Proof. The proof follows the same steps as those of Lemma 5, except that it uses Lemma 8 instead
of Lemma 6 due to different structure of action-value functions Qkh in this section.

Lemma 10. Let W   f = {wτ : τ ∈ [K]} ∪ {w(j) : j ∈ [n]}. Under the setting of Theorem 3 and
conditioned on events {E3 (w)}w∈W  f defined in (32), for all (s, a, w, h, k) ∈ S × A × W × [H] × [K],
                                                                                        f
it holds that

                   k
                                        h            i
                                           k
                ξ̂ h , ψ(s, a, w) − Ph Vh+1    (., w) (s, a) ≤ 2Lβ φ(s, a) (Λk )−1 .
                                                                                             h


Proof. The proof follows the exact same steps as those of Lemma 1’s proof.

Lemma 11. Let W  f = {wτ : τ ∈ [K]} ∪ {w(j) : j ∈ [n]}. Under the setting of Theorem 3 and
                                                                 k
conditioned on events {E3 (w)}w∈W   f defined in (32), and with Qh computed as in (28), it holds that
Qk (s, a, w) ≥ Q∗ (s, a, w) for all (s, a, w, h, k) ∈ S × A × W
  h                    h
                                                               f × [H] × [K].


Proof. We first note that conditioned on events {E3 (w)}w∈W
                                                          f, for all (s, a, w, h, k) ∈ S × A × W ×
                                                                                               f
[H] × [K], it holds that

                        k
                                                                  h                         i
             η̃ kh + ξ̂ h , ψ(s, a, w)        − Qπh (s, a, w) − Ph Vh+1
                                                                    k             π
                                                                        (., w) − Vh+1 (., w) (s, a)

                             k
                                                               h           i
         =        η̃ kh + ξ̂ h , ψ(s, a, w) − rh (s, a, w) − Ph Vh+1
                                                                 k
                                                                     (., w) (s, a)

                     k
                                              h           i
                                                k
         ≤        ξ̂ h , ψ(s, a, w)       − Ph Vh+1 (., w) (s, a) + β̃ ψ(s, a, w)   k  −1             (Eqn. (31))
                                                                                       Λ̃h

         ≤ 2Lβ φ(s, a) (Λk )−1 + β̃ ψ(s, a, w)   k  −1 ,                                              (Lemma 10)
                                      h                             Λ̃h


for any policy π.
Now, we prove the lemma by induction. The statement holds for H because QkH+1 (., ., .) =
Q∗H+1 (., ., .) = 0 and thus conditioned events {E3 (w)}w∈W
                                                          f, defined in (32), for all (s, a, w, k) ∈
S × A × W × [K], we have
           f



                 k
      η̃ kH + ξ̂ H , ψ(s, a, w)       − Q∗H (s, a, w) ≤ 2Lβ φ(s, a) (Λk )−1 + β̃ ψ(s, a, w)   k  −1 .
                                                                               H                       Λ̃H

                                                                                                             (33)

                                           f, for all (s, a, w, k) ∈ S × A × W × [K], we have
Therefore, conditioned on events {E3 (w)}w∈W                                 f

                                      k
Q∗H (s, a, w) ≤            η̃ kH + ξ̂ H , ψ(s, a, w) + 2Lβ φ(s, a) (Λk )−1 + β̃ ψ(s, a, w)   k  −1
                                                                           H                      Λ̃H
                       (                                                                                     )+
                                       k
                   =        η̃ kH + ξ̂ H , ψ(s, a, w)       + 2Lβ φ(s, a) (Λk )−1 + β̃ ψ(s, a, w)   k  −1
                                                                               H                      Λ̃H

                   = QkH (s, a, w),

where the first equality follows from the fact that Q∗H (s, a, w) ≥ 0. Now, suppose the statement
holds at time-step h + 1 and consider time-step h. Conditioned on events {E3 (w)}w∈W    f, for all



                                                               24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


(s, a, w, h, k) ∈ S × A × W   f × [H] × [K], we have

                  k
                                                     h                         i
   0 ≤ η̃ kh + ξ̂ h , ψ(s, a, w) − Q∗h (s, a, w) − Ph Vh+1
                                                       k             ∗
                                                           (., w) − Vh+1 (., w) (s, a)

      + 2Lβ φ(s, a) (Λk )−1 + β̃ ψ(s, a, w)   k  −1
                            h                      Λ̃h

                   k
      ≤ η̃ kh + ξ̂ h , ψ(s, a, w) − Q∗h (s, a, w) + 2Lβ φ(s, a) (Λk )−1 + β̃ ψ(s, a, w)   k  −1 .
                                                                                    h                         Λ̃h
                                                                                                (Induction assumption)

Therefore, conditioned on events {E3 (w)}w∈W   f, for all (s, a, w, h, k) ∈ S × A × W × [H] × [K],
                                                                                    f
we have

                             k
  Q∗h (s, a, w) ≤ η̃ kh + ξ̂ h , ψ(s, a, w) + 2Lβ φ(s, a) (Λk )−1 + β̃ ψ(s, a, w)   k  −1
                                                                            h                           Λ̃h
                    (                                                                                               )+
                                    k
                =        η̃ kh + ξ̂ h , ψ(s, a, w)       + 2Lβ φ(s, a) (Λk )−1 + β̃ ψ(s, a, w)   k  −1
                                                                                h                         Λ̃h

                = Qkh (s, a, w),
where the first equality follows from the fact that Q∗h (s, a, w) ≥ 0. This completes the proof.

C.3     P ROOF OF T HEOREM 3
                                                                        k
First, we bound the number of times Algorithm 3 updates ξ̂ h , i.e., number of planning calls. Let P
be the total number of policy updates and kp be the episode at, the agent did replanning for the p-th
                                                                          d
time. Note that det Λ1h = λd and det ΛK              K    d
                                        h ≤ trace(Λh /d) ≤ λ + d
                                                                       K
                                                                            , and consequently:
                                            P        k            d
                                 det ΛK         det Λhp

                                      h
                                           Y                  K
                                         =               ≤ 1+       ,
                                 det Λ1h            kp−1
                                           p=1 det Λh
                                                              dλ

and therefore

                           H                     H Y
                                                   P      k                              dH
                             det ΛK                  det Λhp

                           Y
                                    h
                                                 Y                                 K
                                     1       =                kp−1
                                                                        ≤       1+              .                   (34)
                               det Λ                                               dλ
                           h=1       h           h=1 p=1 det Λh

We similarly have
                        H       K            H Y
                                               P       kp                    mdH
                        Y det Λ̃  h
                                             Y   det Λ̃h                 K
                                  1      =                    kp−1
                                                                   ≤ 1+          .                                  (35)
                            det Λ̃                 p=1 det Λ̃
                                                                        mdλ
                        h=1       h          h=1                  h
                    k
             det Λhp
Since 1 ≤        kp−1    for all p ∈ [P ], we can deduce from (34) and (35) that
            det Λh

                                                                                                k
                                                              det Λkh                   det Λ̃h
                          ∃h ∈ [H] such that e <                        or e <       (36)
                                              det Λk̃h               k̃
                                                               det Λ̃h

                                K                       K
happens for at most dH log 1 + dλ    + mdH log 1 + mdλ      number of episodes k ∈ [K].

                                                                                  K
This concludes that number of planning calls in Algorithm 3 is at most dH log 1 + dλ   +

               K
mdH log 1 + mdλ     .
                                                                                            k
Now, we prove the regret bound. Let δhk = Vhk̃ (skh , wk ) − Vhπ (skh , wk ) and ξh+1  k
                                                                                            =
 h              i
   k     k    k    k
E δh+1 |sh , ah − δh+1 . Conditioned on events {E3 (w)}w∈W
                                                         f, for all (s, a, w, h, k) ∈ S × A ×



                                                             25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


W
f × [H] × [K], we have

                      k                           k̃                     k
Qk̃h (s, a, w) − Qπh (s, a, w) =      η̃ k̃h + ξ̂ h , ψ(s, a, w) − Qπh (s, a, w) + 2Lβ φ(s, a) (Λk̃ )−1 + β̃ ψ(s, a, w) k̃ −1
                                                                                                     h                  (Λ̃h )
                                        h                               i
                                              k̃               πk
                                   ≤ Ph Vh+1       (., w) − Vh+1  (., w) (s, a) + 4Lβ φ(s, a) (Λk̃ )−1 + 2β̃ ψ(s, a, w) k̃ −1 .
                                                                                                                  h           (Λ̃h )
                                                                                                                       (37)

                                                k
Note that δhk ≤ Qk̃h (skh , akh , wk ) − Qπh (skh , akh , wk ). Thus, combining (37), Lemma 9, and a union
bound over W,f we conclude that for all (h, k) ∈ [H] × [K], with probability at least 1 − δ, it holds
that gives

              δhk ≤ ξh+1
                     k      k
                         + δh+1 + 4Lβ φ(skh , akh )                        + 2β̃ ψ(skh , akh , wk )     k̃
                                                                                                                 .
                                                                 (Λk̃
                                                                   h)
                                                                      −1                              (Λ̃h )−1


Now, we complete the regret analysis following similar steps as those of Theorem 1’s proof:
        K
        X                            k
RK =          V1∗ (sk1 , wk ) − V1π (sk1 , wk )
        k=1
        K
        X                            k
    ≤         V1k̃ (sk1 , wk ) − V1π (sk1 , wk )                                                                 (Lemma 11)
        k=1
        K
        X
    =         δ1k
        k=1
        K X
        X H                     K X
                                X H                                          K X
                                                                             X H
    ≤               ξhk + 4Lβ                φ(skh , akh )   k̃  −1 + 2β̃               ψ(skh , akh , wk )   k̃  −1
                                                            Λh                                                   Λ̃h
        k=1 h=1                 k=1 h=1                                      k=1 h=1
                                                    v                                                   v
       K X H            K X H                               k          K X H
                                                                                                        u det Λ̃kh
                                                    u                                                   u
      X
               k
                       X
                                  k    k
                                                    u det Λ h
                                                                      X
                                                                                 k    k     k
    ≤         ξh + 4Lβ         φ(sh , ah )       −1
                                                    t          + 2 β̃         ψ(s  ,
                                                                                 h h a  , w  )    k
                                                                                                     −1
                                                                                                        t
                                           (                k̃                                                   k̃
                                              h)
                                             Λk       det Λ                                     Λ̃h
      k=1 h=1          k=1 h=1                              h         k=1 h=1                             det Λ̃h
                                                                                       (Eqn. (27))
         p                    √   p                             p
    ≤ 2H T log(dT /δ) + 4H K Lβ 2d log(1 + K/λ) + β̃ 2md log(1 + K/λ)
          √
    ≤ Õ L λm2 d3 H 3 T .


D    D ETAILS OF R EMARK 2: R ELAXATION OF A SSUMPTION 3

In this section, we replace Assumption 3 with the following assumption:
                                       (1)   (2)     (n)         0
Assumption
      n                      set {w , w , . . . , w } of n ≤ d tasks such that ψ(s, a, w) ∈
           5. There is a known
                     o
Span   ψ(s, a, w(j) )       for all (s, a, w) ∈ S × A × W. This implies that for any (s, a, w) ∈
                             j∈[n]
S × A × W, there exist coefficients {cj (s, a, w)}j∈[n] such that
                                          X
                         ψ(s, a, w) =          cj (s, a, w)ψ s, a, w(j) .                                              (38)
                                                    j∈[n]
            P
Moreover,       j∈[n] cj (s, a, w)       ≤ L for all (s, a, w) ∈ S × A × W.
                                                                                                             0
Define the concatenated mapping ψ̃         :                      S × A × W                  →        Rd+d such that
                       >             > >

ψ̃(s,
n a, w) =       φ(s, a) , ψ(s, a, w)     .                        For anyo w ∈               W,       define D(w) =
 (s, a) : ψ̃(s, a, w) are d + d0 linearly independent vectors. .                   Given Assumption 5, we mod-


                                                            26
     Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


     Algorithm 4: Modified UCBlvd
1 Set: QkH+1 (., ., .) = 0, ∀k ∈ [K], k̃ = 1
2 for episodes k = 1, . . . , K do
3     Observe the initial state sk1 and the task context wk .
                                    k
                               det Λh
4     if ∃h ∈ [H] such that         k̃
                                       > e then
                               det Λh
5         k̃ = k
6         for time-steps h = H, . . . , 1 do
                             k
 7               Compute ξ̂ h as in (39).
8        for time-steps h = 1, . . . , H do
 9           Compute Qk̃h (skh , a, wk ) for all a ∈ A as in (7).
10           Play akh = arg maxa∈A Qk̃h (skh , a, wk ) and observe skh+1 and rhk .



     ify the planning step of UCBlvd to the following:
                                                                                                          2
                                                                                                         !
          k      k(j)                           X         X           D            E
                                                                         (j)                       (j)
       ξ̂ h , θ̂ h            = arg min                                 θ , φ(s, a) − ξ, ψ s, a, w
                        j∈[n]  ξ,{θ (j) }
                                         j∈[n] j∈[n] (s,a)∈D (w (j) )

                                                                                                         (39)
                                                k
                                                                                            √
                               s.t. θ (j) − θ̃ h w(j)            ≤ β, ∀j ∈ [n] and kξk2 ≤ H d0 .
                                                           Λk
                                                            h
                                                                                  k
     The only change we make in Algorithm 2 is in Line 9, in which ξ̂ h is now computed as defined in
     (39). We present this modification in Algorithm 4 for completeness.
     Theorem 4. Let T = KH.            Under Assumptions
                                                         1, 2, and 5, the number or planning calls in
                                             K
     Algorithm 4 is at most dH log 1 + dλ and there exists an absolute constant c > 0 such that for
                                                             √  p
     any fixed δ ∈ (0, 0.5), if we set λ = 1 and β = cH d + d0       λ log(dd0 T /δ) in Algorithm 4, then
     with probability at least 1 − 2δ, it holds that
                          p                          p                  p
               RK ≤ 2H T log(dT /δ) + 8HLβ 2dK log(K) ≤ Õ L (d3 + dd0 )H 3 T .                      (40)

     Proof of Theorem 4 follows exactly the same steps as those of Theorem 2. The only difference is the
     proof of Lemma 1, which we clarify in the proof of following lemma.
     Lemma 12. Let W  f = {wτ : τ ∈ [K]} ∪ {w(j) : j ∈ [n]}. Under Assumptions 1, 2, and
                               √  p
     5, if we let β = cH d + d0          λ log(dd0 T /δ) with an absolute constant c > 0, then for all
     (s, a, w, h, k) ∈ S × A × W × [H] × [K] with probability at least 1 − δ, it holds that

                          k
                                             h           i
                                               k
                       ξ̂ h , ψ(s, a, w) − Ph Vh+1 (., w) (s, a) ≤ 2Lβ φ(s, a) (Λk )−1 .
                                                                                                    h



                                          h                i>
     Proof. We let ψ̃ i (w)        =       φ> i , ψ i (w)
                                                         >
                                                                  be the i-th element of D̃(w)         =
     n                             o
      ψ̃(s, a, w) : (s, a) ∈ D(w) and for any triple (s, a, w) ∈ S × A × W, we let {c0i (s, a, w)}i∈[d+d0 ]
     be the coefficients such that                     X
                                    ψ̃(s, a, w) =            c0i (s, a, w)ψ̃ i (w),
                                                         i∈[d+d0 ]

     which implies that
                             X                                                   X
               φ(s, a) =               c0i (s, a, w)φi   and    ψ(s, a, w) =               c0i (s, a, w)ψ i (w).   (41)
                           i∈[d+d0 ]                                           i∈[d+d0 ]



                                                               27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Thanks to Assumption 2 and conditioned on events {E1 (w)}w∈W f, one set of solution for (39) is
                         k
                       V
 θ kh w(j)       and ξ hh+1 with corresponding zero optimal objective value. Therefore, it holds
                     j∈[n]
that
                                  k(j)                           k

                               θ̂ h , φi              =       ξ̂ h , ψ i       w   (j)
                                                                                              ,        ∀(i, j) ∈ [d + d0 ] × [n].                 (42)

Moreover, for any triple (s, a, j) ∈ S × A × [n], we have
                                                              k
               k
                                       X
                             (j)             0         (j)                (j)
            ξ̂ h , ψ s, a, w        =       ci s, a, w       ξ̂ h , ψ i w                                                                  (Eqn. (41))
                                                            i∈[d+d0 ]
                                                                X                             k(j)
                                                        =                  c0i s, a, w(j)    θ̂ h , φi                                     (Eqn. (42))
                                                            i∈[d+d0 ]

                                                                   k(j)
                                                        =       θ̂ h , φ(s, a)                    .                                               (43)

For any (s, a, w) ∈ S × A × W, it holds that
          h            i         D                 E
       Ph Vh+1k
                 (., w) (s, a) = θ kh (w), φ(s, a)                                                                                           (Eqn. (4))
                                   k
                                    Vh+1
                               = ξ h , ψ(s, a, w)                                                                                      (Assumption 2)
                                                     k
                                 X                    Vh+1          (j)
                               =       cj (s, a, w) ξ h , ψ s, a, w                                                                        (Eqn. (38))
                                                       j∈[n]
                                                        X
                                                                                k
                                                  =             cj (s, a, w)Ph Vh+1   ., w(j) (s, a)i                                  (Assumption 2)
                                                       j∈[n]
                                                        X
                                                  =             cj (s, a, w)               θ kh       w   (j)
                                                                                                                    , φ(s, a) .                   (44)
                                                       j∈[n]


Finally, conditioned on events {E1 (w)}w∈W f, for all (s, a, w, h, k) ∈ S × A × W × [H] × [K], it
                                                                                f
holds that

      k
                         h           i
                           k
   ξ̂ h , ψ(s, a, w) − Ph Vh+1 (., w) (s, a)                                                (45)

              k
                                    D                  E
=          ξ̂ h , ψ(s, a, w)       − θ kh (w), φ(s, a)

                                                                                                                          !
                                          k
       X
=              cj (s, a, w)            ξ̂ h , ψ       s, a, w   (j)
                                                                           −           θ kh       w   (j)
                                                                                                                , φ(s, a)         (Eqns. (38) and (23))
       j∈[n]
                                                                                                                     !
                                          k                                               k(j)
       X
                                                                (j)
≤              cj (s, a, w)            ξ̂ h , ψ       s, a, w              −           θ̂ h , φ(s, a)
       j∈[n]

                               k(j)   k                                    k
       X                                                 X
+              cj (s, a, w) θ̂ h − θ̃ h w(j) , φ(s, a) +   cj (s, a, w) θ̃ h w(j) − θ kh w(j) , φ(s, a)
    j∈[n]                                                                                             j∈[n]

                    k(j)   k                                       k
  X                                              X
                               (j)                                     (j)      k   (j)
=   cj (s, a, w) θ̂ h − θ̃ h w       , φ(s, a) +   cj (s, a, w) θ̃ h w       − θh w       , φ(s, a)
       j∈[n]                                                                                          j∈[n]
                                                                                                                                           (Eqn. (22))
≤ 2Lβ φ(s, a) (Λk )−1 .                                                                                                                    (Lemma 5)
                               h


                                                                                    28
     Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


     Algorithm 5: Standard Lifelong-LSVI with Computation Sharing
1 Set: QkH+1 (., ., .) = 0, ∀k ∈ [K], k̃ = 1
2 for episodes k = 1, . . . , K do
3     Observe the initial state sk1 and the task context wk .
                                   ˜k
                               det Λh
4     if ∃h ∈ [H] such that             > e then
                                   ˜ k̃
                               det Λh
5         k̃ = k
6         for time-steps h = H, . . . , 1 do
7             Compute Compute ν̃ k̃h as in (49).
8          for time-steps h = 1, . . . , H do
 9             Compute Qk̃h (skh , a, wk ) for all a ∈ A as in (48).
10             Play akh = arg maxa∈A Qk̃h (skh , a, wk ) and observe skh+1 and rhk .


     E      D ETAILS OF R EMARK 3
     In this section, we only rely on the following two assumptions:
                                                                       0
     Assumption 6. Given a feature map ψ : S × A × W → Rd , consider function class
         (                                                                                         )
                                   n                                 o+
                                                                                    d0          d0
     F = f : f (s, w) = min max hν, ψ(s, a, w)i + β ψ(s, a, w) Λ−1      , H ν ∈ R , β ≥ 0, Λ ∈ S++ .
                                     a∈A

                                                                                                               (46)
                                                                    0             √
     Then for any f ∈ F and h ∈ [H], there exists a vector ν fh ∈ Rd with ν fh ≤ H d0 such that
                                                                              2

                                 Ph f (., w) (s, a) = hψ(s, a, w), ν fh i.

                                                                                              (47)
     Moreover, for every h ∈ [H], there exists a vector η h such that rh (s, a, w) = η h , ψ(s, a, w) .
     Assumption 7. Without loss of generality, ψ(s, a, w) 2 ≤ 1 for all (s, a, w) ∈ S × A × W, and
              √
     kη h k2 ≤ d0 for all h ∈ [H].

     E.1     OVERVIEW
     Let ψ τh = ψ(sτh , aτh , wτ ). Standard Lifelong-LSVI with computation sharing works with the follow-
     ing action-value functions:
                                                   D             E                         +
                Qkh (s, a, w) = rh (s, a, w) + ν̃ kh , ψ(s, a, w) + β ψ(s, a, w) (Λ̃k )−1     ,       (48)
                                                                                           h


     where
                   −1 k−1                                                                        k−1
                   k  X
                            τ                                                          k         X              >
      ν̃ kh =    Λ̃h                     k     τ         τ
                          ψ h . min max Qh+1 (sh+1 , a, w ), H              and   Λ̃h = λId0 +          ψ τh ψ τh .
                                           a∈A
                         τ =1                                                                    τ =1
                                                                                                               (49)
     Theorem  5. Let T  = KH. Under Assumptions 6 and 7, the number of planning calls in 5 is at most
     d0 H log 1 + dK0 λ and there exists an absolute constant c > 0 such that for any fixed δ ∈ (0, 0.5), if
                                 p
     we set λ = 1 and β = cd0 H log(d0 T /δ) in Algorithm 5, then with probability at least 1 − 2δ, it
     holds that
                                                                            p
                            p                         p                             3 3
                                       0                   0
                 RK ≤ 2H T log(d T /δ) + 4Hβ 2d K log(K) ≤ Õ                     0
                                                                                d H T .


                                                          29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


E.2      N ECESSARY ANALYSIS FOR THE PROOF OF T HEOREM 5
Thanks to Assumption 6, we have

                                                 h           i        D                 E
                                                   k
                                               Ph Vh+1 (., w) (s, a) = ν kh , ψ(s, a, w) ,                                         (50)
                        Vk
where ν kh = ν hh+1 .
Lemma 13. Let cβ be a constant in the definition of β. Then, under Assumption 7, there is an
absolute constant c0 independent of cβ , such that for all (h, k) ∈ [H] × [K], with probability at least
1 − δ it holds that
  k−1
  X                                                                            q
      ψ τh . Vh+1
              k
                  (sτh+1 , wτ ) − Ph [Vh+1
                                       k
                                           (., wτ )](sτh , aτh )      ≤ c0 d0 H log((cβ + 1)d0 T /δ),
 τ =1                                                                                         k −1

                                                                                            Λ̃h

where c0 and cβ are two independent absolute constants.
                                                                                                 −1
                                                                   √

                                                                                            k
Proof. We note that η h + ν̃ kh                           ≤ (1 + H) d0 and              Λ̃h              ≤ λ1 . Thus, Lemmas 19 and 24
                                                      2

together imply that for all (h, k) ∈ [H] × [K], with probability at least 1 − δ it holds that
                                                                                       2
 k−1
 X
        φτh        k
                  Vh+1 (sτh+1 , wτ ) − Ph [Vh+1
                                            k
                                                (., wτ )](sτh , aτh )
 τ =1                                                                                     k −1

                                                                                        Λ̃h
                                                                                                                √ !          
                    0                                                   √                                     2 2  0        1  8k 2  2

                  d                 k+λ                                                2               1 + 32L β d
≤ 4H 2             log                        + d0 log(1 + 8H d0 / ) + d0 log                                 2
                                                                                                                     + log      +       .
                  2                  λ                                                                       λ              δ     λ
                               0
                                   √   p
If we let   = dH
               k and β = cβ (d + d )H
                                     0  log(dT /δ), then, there exists an absolute constant C > 0
that is independent of cβ such that
                                                                                       2
 k−1
                                                                                                                  2
 X
        φτh        k
                       (sτh+1 , wτ ) − Ph [Vh+1
                                            k
                                                (., wτ )](sτh , aτh )                                  ≤ C(d0 + d0 )H 2 log (cβ + 1)d0 T /δ .

                  Vh+1
 τ =1                                                                                             −1
                                                                                            k
                                                                                           Λ̃h


                                                            p
Lemma 14. Under Assumptions 6 and 7, if we let β = cd0 H λ log(d0 T /δ) with an absolute
constant c > 0, then the event

                                k      k
                        E4 := ν h − ν̃ h k ≤ β, ∀(h, k) ∈ [H] × [K] .               (51)
                                                                      Λ̃h

holds with probability at least 1 − δ.

Proof.
                        −1 k−1
                        k  X
ν kh − ν̃ kh = ν kh − Λ̃h      ψ τh Vh+1
                                     k
                                         (sτh+1 , wτ )
                                               τ =1
                                                                                       
                                 −1                       k−1
                            k
                                      Λ̃kh ν kh −
                                                          X
              =         Λ̃h                                      ψ τh Vh+1
                                                                       k
                                                                           (sτh+1 , wτ )
                                                          τ =1
                                                                                                                      
                                     −1             −1 k−1
                                k                  k    X
              = λ Λ̃h                     ν kh − Λ̃h        ψ τh Vh+1
                                                                   k
                                                                       (sτh+1 , wτ ) − Ph [Vh+1
                                                                                            k
                                                                                                (., wτ )](sτh , aτh )  .
                |   {z                       }          τ =1
                                q1             |                             {z                                        }
                                                                                                  q2
                                                                                                                            (Eqn. (50))


                                                                            30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Thus, in order to upper bound ν kh − ν̃ kh (w)               k
                                                                  , we boundkq1 kΛ̃k andkq2 kΛ̃k separately.
                                                            Λ̃h                          h               h


From Assumption 7, we have
                                                                       √                   √
                               kq1 kΛk = λ ν kh   k  −1 ≤                  λ ν kh       ≤ H λd0 .                           (52)
                                       h               Λ̃h                          2


Thanks to Lemma 13, for all (h, k) ∈ [H] × [K], with probability at least 1 − δ, it holds that
             k−1
             X                                                                                                     q
kq2 kΛ̃k ≤          ψ τh Vh+1
                          k
                              (sτh+1 , wτ ) − Ph [Vh+1
                                                   k
                                                       (., wτ )](sτh , aτh )                           ≤ c0 d0 H    log((cβ + 1)d0 T /δ),
      h
             τ =1                                                                                 −1
                                                                                             (Λkh )
                                                                                                                            (53)
where c0 and cβ are two independent absolute constants.
Combining (52) and (53), for all (h, k) ∈ [H] × [K], with probability at least 1 − δ, it holds that

                                                                       p
                                       ν kh − ν̃ kh     k
                                                            ≤ cd0 H        λ log(d0 T /δ)
                                                      Λ̃h

for some absolute constant c > 0.
Lemma 15. Let the setting of Lemma 14 holds. Conditioned on events E4 defined in (51), and
with Qkh computed as in (48), it holds that Qkh (s, a, w) ≥ Q∗h (s, a, w) for all (s, a, w, h, k) ∈
S × A × W × [H] × [K].

Proof. We first note that conditioned on the event E4 , for all (s, a, w, h, k) ∈ S ×A×W ×[H]×[K],
it holds that
                      D                 E                       h                           i
       rh (s, a, w) + ν̃ kh , ψ(s, a, w) − Qπh (s, a, w) − Ph Vh+1  k             π
                                                                        (., w) − Vh+1 (., w) (s, a)
                      D                  E                   h           i
      = rh (s, a, w) + ν̃ kh , ψ(s, a, w) − rh (s, a, w) − Ph Vh+1
                                                               k
                                                                   (., w) (s, a)
          D                  E    h           i
      =    ν̃ kh , ψ(s, a, w) − Ph Vh+1
                                    k
                                        (., w) (s, a)
          D                         E
      =    ν̃ kh − ν kh , ψ(s, a, w)

      ≤ ν̃ kh − ν kh      k
                                ψ(s, a, w)   k  −1
                         Λ̃h                   Λ̃h

      ≤ β ψ(s, a, w)   k  −1 ,                                                                                      (Lemma 14)
                                 Λ̃h

for any policy π.
Now, we prove the lemma by induction. The statement holds for H because QkH+1 (., ., .) =
Q∗H+1 (., ., .) = 0 and thus conditioned on the event E4 , defined in (51), for all (s, a, w, k) ∈
S × A × W × [K], we have

                           D                 E
             rh (s, a, w) + ν kH , ψ(s, a, w) − Q∗H (s, a, w) ≤ β ψ(s, a, w)   k  −1 .
                                                                                                             Λ̃H

Therefore, conditioned on the event E4 , for all (s, a, w, k) ∈ S × A × W × [K], we have
                                          D                  E
          Q∗H (s, a, w) ≤ rH (s, a, w) + ν kH , ψ(s, a, w) + β ψ(s, a, w) (Λ̃k )−1
                                                                              H
                                            D                  E                      +
                                               k
                        = rH (s, a, w) + ν H , ψ(s, a, w) + β ψ(s, a, w) (Λ̃k )−1
                                                                                                             H


                               = QkH (s, a, w),


                                                                  31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


where the first equality follows from the fact that Q∗H (s, a, w) ≥ 0. Now, suppose the statement
holds at time-step h + 1 and consider time-step h. Conditioned on events E4 , for all (s, a, w, h, k) ∈
S × A × W × [H] × [K], we have
                   D                E                     h                           i
0 ≤ rh (s, a, w) + ν kh , ψ(s, a, w) − Q∗h (s, a, w) − Ph Vh+1k            ∗
                                                                 (., w) − Vh+1 (., w) (s, a) + β ψ(s, a, w)   k  −1
                                                                                                             Λ̃h
                   D                E
  ≤ rh (s, a, w) + ν kh , ψ(s, a, w) − Q∗h (s, a, w) + β ψ(s, a, w)   k  −1 .
                                                                                  Λ̃h
                                                                                              (Induction assumption)
Therefore, conditioned on events E4 , for all (s, a, w, h, k) ∈ S × A × W × [H] × [K], we have
                                         D                  E
           Q∗h (s, a, w) ≤ rh (s, a, w) + ν kh , ψ(s, a, w) + β ψ(s, a, w)   k  −1
                                                                                              Λ̃h
                            (                                                                           )+
                                                D                 E
                        =       rh (s, a, w) + ν kh , ψ(s, a, w) + β ψ(s, a, w)   k  −1
                                                                                                  Λ̃h

                        = Qkh (s, a, w),
where the first equality follows from the fact that Q∗H (s, a, w) ≥ 0. This completes the proof.



E.3   P ROOF OF T HEOREM 5
First, we bound the number of times Algorithm 5 updates ν̃ kh . Let P be the total number of updates
                                                                                             1     0
and kp be the episode at which, the agent did replanning for the p-th time. Note that det Λ̃h = λd
           K           K      0
                                             d0
and det Λ̃h ≤ trace(Λ̃h /d0 )d ≤ λ + K   d0     , and consequently:
                                     K        P       kp                         d0
                            det Λ̃h           Y det Λ̃h                  K
                                     1   =             kp−1
                                                              ≤       1+ 0            ,
                             det Λ̃h         p=1 det Λ̃h
                                                                        dλ

and therefore

                       H        K            H Y
                                               P       kp                          d0 H
                       Y det Λ̃  h
                                             Y   det Λ̃h                     K
                                 1       =                 kp−1
                                                                  ≤       1+ 0                .                  (54)
                                                                            dλ
                       h=1 det Λ̃h           h=1 p=1 det Λ̃h

                 ˜ kp
             det Λh
Since 1 ≤       ˜ kp−1
                       for all p ∈ [P ], we can deduce from (54) that
            det Λh

                                                                           k
                                                                      det Λ̃h
                                   ∃h ∈ [H] such that         e<
                                                                           k̃
                                                                      det Λ̃h

happens for at most d0 H log 1 + dK0 λ number of episodes k ∈ [K]. This concludes that number of

planning calls in Algorithm 5 is at most d0 H log 1 + dK0 λ .
                                                                                          k
Now, we prove the regret bound. Let δhk = Vhk̃ (skh , wk ) − Vhπ (skh , wk ) and ξh+1         k
                                                                                                  =
 h                i
      k      k  k      k
E δh+1 |sh , ah − δh+1 . Conditioned on E4 , for all (s, a, w, h, k) ∈ S × A × W × [H] × [K],
we have
                    k
                                               D                  E     k
Qk̃h (s, a, w) − Qπh (s, a, w) = rh (s, a, w) + θ k̃h , ψ(s, a, w) − Qπh (s, a, w) + β ψ(s, a, w) k̃ −1
                                                                                                 (Λ̃h )
                                     h                           i
                                         k̃             πk
                               ≤ Ph Vh+1 (., w) − Vh+1 (., w) (s, a) + 2β ψ(s, a, w) (Λ̃v )−1 .
                                                                                                             h
                                                                                                                 (55)


                                                       32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                 k
Note that δhk̃ ≤ Qkh (skh , akh , wk ) − Qπh (skh , akh , wk ). Thus, (55) and Lemma 14 imply that for all
(h, k) ∈ [H] × [K], it holds that
                                δhk ≤ ξh+1
                                       k      k
                                           + δh+1 + 2β ψ(skh , akh , wk )                  k
                                                                                                    .
                                                                                        (Λ̃h )−1

Now, we complete the regret analysis following similar steps as those of Theorem 1’s proof:
                    K
                    X                                k
           RK =           V1∗ (sk1 , wk ) − V1π (sk1 , wk )
                    k=1
                    K
                    X                                k
                ≤         V1k̃ (sk1 , wk ) − V1π (sk1 , wk )                                                            (Lemma 15)
                    k=1
                    K
                    X
                =         δ1k
                    k=1
                    K X
                    X H                       K X
                                              X H
                ≤               ξhk + 2β                   ψ(skh , akh , wk )   k̃  −1
                                                                               Λ̃h
                    k=1 h=1                   k=1 h=1
                                                                                         v
                    K X
                      H                       K X
                                                H
                                                                                         u det Λ̃kh
                                                                                         u
                    X                         X
                ≤               ξhk + 2β                   ψ(skh , akh , wk )   k     −1 t                               (Eqn. (27))
                                                                               Λ̃h                      k̃
                    k=1 h=1                   k=1 h=1                                          det Λ̃h
                      p                  p
                ≤ 2H T log(d0 T /δ) + 4Hβ 2λd0 K log(1 + K/λ)
                      p
                ≤ Õ    λd0 3 H 3 T .


F     D ETAILS OF R EMARK 4: A MISSPECIFIED SETTING
We first present a definition for an approximate completeness model.
Assumption 8 (ζ-Approximate Completeness). Given feature maps φ : S × A → Rd and ψ :
                    0
S × A × W → Rd in Assumption 1, consider the function class
      (                                                                                                                            )
                                                                                     o+
                                                                                                             d0
                                          n
F = f : f (s, w) = min max hν, ψ(s, a, w)i + β φ(s, a) Λ−1                                ,H       ,ν ∈ R         , Λ ∈ Sd++ , β ≥ 0   .
                                    a∈A

                                                           0             √
 For any f ∈ F and h ∈ [H], there exists a vector ξ fh ∈ Rd with ξ fh ≤ H d0 such that for all
(s, a, w) ∈ S × A × W
                                     Ph f (., w) (s, a) − hξ fh , ψ(s, a, w)i ≤ ζ.


Theorem 6. Let T = KH. Under Assumptions 1, 8, and 3, the number of planning calls in Algorithm
                           K
2 is at most dH log(1 + dλ    ), and there exists an absolute constant c > 0 such that for any fixed
                                                    √     p
δ ∈ (0, 0.5), if we set λ = 1 and β = cH(d + md) log(mdT /δ) in Algorithm 2, then with
probability at least 1 − 2δ, it holds that

                                                 √                p
                                    RK ≤ Õ          mdT ζ +          (d3 + md2 )H 3 T .

F.1 N ECESSARY ANALYSIS FOR THE PROOF OF T HEOREM 6

Let s(i) , a(i) be the i-th element of D and {c0i (s, a)}i∈[d] be the coefficients such that
                                          X
                                φ(s, a) =     c0i (s, a)φ s(i) , a(i) .
                                                         i∈[d]
                                                                  0
                                                         P
Then, Lφ is a positive constant such that                  i∈[d] ci (s, a)   ≤ Lφ for all (s, a) ∈ S × A.


                                                                 33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Lemma 16. Let W       f = {wτ : τ ∈ [K]} ∪ {w(j) : j ∈ [n]}. Under the setting of Theorem 6 and
conditioned on events {E1 (w)}w∈W    f defined in (9), for all (s, a, w, h, k) ∈ S × A × W × [H] × [K],
                                                                                         f
it holds that
           k                      k
                                                                  √
       hξ̂ h , ψ(s, a, w)i − Ph [Vh+1 (., w)](s, a) ≤ (2L + Lφ md)ζ + 2Lβ φ(s, a) (Λk )−1 .
                                                                                            h



Proof. Thanks to Assumption 8 and conditioned on events {E1 (w)}w∈W
                                                                  f, one set of feasible parame-
                                       k
                                     V
ters for (8) is θ kh w(j)      and ξ hh+1 such that
                                    j∈[n]

                                                         √

                 k(j)             k

              θ̂ h , φ(s, a) − ξ̂ h , ψ s, a, w(j)    ≤ ζ md,                                              ∀(j, (s, a)) ∈ [n] × D.       (56)


For any triple (s, a, j) ∈ S × A × [n], we have
                              k
       k

                     (j)                            (j)
    ξ̂ h , ψ s, a, w       = ξ̂ h , φ(s, a) ⊗ ρ w
                             *                                             +
                                k X 0

                                                      (i) (i)        (j)
                           = ξ̂ h ,     ci (s, a)φ s , a        ⊗ρ w
                                               i∈[d]

                                                                  k
                                   X
                               =              c0i (s, a)       ξ̂ h , ψ       (i)
                                                                              s ,a ,w   (i)     (j)
                                                                                                                             (Assumption 3)
                                   i∈[d]
                                   √

                                                                                                    k(j)
                                                 X                            X
                               ≤       mdζ               c0i (s, a) +                 c0i (s, a) θ̂ h , φ s(i) , a(i)    (Eqn. (56))
                                                 i∈[d]                        i∈[d]
                                          √

                                                                 k(j)
                               ≤ Lφ mdζ + θ̂ h                            , φ(s, a) .

                                                                                    √

                                  k                                                                        k(j)

                                                        (j)
Similarly, it holds that       ξ̂ h , ψ       s, a, w              ≥ −Lφ mdζ +                          θ̂ h , φ(s, a)    . Therefore, for any
(s, a, j) ∈ S × A × [n], it holds that

                                                                                                            √

                              k                                              k(j)

                                                    (j)
                           ξ̂ h , ψ       s, a, w                −        θ̂ h , φ(s, a)                ≤ Lφ mdζ.                        (57)


For any (s, a, w) ∈ S × A × W, it holds that
         h            i         D                 E
     Ph Vh+1k
                (., w) (s, a) = θ kh (w), φ(s, a)                                                                                  (Eqn. (4))
                                       k
                                       V
                              ≤ ζ + ξ hh+1 , ψ(s, a, w)                                                                      (Assumption 8)
                                                  k
                                      X             V
                              =ζ+         cj (w) ξ hh+1 , ψ s, a, w(j)                                                       (Assumption 3)
                                                   j∈[n]
                                                                             
                                                           X                             X
                                                                                                          k
                                      ≤ ζ 1 +                     cj (w) +                    cj (w)Ph Vh+1   ., w(j) (s, a)
                                                           j∈[n]                        j∈[n]
                                                                                                                             (Assumption 8)
                                                         X
                                      ≤ 2Lζ +                    cj (w) θ kh w(j)                   , φ(s, a) .              (Assumption 3)
                                                        j∈[n]
                           h           i
                             k
                                 (., w) (s, a) ≥ −2Lζ + j∈[n] cj (w) θ kh w(j) , φ(s, a) .
                                                       P
Similarly, it holds that Ph Vh+1
Therefore, for any (s, a, w) ∈ S × A × W, it holds that


                                                                          34
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                        h                   i                  X
                        k
                    Ph Vh+1 (., w)               (s, a) −              cj (w)           θ kh       w    (j)
                                                                                                                  , φ(s, a) ≤ 2Lζ.             (58)
                                                               j∈[n]


Finally, conditioned on events {E1 (w)}w∈W f, for all (s, a, w, h, k) ∈ S × A × W × [H] × [K], it
                                                                                f
holds that

      k
                         h           i
                           k
   ξ̂ h , ψ(s, a, w) − Ph Vh+1 (., w) (s, a)

                                                                                                                      !
                                         k
                X
≤ 2Lζ +               cj (w)          ξ̂ h , ψ       s, a, w   (j)
                                                                          −        θ kh       w   (j)
                                                                                                            , φ(s, a)
              j∈[n]
                                                                                                                       (Assumption 3 and Eqn. (58))
                                                               k(j)                                                !
                                         k
                X
≤ 2Lζ +               cj (w)          ξ̂ h , ψ s, a, w(j)   − θ̂ h , φ(s, a)
              j∈[n]

                      k(j)   k                              k
    X                                           X
+           cj (w) θ̂ h − θ̃ h w(j) , φ(s, a) +   cj (w) θ̃ h w(j) − θ kh w(j) , φ(s, a)
    j∈[n]                                                                      j∈[n]

          √

                              k(j)   k                              k
                  X                                     X
≤ (2L + Lφ md)ζ +   cj (w) θ̂ h − θ̃ h w(j) , φ(s, a) +   cj (w) θ̃ h w(j) − θ kh w(j) , φ(s, a)
                                  j∈[n]                                                                                  j∈[n]
                                                                                                                                        (Eqn. (57))
                  √
≤ (2L + Lφ md)ζ + 2Lβ φ(s, a) (Λk )−1 .                                                                                                 (Lemma 5)
                                                                h


As the final step in the regret analysis, we state the following lemma which uses Lemma 16 to prove
the optimistic nature of UCBlvd. Then following the standard analysis of single-task LSVI-UCB we
derive the regret bound for misspecified settings.
Lemma 17. Let W  f = {wτ : τ ∈ [K]} ∪ {w(j) : j ∈ [n]}. Under the setting of Theorem
                                                                  k
6 and conditioned on events {E1 (w)}w∈W
                                      f defined in (9), and with Qh computed as in (7), it
                   √
holds that (2L + Lφ md)(H − h + 1)ζ + Qkh (s, a, w) ≥ Q∗h (s, a, w) for all (s, a, w, h, k) ∈
S ×A×W    f × [H] × [K].


Proof. We first note that conditioned on events {E1 (w)}w∈W
                                                          f , for all (s, a, w, h, k) ∈ S × A × W ×
                                                                                                f
[H] × [K], it holds that

                                   k
                                                                               h                         i
       rh (s, a, w) +           ξ̂ h , ψ(s, a, w)          − Qπh (s, a, w) − Ph Vh+1
                                                                                 k             π
                                                                                     (., w) − Vh+1 (., w) (s, a)

                           k
                                                             h           i
                                                               k
       = rh (s, a, w) + ξ̂ h , ψ(s, a, w) − rh (s, a, w) − Ph Vh+1 (., w) (s, a)

                   k
                                            h           i
                                              k
       =        ξ̂ h , ψ(s, a, w)       − Ph Vh+1 (., w) (s, a)
                 √
       ≤ (2L + Lφ md)ζ + 2Lβ φ(s, a) (Λk )−1 ,                                                                                         (Lemma 16)
                                                                          h


for any policy π.


                                                                              35
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Now, we prove the lemma by induction. The statement holds for H because QkH+1 (., ., .) =
Q∗H+1 (., ., .) = 0 and thus conditioned events {E1 (w)}w∈W
                                                          f, defined in (9), for all (s, a, w, k) ∈
S ×A×W     f × [K], we have


                                                                    √

                         k
 rH (s, a, w) +       ξ̂ H , ψ(s, a, w)   − Q∗H (s, a, w) ≤ (2L + Lφ md)ζ + 2Lβ φ(s, a) (Λk )−1 .
                                                                                                               H



Therefore, conditioned on events {E1 (w)}w∈W  f, for all (s, a, w, k) ∈ S × A × W × [K], we have
                                                                                f
                                                                                      √

 ∗                               k
QH (s, a, w) ≤ rH (s, a, w) + ξ̂ H , ψ(s, a, w) + 2Lβ φ(s, a) (Λk )−1 + (2L + Lφ md)ζ
                                                                                    H
                  (                                                         )+
                                                                                         √

                                       k
             =       rH (s, a, w) + ξ̂ H , ψ(s, a, w) + 2Lβ φ(s, a) (Λk )−1    + (2L + Lφ md)ζ
                                                                                        H

                                               √
             = QkH (s, a, w) + (2L + Lφ md)ζ,
where the first equality follows from the fact that Q∗H (s, a, w) ≥ 0. Now, suppose the statement
holds at time-step h + 1 and consider time-step h. Conditioned on events {E1 (w)}w∈W       f, for all
(s, a, w, h, k) ∈ S × A × Wf × [H] × [K], we have

                      k
                                                          h                          i
0 ≤ rh (s, a, w) + ξ̂ h , ψ(s, a, w) − Q∗h (s, a, w) − Ph Vh+1 k           ∗
                                                                 (., w) − Vh+1 (., w) (s, a)
                √
  + (2L + Lφ md)ζ + 2Lβ φ(s, a) (Λk )−1
                                          h

                                                                  √

                      k
  ≤ rh (s, a, w) + ξ̂ h , ψ(s, a, w) − Q∗h (s, a, w) + (2L + Lφ md)(H − h + 1)ζ + 2Lβ φ(s, a) (Λk )−1 .
                                                                                                                              h

                                                                                                (Induction assumption)

Therefore, conditioned on events {E1 (w)}w∈W   f, for all (s, a, w, h, k) ∈ S × A × W × [H] × [K],
                                                                                    f
we have
                                                               √

 ∗                               k
Qh (s, a, w) ≤ rh (s, a, w) + ξ̂ h , ψ(s, a, w) + (2L + Lφ md)(H − h + 1)ζ + 2Lβ φ(s, a) (Λk )−1
                                                                                                                          h
                 (                                                       )+
                                                                                      √

                                    k
             =    rh (s, a, w) + ξ̂ h , ψ(s, a, w) + 2Lβ φ(s, a) (Λk )−1    + (2L + Lφ md)(H − h + 1)ζ
                                                                                    h

                                              √
             = Qkh (s, a, w) + (2L + Lφ md)(H − h + 1)ζ,
where the first equality follows from the fact that Q∗h (s, a, w) ≥ 0. This completes the proof.



F.2   P ROOF OF T HEOREM 6
The proof for establishing the upper bound on the number of planning calls for misspecified settings
follows exactly the steps as those in the proof of Theorem 2.
                                                                                            k
Now, we prove the regret bound. Let δhk = Vhk̃ (skh , wk ) − Vhπ (skh , wk ) and ξh+1  k
                                                                                            =
 h              i
   k     k    k    k
E δh+1 |sh , ah − δh+1 . Conditioned on events {E1 (w)}w∈W
                                                         f, for all (s, a, w, h, k) ∈ S × A ×

W
f × [H] × [K], we have

                    k                                     k̃                        k
Qk̃h (s, a, w) − Qπh (s, a, w) = rh (s, a, w) +        ξ̂ h , ψ(s, a, w)       − Qπh (s, a, w) + 2Lβ φ(s, a) (Λk̃ )−1
                                                                                                                      h
                                      h
                                        k̃            πk
                                                                i                 √
                                  ≤ Ph Vh+1 (., w) − Vh+1 (., w) (s, a) + (2L + Lφ md)ζ + 4Lβ φ(s, a) (Λk̃ )−1 .
                                                                                                                                  h
                                                                                                                   (59)


                                                        36
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                   k
Note that δhk ≤ Qk̃h (skh , akh , wk ) − Qπh (skh , akh , wk ). Thus, combining (59), Lemma 5, and a union
bound over W,f we conclude that for all (h, k) ∈ [H] × [K], with probability at least 1 − δ, it holds
that gives
                                                          √
                δhk ≤ ξh+1k          k
                                 + δh+1  + (2L + Lφ md)ζ + 4Lβ φ(skh , akh ) k̃ −1 .
                                                                                                   (Λh )


Now, we complete the regret analysis following similar steps as those of Theorem 1’s proof:
              K
              X                            k
    RK =            V1∗ (sk1 , wk ) − V1π (sk1 , wk )
              k=1

                     √         K
                               X                       k
           ≤ (2L + Lφ md)HKζ +   V1k̃ (sk1 , wk ) − V1π (sk1 , wk )                                                 (Lemma 17)
                                               k=1

                     √         K
                               X
           = (2L + Lφ md)HKζ +   δ1k
                                               k=1

                            √                      K X
                                                   X H                        K X
                                                                              X H
           ≤ (4L + 2Lφ md)HKζ +                                   ξhk + 4Lβ             φ(skh , akh )   k̃  −1
                                                                                                       Λh
                                                   k=1 h=1                    k=1 h=1
                                                                            v
                            √                      K X
                                                     H                        K X
                                                                                H
                                                                            u det Λkh
                                                                            u
                                                   X                          X
                                         k                  k    k
           ≤ (4L + 2Lφ md)HKζ +         ξh + 4Lβ         φ(sh , ah )     −1
                                                                            t
                                k=1 h=1          k=1 h=1
                                                                     ( h)
                                                                      Λk      det Λk̃h
                                                                              (Eqn. (27))
                      √            p                      p
           ≤ (4L + 2Lφ md)HKζ + 2H T log(dT /δ) + 8HLβ 2dK log(1 + K/λ)
                       √           p
           ≤ Õ (L + Lφ md)HKζ + L λ(d3 + md2 )H 3 T ,

where the last two inequalities follow from the similar steps in the proof of Theorem 1.

G       AUXILIARY LEMMAS
Notations. N  (V) denotes the  -covering number of the class V of functions mapping S to R with
respect to the distance dist(V, V 0 ) = sups V (s) − V 0 (s) .
Lemma 18 (Bound on Weights θ kh (w)). Under Assumption 1, for any set of action-value functions
{Qkh }h∈[H] , and (w, h, k) ∈ W × [H] × [K], it holds that
                                                       √
                                       θ kh (w) ≤ H d.
                                                                    2


                                                                                                                 θ kh (w)

Proof. Recall that Vhk (s, w)          =                        min maxa∈A Qkh (s, a, w), H                and                   :=
     k    0           0
R
   V
  S h+1
        (s  , w)dµh (s  ). Thus, we have
                                                       Z                                 √
                                θ kh (w)       =                k
                                                               Vh+1 (s0 , w)dµh (s0 ) ≤ H d.
                                           2               S



Lemma 19 (Lemma D.4 in Jin et al. (2020)). Let {sτ }∞    τ =1 be a stochastic process on state space
S with corresponding filtration {Fτ }∞
                                     τ =0 . LetP{φτ }∞            d
                                                     τ =0 be an R -valued stochastic process where
                                                 k−1      >
φτ ∈ Fτ −1 , andkφτ k ≤ 1. Let Λk = λId + τ =1 φτ φτ . Then with probability at least 1 − δ, for
all k ≥ 0 and V ∈ V such that sups∈S V (s) ≤ H, we have
                                                       2
 k                                                                                                                   !
                                                                                                                             8k 2  2

 X                                                                       d           k+λ                   N  (V)
                                                                ≤ 4H 2

        φτ . V (sτ ) − E V (sτ )|Fτ −1                                     log                 + log                     +           .
 τ =1
                                                                         2            λ                      δ                 λ
                                                       Λ−1
                                                        k


                                                                    37
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Lemma 20. For any   > 0, the  -covering number of the Euclidean ball in Rd with radius R > 0 is
upper bounded by (1 + 2R/ )d .
Lemma 21. For a fixed w, let V denote a class of functions mapping from S to R with following
parametric form
                                                            q
        V (.) = min max z, ψ(., a, w) + y, φ(., a) + β φ(., a)> Yφ(., a), H ,
                               a∈A

                                               0
where the parameters β ∈ R, z ∈ Rd , y ∈ Rd , and Y ∈ Rd×d satisfy 0 ≤ β ≤ B,kzk ≤ z,kyk ≤ y,
andkYk ≤ λ−1 . Assume φ(s, a) ≤ 1 and ψ(s, a, w) ≤ 1 for all (s, a, w) ∈ S × A × W. Then
                                                                               √ !
                          0                                    2       1 + 8B 2 d
          log N  (V) ≤ d log(1 + 4z/ ) + d log(1 + 4y/ ) + d log                   .
                                                                           λ 2


Proof. First, we reparametrize V by letting Ỹ = β 2 Y. We have
                                                              q
          V (.) = min max z, ψ(., a, w) + y, φ(., a) + φ(., a)> Ỹφ(., a), H ,
                                   a∈A

                                                       2
for kzk ≤ z, kyk ≤ y, and Ỹ ≤ Bλ . For any two functions V1 , V2 ∈ V with parameters

  z1 , y1 , Ỹ1 and z2 , y2 , Ỹ2 , respectively, we have
                                     D              E D           E q
                                       1                1                   >  1
dist(V1 , V2 ) ≤      sup             z , ψ(s, a, w) + y , φ(s, a) + φ(s, a) Ỹ φ(s, a)
                   (s,a)∈S×A
                    D               E D            E q
             −       z2 , ψ(s, a, w) + y2 , φ(s, a) + φ(s, a)> Ỹ2 φ(s, a)
                                              D     E D     E q         D    E D     E q
                                                1       1       > 1       2      2       > 2
             ≤             sup                 z , ψ + y , φ + φ Ỹ φ − z , ψ + y , φ + φ Ỹ φ
                   ψ:kψk≤1,φ:kφk≤1
                                                                                                      s
                                   D           E                     D           E
             ≤       sup            z1 − z2 , ψ + sup                 y1 − y2 , φ + sup                   φ> Ỹ1 − Ỹ2 φ
                   ψ:kψk≤1                                 φ:kφk≤1                         φ:kφk≤1
                                                                                   √        √         p
                                                                       (because        a−       b ≤    |a − b| for a, b ≥ 0)
                                                           r
                     1         2         1         2
             = z −z                 + y −y             +       Ỹ1 − Ỹ2
                                                           r
             ≤ z1 − z2 + y 1 − y 2 +                           Ỹ1 − Ỹ2       .                                       (60)
                                                                           F

                                                       0
Let Cz and Cy be  /2-covers of {z ∈ Rd : kzk ≤ z} and {y ∈ Rd : kyk ≤ y},
                                                                       √
                                                                          respectively, with
                                     2                   d×d         B2 d
respect to the 2-norm, and CY be an   /4-cover of {Y ∈ R     : kYkF ≤ λ }, with respect to
the Frobenius norm. By Lemma 20, we know
                                                                                                   √ !d2
                                         0                                                 1 + 8B 2 d
             |Cz | ≤ (1 + 4z/ )d ,             Cy ≤ (1 + 4y/ )d , |CY | ≤                                .
                                                                                               λ 2

According to (60), it holds that N  (V) ≤ |Cz | Cy |CY |, and therefore
                                                                                                         √ !
                                     0                                                 2         1 + 8B 2 d
          log N  (V) ≤ d log(1 + 4z/ ) + d log(1 + 4y/ ) + d log                                             .
                                                                                                     λ 2


                                                                 38
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Lemma 22. For a fixed w, let V denote a class of functions mapping from S to R with following
parametric form
                       (                             q                  +     )
            V (.) = min max z, ψ(., a, w) + 2Lβ φ(., a)> Yφ(., a)          ,H ,
                                  a∈A

                                               0
where the parameters β ∈ R, z ∈ Rd and Y ∈ Rd×d satisfy 0 ≤ β ≤ B,kzk ≤ z, andkYk ≤ λ−1 .
Assume φ(s, a) ≤ 1 and ψ(s, a, w) ≤ 1 for all (s, a, w) ∈ S × A × W. Then
                                                                  2
                                                                    √ !
                                                           1 + 8B    d
                  log N  (V) ≤ d0 log(1 + 4z/ ) + d2 log

                                                                        .
                                                               λ 2


Proof. First, we reparametrize V by letting Ỹ = β 2 Y. We have
                                                       q
                                                                >
                  V (.) = min max z, ψ(., a, w) + φ(., a) Ỹφ(., a), H ,
                                         a∈A

                               2

for kzk ≤ z, and Ỹ ≤ Bλ . For any two functions V1 , V2 ∈ V with parameters z1 , Ỹ1 and

  z2 , Ỹ2 , respectively, we have
                                  D               E q                       D              E q
dist(V1 , V2 ) ≤     sup           z1 , ψ(s, a, w) + φ(s, a)> Ỹ1 φ(s, a) − z2 , ψ(s, a, w) + φ(s, a)> Ỹ2 φ(s, a)
                   (s,a)∈S×A
                                          D     E q         D    E q
                                            1       > 1       2      > 2
             ≤            sup              z , ψ + φ Ỹ φ − z , ψ + φ Ỹ φ
                   ψ:kψk≤1,φ:kφk≤1
                                                               s
                                D           E
             ≤      sup          z1 − z2 , ψ + sup                 φ> Ỹ1 − Ỹ2 φ
                   ψ:kψk≤1                           φ:kφk≤1
                                                                              √        √         p
                                                                   (because       a−       b ≤    |a − b| for a, b ≥ 0)
                                     r
                     1      2
             = z −z              +       Ỹ1 − Ỹ2
                                     r
                     1      2
             ≤ z −z              +       Ỹ1 − Ỹ2        .                                                       (61)
                                                      F
                                          0
                             ∈ Rd : kzk ≤ z} with respect to the 2-norm, and CY be an  2 /4-cover
Let Cz be an  /2-cover of {z √
           d×d            B2 d
of {Y ∈ R      : kYkF ≤ λ }, with respect to the Frobenius norm. By Lemma 20, we know
                                                                              √ !d2
                                                     0                1 + 8B 2 d
                             |Cz | ≤ (1 + 4z/ )d , |CY | ≤                          .
                                                                          λ 2

According to (61), it holds that N  (V) ≤ |Cz ||CY |, and therefore
                                                                                      √ !
                                               0                     2        1 + 8B 2 d
                         log N  (V) ≤ d log(1 + 4z/ ) + d log                             .
                                                                                  λ 2



Lemma 23. For a fixed w, let V denote a class of functions mapping from S to R with following
parametric form
            (                           q                       q                         +   )
V (.) = min max z, ψ(., a, w) + 2Lβ φ(., a)> Yφ(., a) + β̃ φ(., a, w)> Ỹφ(., a, w)         ,H ,
               a∈A



                                                              39
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                       0                                       0     0
where the parameters β, β̃ ∈ R, z ∈ Rd , Y ∈ Rd×d and Ỹ ∈ Rd ×d satisfy 0 ≤ β ≤ B,
0 ≤ β̃ ≤ B̃ kzk ≤ z, kYk ≤ λ−1 and Ỹ ≤ λ−1 . Assume φ(s, a) ≤ 1 and ψ(s, a, w) ≤ 1
for all (s, a, w) ∈ S × A × W. Then
                                                                        √ !                                       √ !
                                                                1 + 8B 2 d      2                        1 + 8B̃ 2 d0
      log N  (V) ≤ d0 log(1 + 4z/ ) + d2 log                                + d0 log

                                                                                                                      .
                                                                    λ 2                                      λ 2

Proof. First, we reparametrize V by letting Z = β 2 Y and Z̃ = β̃ 2 Ỹ. We have
                                            q                       q
      V (.) = min max z, ψ(., a, w) + φ(., a)> Zφ(., a) + φ(., a)> Z̃φ(., a), H ,
                         a∈A
                                2                  2
for kzk ≤ z, kZk ≤ Bλ , and Z̃ ≤ B̃λ . For any two functions V1 , V2 ∈ V with parameters

  z1 , Z1 , Z̃1 and z2 , Z2 , Z̃2 , respectively, we have
                                     D              E q                   q
                                       1                      > 1                    >  1
dist(V1 , V2 ) ≤      sup             z , ψ(s, a, w) + φ(s, a) Z φ(s, a) + ψ(s, a, w) Z̃ ψ(s, a, w)
                   (s,a)∈S×A
                    D               E q                     q
             −       z2 , ψ(s, a, w) + φ(s, a)> Z2 φ(s, a) + ψ(s, a, w)> Z̃2 ψ(s, a, w)
                                           D     E q       q         D    E q       q
                                             1       > 1     > 1       2      > 2     > 2
             ≤             sup              z , ψ + φ Z φ + ψ Z̃ ψ − z , ψ + φ Z φ + ψ Z̃ ψ
                   ψ:kψk≤1,φ:kφk≤1
                                                   r                                                           s
                                D           E
             ≤       sup         z1 − z2 , ψ + sup   φ> (Z1 − Z2 ) φ +                              sup             ψ > Z̃1 − Z̃2 ψ
                   ψ:kψk≤1                         φ:kφk≤1                                         ψ:kφk≤1
                                                                                  √        √             p
                                                                    (because          a−       b ≤        |a − b| for a, b ≥ 0)
                                                           r
                     1      2
                                     p
             = z −z                 + kZ1 − Z2 k + Z̃1 − Z̃ 2
                                     q            r
             ≤ z1 − z2                  1   2
                                    + kZ − Z kF +    Z̃1 − Z̃2                .                                                (62)
                                                                          F
                                           0
Let Cz be an  /2-cover of {z ∈ Rd : kzk ≤ z} with respect to the 2-norm, CZ be an  2 /4-cover of
                    2
                      √                                          0  0                                                  2
                                                                                                                           √
{Z ∈ Rd×d : kZkF ≤ B λ d }, and CZ̃ be an  2 /4-cover of {Z̃ ∈ Rd ×d :                                    Z̃       ≤ B̃ λ d } with
                                                                                                               F
respect to the Frobenius norm. By Lemma 20, we know
                                               √ !d2                                                √ !d0 2
                           d0         1 + 8B 2 d                                           1 + 8B̃ 2 d0
         |Cz | ≤ (1 + 4z/ ) , |CZ | ≤                ,                        CZ̃ ≤                         .
                                          λ 2                                                  λ 2
According to (62), it holds that N  (V) ≤ |Cz ||CY |, and therefore
                                                              √ !                                                 √ !
                        0                            1 + 8B 2 d         2                                1 + 8B̃ 2 d0
                                            2
                                                                    + d0 log

     log N  (V) ≤ d log(1 + 4z/ ) + d log                                                                             .
                                                         λ 2                                                 λ 2


Lemma 24. Let V denote a class of functions mapping from S to R with following parametric form
                     (                             q                        +     )
                                                              >
       V (., .) = min max z, ψ(., a, .) + 2Lβ ψ(., a, .) Yψ(., a, .)          ,H ,
                                    a∈A

                                               0                0   0
where the parameters β ∈ R, z ∈ Rd and Y ∈ Rd ×d satisfy 0 ≤ β ≤ B,kzk ≤ z, andkYk ≤ λ−1 .
Assume ψ(s, a, w) ≤ 1 for all (s, a, w) ∈ S × A × W. Then
                                                                   √ !
                                  0                02      1 + 8B 2 d0
                  log N  (V) ≤ d log(1 + 4z/ ) + d log                  .
                                                               λ 2


                                                               40
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Proof. First, we reparametrize V by letting Ỹ = β 2 Y. We have
                                                      q
                                                                >
               V (., .) = min max z, ψ(., a, .) + ψ(., a, .) Ỹψ(., a, .), H ,
                                    a∈A

                               2

for kzk ≤ z, and Ỹ ≤ Bλ . For any two functions V1 , V2 ∈ V with parameters z1 , Ỹ1 and

  z2 , Ỹ2 , respectively, we have
                                                      D               E q
          dist(V1 , V2 ) ≤          sup                z1 , ψ(s, a, w) + ψ(s, a)> Ỹ1 ψ(s, a)
                             (s,a,w)∈S×A×W
                         D             E q
                           2                        >  2
                       − z , ψ(s, a, w) + ψ(s, a, w) Ỹ ψ(s, a, w)
                                          D      E q            D     E q
                       ≤      sup          z1 , ψ + ψ > Ỹ1 ψ − z2 , ψ + ψ > Ỹ2 ψ
                             ψ:kψk≤1
                                                                             s
                                         D           E
                       ≤      sup         z1 − z2 , ψ +           sup            ψ > Ỹ1 − Ỹ2 ψ
                             ψ:kψk≤1                             ψ:kψk≤1
                                                                                 √        √         p
                                                                  (because           a−       b ≤    |a − b| for a, b ≥ 0)
                                                 r
                              1      2
                       = z −z                +       Ỹ1 − Ỹ2
                                                 r
                              1      2
                       ≤ z −z                +       Ỹ1 − Ỹ2        .                                              (63)
                                                                  F
                                         0
Let Cz be an  /2-cover of {z ∈√Rd : kzk ≤ z} with respect to the 2-norm, and CY be an  2 /4-cover
            0  0             2  0
of {Y ∈ Rd ×d : kYkF ≤ B λ d }, with respect to the Frobenius norm. By Lemma 20, we know
                                                                                  √ !d0 2
                                                     0                    1 + 8B 2 d0
                        |Cz | ≤ (1 + 4z/ )d , |CY | ≤                                     .
                                                                              λ 2

According to (63), it holds that N  (V) ≤ |Cz ||CY |, and therefore
                                                                                         √ !
                                                     2                           1 + 8B 2 d0
                   log N  (V) ≤ d0 log(1 + 4z/ ) + d0 log

                                                                                             .
                                                                                     λ 2



H    D ETAILS OF THE EXPERIMENTS
In all the experiments, we have chosen δ = 0.01, λ = 1, d = 5, and H = 5. The parameters
{η h }h∈[H] are drawn from N (0, Id0 ). In order to tune parameters {µh (.)}h∈[H] and the feature
mappings φ such that they are compatible with Assumption 1, we consider that the feature space
                                                                                 Pd
{φ(s, a) : (s, a) ∈ S × A} is a subset of the d-dimensional simplex, {φ ∈ Rd : i=1 φi = 1, φi ≥
0, φi ≤ 1, ∀i ∈ [d]}, and e>
                           i µh (.) is an arbitrary probability measure over S for all i ∈ [d].
The results shown in Figure 2a depict averages over 50 realizations for the main setup considered
throughout the paper with m = 5 and the results shown in Figure 2b depict averages over 50
realizations, for the more general setup of Remark 2 with d0 = 10. For the results shown in Figure 2a,
the mappings ρ(w) are drawn from N (0, Im ) except for the n = m representative tasks {w(j) }j∈[m]
introduced in Assumption 3, for which we set ρ(w(j) ) = ej for j ∈ [m]. For the results shown in
Figure 2b, the mappings ψ(s, a, w) are drawn from N (0, Id0 ) and we set ψ(s, a, w(j) ) = ej for
j ∈ [d0 ], where {w(j) }j∈[d0 ] are n = d0 representative tasks introduced in Assumption 5 in Appx. D.
The parameters {η h }h∈[H] are drawn from N (0, Id0 ), where d0 = m × d = 25 in Figure 2a. In our


                                                          41
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


experiments, the exact same settings are used for both UCBlvd and Lifelong-LSVI in both Figures 2a
and 2b. We chose fairly large d, m, and d0 and by checking online, we noticed that the optimal value
of QCQP in (8) happens always to be zero. All these together suggest that the assumptions made in
the paper approximately hold. Figures 2a and 2b depict the average per-episode reward of UCBlvd
and state the average number of planning calls and compare them to those of baseline algorithm
Lifelong-LSVI, a direct extension of LSVI-UCB in Jin et al. (2020). The results emphasize the value
of UCBlvd in terms of requiring much smaller numbers of planning calls. The plots verify that the
performances of Lifelong-LSVI and UCBlvd are almost the same statistically, while UCBlvd uses
much smaller numbers of planning calls (1000 vs ∼ 20).
In Figure 3, we plot UCBlvd’s number of planning calls for different number of task episodes, K,
while the setting is same as that in 2a. In this figure, we empirically verify the logarithmic dependence
of number of planning calls on K as suggested by Theorem 2.
 Per-episode reward


                                                                                             Per-episode reward


                             Episode, k                                                                                       Episode, k

            (a) Setting of Theorem 2, d = 5, m = 5, d0 = 25                                                       (b) Setting of Remark 2, d = 5, d0 = 10

                                                                          Figure 2: UCBlvd vs Lifelong-LSVI
                                          # of planning calls in UCBlvd


                                                                              Total number of task episodes, K

                                Figure 3: Setting of Theorem 2, d = 5, m = 5, d0 = 25


                                                                                           42
