Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


H ETEROGENEOUS N EURONAL AND S YNAPTIC DYNAM -
ICS FOR S PIKE -E FFICIENT U NSUPERVISED L EARNING :
T HEORY AND D ESIGN P RINCIPLES
 Biswadeep Chakraborty & Saibal Mukhopadhyay
 Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
 Georgia Institute of Technology
 {biswadeep,smukhopahyay6}@gatech.edu



                                            A BSTRACT

         This paper shows that the heterogeneity in neuronal and synaptic dynamics re-
         duces the spiking activity of a Recurrent Spiking Neural Network (RSNN) while
         improving prediction performance, enabling spike-efficient (unsupervised) learn-
         ing. We analytically show that the diversity in neurons’ integration/relaxation
         dynamics improves an RSNN’s ability to learn more distinct input patterns (higher
         memory capacity), leading to improved classification and prediction performance.
         We further prove that heterogeneous Spike-Timing-Dependent-Plasticity (STDP)
         dynamics of synapses reduce spiking activity but preserve memory capacity. The
         analytical results motivate Heterogeneous RSNN design using Bayesian optimiza-
         tion to determine heterogeneity in neurons and synapses to improve E, defined as
         the ratio of spiking activity and memory capacity. The empirical results on time
         series classification and prediction tasks show that optimized HRSNN increases
         performance and reduces spiking activity compared to a homogeneous RSNN.


1   I NTRODUCTION

Spiking neural networks (SNNs) (Ponulak & Kasinski, 2011) use unsupervised bio-inspired neu-
rons and synaptic connections, trainable with either biological learning rules such as spike-timing-
dependent plasticity (STDP) (Gerstner & Kistler, 2002) or supervised statistical learning algorithms
such as surrogate gradient (Neftci et al., 2019). Empirical results on standard SNNs also show good
performance for various tasks, including spatiotemporal data classification, (Lee et al., 2017; Khoei
et al., 2020), sequence-to-sequence mapping (Zhang & Li, 2020), object detection (Chakraborty
et al., 2021; Kim et al., 2020), and universal function approximation (Gelenbe et al., 1999; Iannella &
Back, 2001). An important motivation for the application of SNN in machine learning (ML) is the
sparsity in the firing (activation) of the neurons, which reduces energy dissipation during inference
(Wu et al., 2019). Many prior works have empirically shown that SNN has lower firing activity than
artificial neural networks and can improve energy efficiency (Kim et al., 2022; Srinivasan & Roy,
2019). However, there are very few analytical studies on how to reduce the spiking activity of an SNN
while maintaining its learning performance. Understanding and optimizing the relations between
spiking activity and performance will be key to designing energy-efficient SNNs for complex ML
tasks.
In this paper, we derive analytical results and present design principles from optimizing the spiking
activity of a recurrent SNN (RSNN) while maintaining prediction performance. Most SNN research
in ML considers a simplified network model with a homogeneous population of neurons and synapses
(homogeneous RSNN (MRSNN)) where all neurons have uniform integration/relaxation dynamics,
and all synapses use the same long-term potentiation (LTP) and long-term depression (LTD) dynamics
in STDP learning rules. On the contrary, neurobiological studies have shown that a brain has a wide
variety of neurons and synapses with varying firing and plasticity dynamics, respectively (Destexhe
& Marder, 2004; Gouwens et al., 2019; Hansel et al., 1995; Prescott et al., 2008). We show that
optimizing neuronal and synaptic heterogeneity will be key to simultaneously reducing spiking
activity while improving performance.


                                                  1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                 Table 1: Notations Table
 Notation             Meaning         Notation       Meaning              Notation       Meaning         Notation          Meaning
                   Heterogeneous
                                                 Spike train from                     Spike indicator
 HRSNN            Recurrent Spiking    Si (t)                               zjt                            r(t)         States of RSNN
                                                 neuron i at time t                      Function
                   Neural Network
                   Homogeneous
                                                 Synaptic Weight                                                      Covariance Matrix of
 MRSNN            Recurrent Spiking     ∆w                                  vth      Threshold voltage      Σ
                                                     Update                                                                   r(t)
                   Neural Network
                     Membrane                     Synaptic Time
   τm                                   τ±                                   C       Memory Capacity       xi             Model Input
                   Time Constant                    Constants
                     Membrane                                                         Model Output
  vi (t)                                η±       Scaling Functions          yτ                              E           Spike Efficiency
                      Potential                                                       with delay τ
                                                      Constant                       Recurrent Layer                   Total Spike Count
  vrest           Resting potential      α                                   R                           SR , SM
                                                   Decay Factor                          in RSNN                    HRSNN (R) , MRSNN (M)
                  Avg. Spike Count                Synapse weight                      Heterogeneity                     Spike frequency
 S̃R , S̃M         per neuron of        Wji        from neuron i             H         in Neuronal       ΦR , ΦM        of HRSNN (R),
               HRSNN (R), MRSNN (M)                  to neuron j                        Parameters                       MRSNN (M)


We define the spike efficiency E of an RSNN as the ratio of its memory capacity C and average spiking
activity S̃. Given a fixed number of neurons and synapses, a higher C implies a network can learn
more patterns and hence, perform better in classification or prediction tasks (Aceituno et al., 2020;
Goldmann et al., 2020); a lower spiking rate implies that a network is less active, and hence, will
consume less energy while making inferences (Sorbaro et al., 2020; Rathi et al., 2021). We analytically
show that a Heterogeneous Recurrent SNN (HRSNN) model leads to a more spike-efficient learning
architecture by reducing spiking activity while improving C (i.e., performance) of the learning models.
In particular, we make the following contributions to the theoretical understanding of an HRSNN.

             • We prove that for a finite number of neurons, models with heterogeneity among the neuronal
               dynamics has higher memory capacity C.

             • We prove that heterogeneity in the synaptic dynamics reduces the spiking activity of neurons
               while maintaining C. Hence, a model with heterogeneous synaptic dynamics has a lesser
               firing rate than a model with homogeneous synaptic dynamics.

             • We connect the preceding results to prove that simultaneously using heterogeneity in neurons
               and synapses, as in an HRSNN, improves the spike efficiency of a network.

We empirically characterize HRSNN considering the tasks of (a) classifying time series ( Spoken
Heidelberg Digits (SHD)) and (b) predicting the evolution of a dynamical system (a modified chaotic
Lorenz system). The theoretical results are used to develop an HRSNN architecture where a modified
Bayesian Optimization (BO) is used to determine the optimal distribution of neuron and synaptic
parameters to maximize E. HRSNN exhibits a better performance (higher classification accuracy and
lower NRMSE loss) with a lesser average spike count S̃ than MRSNN.
Related Works Inspired by the biological observations, recent empirical studies showed potential
for improving SNN performance with heterogeneous neuron dynamics(Perez-Nieves et al., 2021;
Chakraborty & Mukhopadhyay, 2023). However, there is a lack of theoretical understanding of why
heterogeneity improves SNN performance, which is critical for optimizing SNNs for complex tasks.
She et al. (2022) have analytically studied the universal sequence approximation capabilities of a feed-
forward network of neurons with varying dynamics. However, they did not consider heterogeneity in
plasticity dynamics, and the results are applicable only for a feed-forward SNN and do not extend
to recurrent SNNs (RSNN). The recurrence is not only a fundamental component of a biological
brain (Soures & Kudithipudi, 2019), but as a machine learning (ML) model, RSNN also shows good
performance in modeling spatiotemporal and nonlinear dynamics (Pyle & Rosenbaum, 2017; Gilra
& Gerstner, 2017). Hence, it is critical to understand whether heterogeneity can improve learning
in an RSNN. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first work that analytically studies the impact
of heterogeneity in synaptic and neuronal dynamics in an RSNN. This work shows that only using
neuronal heterogeneity improves performance and does not impact spiking activity. The number of
spikes required for the computation increases exponentially with the number of neurons. Therefore,
simultaneously analyzing and optimizing neuronal and synaptic heterogeneity, as demonstrated in
this work, is critical to design an energy-efficient recurrent SNN.


                                                                      2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


2   P RELIMINARIES AND D EFINITIONS
We now define the key terms used in the paper. Table 1 summarizes the key notations used in this
paper. Figure 1 shows the general structure of the HRSNN model with heterogeneity in both the LIF
neurons and the STDP dynamics. It is to be noted here that there are a few assumptions we use for
the rest of the paper: Firstly, the heterogeneous network hyperparameters are estimated before the
training and inference. The hyperparameters are frozen after estimation and do not change during the
model evaluation. Secondly, this paper introduces neuronal and synaptic dynamics heterogeneity by
using a distribution of specific parameters. However, other parameters can also be chosen, which
might lead to more interesting/better performance or characteristics. We assume a mean-field model
where the synaptic weights converge for the analytical proofs. In addition, it must be noted that LIF
neurons have been shown to demonstrate different states Brunel (2000). Hence, for the analytical
study of the network, we use the mean-field theory to analyze the collective behavior of a dynamical
system comprising many interacting particles.
Heterogeneous LIF Neurons We use the Leaky
Integrate and Fire (LIF) neuron model in all
our simulations. In this model, the membrane
potential of the i-th neuron ui (t) varies over
time as:
        dvi (t)
     τm         = − (vi (t) − vrest ) + Ii (t) (1)
          dt
where τm is the membrane time constant, vrest
is the resting potential and Ii is the input cur-
rent. When the membrane potential reaches the
threshold value vth a spike is emitted, vi (t) re-
sets to the reset potential vr and then enters a
refractory period where the neuron cannot spike.
Spikes emitted by the j th neuron at a finite set
of times {tj } can be formalized as a spike train
Si (t) = ∑ δ (t − ti ).                            Figure 1: Concept of HRSNN with variable Neu-
                                                   ronal and Synaptic Dynamics
Let the recurrent layer of an RSNN be R. We
incorporate heterogeneity in the LIF neurons by
using different membrane time constants τm,i and threshold voltages vth,i for each LIF neuron i in
R. This gives a distribution of time constants and threshold voltages of the LIF neurons in R.
Heterogeneous STDP:
The STDP rule for updating a synaptic weight (∆w) is defined by Pool & Mato (2011):
             ⎪ A (w)e− τ+ if ∆t ≥ 0
             ⎧            ∣∆t∣

∆w(∆t) = ⎨ +
             ⎪
                          − τ
                            ∣∆t∣             s.t., A+ (w) = η+ (wmax − w) , A− (w) = η− (w − wmin )
             ⎩ −A− (w)e − if ∆t < 0
             ⎪
             ⎪
                                                                                                (2)
where ∆t = tpost − tpre is the time difference between the post-synaptic spike and the pre-synaptic
one, with synaptic time-constant τ± . In heterogeneous STDP, we use an ensemble of values from a
distribution for τ± and the scaling functions η± .
Heterogeneity:
We define heterogeneity as a measure of the variability of the hyperparameters in an RSNN that gives
rise to an ensemble of neuronal dynamics.
Entropy is used to measure population diversity. Assuming that the random variable for the hyperpa-
rameters X follows a multivariate Gaussian Distribution (X ∼ N (µ, Σ)), then the differential entropy
                                                          n           1         n
of x on the multivariate Gaussian distribution, is H(x) = ln(2π) + ln ∣Σ∣ + . Now, if we take
                                                          2           2          2
any density function q(x) that satisfies ∫ q(x)xi xj dx = Σij and p = N (0, Σ), then H(q) ≤ H(p).
(Proof in Suppl. Sec. A) The Gaussian distribution maximizes the entropy for a given covariance.
Hence, the log-determinant of the covariance matrix bounds entropy. Thus, for the rest of the paper,
we use the determinant of the covariance matrix to measure the heterogeneity of the network.


                                                 3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Memory Capacity: Given an input signal x(t), the memory capacity C of a trained RSNN model
is defined as a measure for the ability of the model to store and recall previous inputs fed into the
network (Jaeger, 2001; Jaeger et al., 2001).
In this paper, we use C as a measure of the performance of the model, which is based on the network’s
ability to retrieve past information (for various delays) from the reservoir using the linear combinations
of reservoir unit activations observed at the output. Intuitively, HRSNN can be interpreted as a set
of coupled filters that extract features from the input signal. The final readout selects the right
combination of those features for classification or prediction. First, the τ -delay C measures the
performance of the RC for the task of reconstructing the delayed version of model input x(t) at delay
τ (i.e., x(t − τ ) ) and is defined as the squared correlation coefficient between the desired output (
τ -time-step delayed input signal, x(t − τ )) and the observed network output yτ (t), given as:
                               τmax
                                                        Cov2 (x(t − τ ), yτ (t))
                                                       τmax
                C=     lim     ∑ C(τ ) =     lim       ∑                         , τ ∈ N,               (3)
                     τmax →∞               τmax →∞
                               τ =1                τ =1 Var(x(t)) Var (yτ (t))

where Cov(⋅) and Var(⋅) denote the covariance function and variance function, respectively. The
yτ (t) is the model output in this reconstruction task. C measures the ability of RSNN to reconstruct
precisely the past information of the model input. Thus, increasing C indicates the network is capable
of learning a greater number of past input patterns, which in turn, helps in increasing the performance
of the model. For the simulations, we use τmax = 100.
Spike-Efficiency: Given an input signal x(t), the spike-efficiency (E) of a trained RSNN model is
defined as the ratio of the memory capacity C to the average total spike count per neuron S̃.
E is an analytical measure used to compare how C and hence the model’s performance is improved
with per unit spike activity in the model. Ideally, we want to design a system with high C using fewer
spikes. Hence we define E as the ratio of the memory capacity using NR neurons C(NR ) to the
average number of spike activations per neuron (S̃) and is given as:

                             C(NR )                    T                           T
                       E=              ,   Si = ∫          si (t)dt ≈ Npost     ∞                       (4)
                             ∑i=1
                              NR
                                  Si               0                          ∫tref tΦi dt
                               NR
where Npost is the number of postsynaptic neurons, Φi is the inter-spike interval spike frequency for
neuron i, and T is the total time. It is to be noted here that the total spike count S is obtained by
counting the total number of spikes in all the neurons in the recurrent layer until the emission of the
first spike at the readout layer.

3    H ETEROGENEOUS RSNN: A NALYTICAL R ESULTS
We present three main analytical findings. Firstly, neuronal dynamic heterogeneity increases memory
capacity by capturing more principal components from the input space, leading to better performance
and improved C. Secondly, STDP dynamic heterogeneity decreases spike activation without affecting
C, providing better orthogonalization among the recurrent network states and a more efficient repre-
sentation of the input space, lowering higher-order correlation in spike trains. This makes the model
more spike-efficient since the higher-order correlation progressively decreases the information avail-
able through neural population (Montani et al., 2009; Abbott & Dayan, 1999). Finally, incorporating
heterogeneity in both neuron and STDP dynamics boosts the C to spike activity ratio, i.e., E, which
enhances performance while reducing spike counts.
Memory Capacity: The performance of an RSNN depends on its ability to retain the memory of
previous inputs. To quantify the relationship between the recurrent layer dynamics and C, we note
that extracting information from the recurrent layer is made using a combination of the neuronal
states. Hence, more linearly independent neurons would offer more variable states and, thus, more
extended memory.
Lemma 3.1.1:         The state of the neuron can be written as follows:                        ri (t)    =
NR NR
         −1
∑ ∑ λn ⟨vn , w ⟩ (vn )i x(t − k), where vn , vn−1 ∈ V are, respectively, the left and right
     k        in

k=0 n=1
eigenvectors of W, win are the input weights, and λkn ∈ λ belongs to the diagonal matrix containing


                                                       4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


the eigenvalues of W; ai = [ai,0 , ai,1 , . . .] represents the coefficients that the previous inputs
xt = [x(t), x(t − 1), . . .] have on ri (t).
Short Proof: (See Suppl. Sec. B for full proof) As discussed by Aceituno et al. (2020), the state of
the neuron can be represented as r(t) = Wr(t − 1) + win x(t), where win are the input weights. We
can simplify this using the coefficients of the previous inputs and plug this term into the covariance
between two neurons. Hence, writing the input coefficients a as a function of the eigenvalues of W,

        ∞                      ∞                                         NR NR
r(t) = ∑ Wk win x(t−k) = ∑ (VΛk V−1 ) win x(t−k) ⇒ ri (t) = ∑ ∑ λkn ⟨vn−1 , win ⟩ (vn )i x(t−k)∎
       k=0                     k=0                                       k=0 n=1



Theorem 1: If the memory capacity of the HRSNN and MRSNN networks are denoted by CH and CM
respectively, then, CH ≥ CM , where the heterogeneity in the neuronal parameters H varies inversely
to the correlation among the neuronal states measured as ∑N      NR      2
                                                           n=1 ∑m=1 Cov (xn (t), xm (t)) which in
                                                             R

turn varies inversely with C.
Intuitive Proof: (See Suppl. Sec. B for full proof) Aceituno et al. (2020) showed that the C increases
when the variance along the projections of the input into the recurrent layer are uniformly distributed.
We show that this can be achieved efficiently by using heterogeneity in the LIF dynamics. More
formally, let us express the projection in terms of the state space of the recurrent layer. We show that
                                                                          NR 2
                                                                        ∑n=1  λn (Σ)
the raw variance in the neuronal states J can be written as J =                       2
                                                                                        where λn (Σ) is
                                                                         NR
                                                                      (∑n=1 λn (Σ))
the nth eigenvalue of Σ. We further show that with higher H, the magnitude of the eigenvalues of W
decreases and hence leads to a higher J . Now, we project the inputs into orthogonal directions of the
                                                         ∞
network state space and model the system as r(t) = ∑ aτ x(t − τ ) + εr (t) where the vectors aτ ∈ RN
                                                         τ =1
are correspond to the linearly extractable effect of x(t − τ ) onto r(t) and εr (t) is the nonlinear
contribution of all the inputs onto the state of r(t). First, we show that C increases when the variance
along the projections of the input into the recurrent layer is more uniform. Intuitively, the variances
at directions aτ must fit into the variances of the state space, and since the projections are orthogonal,
the variances must be along orthogonal directions. Hence, we show that increasing the correlation
among the neuronal states increases the variance of the eigenvalues, which would decrease our
                                                                                 NR
memory bound C ∗ . We show that heterogeneity is inversely proportional to ∑ Cov2 (xn (t), xm (t)).
                                                                                 n=1
We see that increasing the correlations between neuronal states decreases the heterogeneity of the
eigenvalues, which reduces C. We show that the variance in the neuronal states is bounded by the
determinant of the covariance between the states; hence, covariance increases when the neurons
become correlated. As H increases, neuronal correlation decreases. Aceituno et al. (2020) proved that
the neuronal state correlation is inversely related to C. Hence, for HRSNN, with H > 0, CH ≥ CM . ∎
Spiking Efficiency We analytically prove that the average firing rate of HRSNN is lesser than the
average firing rate of the MRSNN model by considering a subnetwork of the HRSNN network and
modeling the pre-and post-synaptic spike trains using a nonlinear interactive Hawkes process with
inhibition, as discussed by Duval et al. (2022). The details of the model are discussed in Suppl. Sec.
B.
Lemma 3.2.1: If the neuronal firing rate of the HRSNN network with only heterogeneity in LTP/LTD
dynamics of STDP is represented as ΦR and that of MRSNN represented as ΦM , then the HRSNN
model promotes sparsity in the neural firing which can be represented as ΦR < ΦM .
Short Proof: (See Suppl. Sec. B for full proof ) We show that the average firing rate of the model with
heterogeneous STDP (LTP/LTD) dynamics (averaged over the population of neurons) is lesser than the
corresponding average neuronal activation rate for a model with homogeneous STDP dynamics. We
prove this by taking a sub-network of the HRSNN model. Now, we model the input spike trains of the
pre-synaptic neurons using a multivariate interactive, nonlinear Hawkes process with multiplicative
inhibition. Let us consider a population of neurons of size N that is divided into population A
(excitatory) and population B (inhibitory). We use a particular instance of the model given in terms of
a family of counting processes (Zt1 , . . . , ZtNA ) (population A) and (ZtNA +1 , . . . , ZtN ) (population


                                                     5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


B ) with coupled conditional stochastic intensities given respectively by λA and λB as follows:
                                    −                                         −
                       ⎛1        t                ⎛1        t
                                           j⎞                         j⎞
          λA,N
           t   ∶= ΦA       ∑ ∫ h1 (t − u)dZu ΦB→A     ∑ ∫ h2 (t − u)dZu
                       ⎝ N j∈A 0            ⎠     ⎝ N j∈B 0             ⎠
                                    −                                               −
                       ⎛1        t                  ⎛1        t
                                           j⎞                           j⎞
          λB,N
           t   ∶= ΦB       ∑ ∫ h3 (t − u)dZu + ΦA→B     ∑ ∫ h4 (t − u)dZu                              (5)
                       ⎝ N j∈B 0            ⎠       ⎝ N j∈A 0             ⎠

where A, B are the populations of the excitatory and inhibitory neurons, respectively, λit is the
intensity of neuron i, Φi a positive function denoting the firing rate, and hj→i (t) is the synaptic kernel
associated with the synapse between neurons j and i. Hence, we show that the heterogeneous STDP
dynamics increase the synaptic noise due to the heavy tail behavior of the system. This increased
synaptic noise leads to a reduction in the number of spikes of the post-synaptic neuron. Intuitively,
a heterogeneous STDP leads to a non-uniform scaling of correlated spike-trains leading to de-
correlation. Hence, we can say that heterogeneous STDP models have learned a better-orthogonalized
subspace representation, leading to better encoding of the input space with fewer spikes. ∎
Theorem 2: For a given number of neurons NR , the spike efficiency of the model E = C(NS̃R ) for
HRSNN (ER ) is greater than MRSNN (EM ) i.e., ER ≥ EM
Short Proof: (See Suppl. Sec. B for full proof) First, using Lemma 3.2.1, we show that the number
of spikes decreases when we use heterogeneity in the LTP/LTD Dynamics. Hence, we compare the
efficiencies of HRSNN with that of MRSNN as follows:
                                                                                   ∞
                                               N     Cov2 (x(t−τ ),aR
                                                                    τ rR (t))
                                             ∑τ =1                                 ∫ tΦR dt
                                                R
                                                               τ rR (t))
                                                         Var(aR
                                                                              ×
                 ER CR (NR ) × S̃M                                                tref
                   =               =                                                ∞                  (6)
                 EM S̃R × CM (NR )                             τ rM (t))
                                             NR Cov2 (x(t−τ ),aM
                                            ∑τ =1   Var(aMτ rM (t))
                                                                         ×         ∫ tΦM dt
                                                                                  tref

Since SR ≤ SM and also,the covariance increases when the neurons become correlated, and as
neuronal correlation decreases, HX increases (Theorem 1), we see that ER /EM ≥ 1 ⇒ ER ≥ EM ∎
Optimal Heterogeneity using Bayesian Optimization for Distributions To get optimal heterogene-
ity in the neuron and STDP dynamics, we use a modified Bayesian Optimization (BO) technique.
However, using BO for high-dimensional problems remains a significant challenge. In our case,
optimizing HRSNN model parameters for 5000 neurons requires the optimization of two parameters
per neuron and four parameters per STDP synapse, where standard BO fails to converge to an optimal
solution. However, the parameters to be optimized are correlated and can be drawn from a probability
distribution as shown by Perez-Nieves et al. (2021). Thus, we design a modified BO to estimate
parameter distributions instead of individual parameters for the LIF neurons and the STDP synapses,
for which we modify the BO’s surrogate model and acquisition function. This makes our modified
BO highly scalable over all the variables (dimensions) used. The loss for the surrogate model’s
update is calculated using the Wasserstein distance between the parameter distributions. We use the
modified Matern function on the Wasserstein metric space as a kernel function for the BO problem.
The detailed BO methods are discussed in Suppl. Sec. A. BO uses a Gaussian process to model
the distribution of an objective function and an acquisition function to decide points to evaluate.
For data points x ∈ X and the corresponding output y ∈ Y , an SNN with network structure V and
neuron parameters W acts as a function fV,W (x) that maps input data x to y. The optimization
problem can be defined as: minV,W ∑x∈X,y∈Y L (y, fV,W (x)) where V is the set of hyperparameters
of the neurons in R and W is the multi-variate distribution constituting the distributions of: (i) the
membrane time constants τm−E , τm−I of LIF neurons, (ii) the scaling function constants (A+ , A− )
and (iii) the decay time constants τ+ , τ− for the STDP learning rule in SRR .

4    E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS
Model and Architecture We empirically verify our analytical results using HRSNN for classification
and prediction tasks. Fig. 2 shows the overall architecture of the prediction model. Using a
rate-encoding methodology, the time-series data is encoded to a series of spike trains. This high-
dimensional spike train acts as the input to HRSNN. The output spike trains from HRSNN act as the


                                                     6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


         Figure 2: Block Diagram showing the methodology using HRSNN for prediction


Figure 3: Figure showing the results of ablation studies of BO for the following three cases: (a) for
prediction problem - the radius indicates the normalized NRMSE loss with a smaller radius indicating
lower (better) NRMSE (b) for classification problem - the radius indicates the normalized accuracy
with larger radius indicating higher (better) accuracy. The numbers represent the number of neurons
used in each model, and the line joins the three corresponding models with the same model size. The
detailed results are shown in Suppl. Sec. A


input to a decoder and a readout layer that finally gives the prediction results. For the classification
task, we use a similar method. However, we do not use the decoding layer for the signal but directly
feed the output spike signals from HRSNN into the fully connected layer. The complete details of
the models used and description of the different modules used in Fig. 2 is discussed in Suppl. Sec. A.
Datasets: Classification: We use the Spoken Heidelberg Digits (SHD) spiking dataset to benchmark
the HRSNN model with other standard spiking neural networks (Cramer et al., 2020).
Prediction: We use a multiscale Lorenz 96 system (Lorenz, 1996) which is a set of coupled nonlinear
ODEs and an extension of Lorenz’s original model for multiscale chaotic variability of weather
and climate systems which we use as a testbed for the prediction capabilities of the HRSNN model
(Thornes et al., 2017). Further details on both datasets are provided in Suppl. Sec. A.
 Bayesian Optimization Ablation Studies: First, we perform an ablation study of BO for the
following three cases: (i) Using Memory Capacity C as the objective function (ii) Using Average
Spike Count S̃ as the objective function and (iii) Using E as the objective function. We optimize
both LIF neuron parameter distribution and STDP dynamics distributions for each. We plot C, S̃, the
                            ˆ and the observed RMSE of the model obtained from BO with different
empirical spike efficiency E,
numbers of neurons. The results for classification and prediction problems are shown in Fig. 3(a)
and (b), respectively. Ideally, we want to design networks with high C and low spike count, i.e.,
models in the upper right corner of the graph. The observed results show that BO using E as the
objective gives the best accuracy with the fewest spikes. Thus, we can say that this model has learned
a better-orthogonalized subspace representation, leading to better encoding of the input space with
fewer spikes. Hence, for the remainder of this paper, we focus on this BO model, keeping the E as the
objective function. This Bayesian Optimization process to search for the optimal hyperparameters of
the model is performed before training and inference using the model and is generally equivalent
to the network architecture search process used in deep learning. Once we have these optimal
hyper-parameters, we freeze these hyperparameters, learn (unsupervised) the network parameters


                                                   7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 4: Bar chart showing the global importance of different heterogeneous parameters using
HRSNN on the dataset. The experiments were repeated five times with different parameters from the
same distribution (a) Classification (b) Prediction


(i.e., synaptic weights) of the HRSNN while using the frozen hyperparameters, and generate the final
HRSNN model for inference. In other words, the hyperparameters, like the distribution of membrane
time constants or the distribution of synaptic time constants for STDP, are fixed during the learning
and inference. Further details of the Bayesian Optimization procedure, including the parameterized
variables and the final searched distributions of the hyperparameters, are shown in Suppl. Sec. A,
where we also discuss the convergence analysis of the three different BOs discussed above.
Heterogeneity Parameter Importance: We use SAGE (Shapley Additive Global importancE)
(Covert et al., 2020), a game-theoretic approach to understand black-box models to calculate the
significance of adding heterogeneity to each parameter for improving C and S̃. SAGE summarizes
the importance of each feature based on the predictive power it contributes and considers complex
feature interactions using the principles of Shapley value, with a higher SAGE value signifying a
more important feature. We tested the HRSNN model using SAGE on the Lorenz96 and the SHD
datasets. The results are shown in Fig. 4. We see that τm has the greatest SAGE values for C,
signifying that it has the greatest impact on improving C when heterogeneity is added. Conversely,
we see that heterogeneous STDP parameters (viz., τ± , η± ) play a more critical role in determining the
average neuronal spike activation. Hence, we confirm the notions proved in Sec. 3 that heterogeneity
in neuronal dynamics improves the C while heterogeneity in STDP dynamics improves the spike
count. Thus, we need to optimize the heterogeneity of both to achieve maximum E.
Results: We perform an ablation study to evaluate the performance of the HRSNN model and
compare it to standard BP-based spiking models. We study the performances of both the SHD
dataset for classification and the Lorenz system for prediction. The results are shown in Table
2. We compare the Normalized Root Mean Squared Error (NRMSE) loss (prediction), Accuracy
(classification), Average Spike Count S̃ and the application level empirical spiking efficiency Eˆ
                     1                        Accuracy
calculated as                (prediction) and           (classification). We perform the experiments
               NRMSE × S̃                         S̃
using 5000 neurons in R on both classification and prediction datasets. We see that the HRSNN model
with heterogeneous LIF and heterogeneous STDP outperforms other HRSNN and MRSNN models in
terms of NRMSE scores while keeping the S̃ much lower than HRSNN with heterogeneous LIF and
homogeneous STDP. From the experiments, we can conclude that the heterogeneous LIF neurons
have the greatest contribution to improving the model’s performance. In contrast, heterogeneity in
STDP has the most significant impact on a spike-efficient representation of the data. HRSNN with
heterogeneous LIF and STDP leverages the best of both worlds by achieving the best RMSE with low
spike activations, as seen from Table 2. Further detailed results on limited training data are added
in Suppl. Sec. A. We also compare the generalizability of the HRSNN vs. MRSNN models, where
we empirically show that the heterogeneity in STDP dynamics helps improve the overall model’s
generalizability. In addition, we discuss how HRSNN reduces the effect of higher-order correlations,
thereby giving rise to a more efficient representation of the state space.


                                                  8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Table 2: Table showing the comparison of the Accuracy and NRMSE losses for the SHD Classification
and Lorenz System Prediction tasks, respectively. We show the average spike rate, calculated as the
ratio of the moving average of the number of spikes in a time interval T . For this experiment, we
choose T = 4ms and a rolling time span of 2ms, which is repeated until the first spike appears in the
final layer. Following the works of Paul et al. (2022), we show that the normalized average spike rate
is the total number of spikes generated by all neurons in an RSNN averaged over the time interval T .
The results marked with * denotes we implemented the open-source code for the model and evaluated
the given results.
                                                        SHD                           Chaotic Lorenz System
                      Method                       (Classification)                       (Prediction)
                                                   Normalized                            Normalized
                                        Accuracy                    Efficiency                          Efficiency
                                                   Avg. Firing                    NRMSE Avg. Firing ˆ
                                          (A)              S̃        (Eˆ = A  )                  S̃
                                                                                                               1
                                                                                                       E = NRMSE×
                                                    Rate ( T )             S̃             Rate ( T )              S̃
                       MRSNN
                 (Homogeneous LIF,       73.58        -0.508       18.44 × 10−3    0.395      -0.768     0.787 × 10−3
 Unsupervised   Homogeneous STDP)
    RSNN               HRSNN
                 (Heterogeneous LIF,     78.87        0.277        17.19 × 10−3    0.203      -0.143     1.302 × 10−3
                Homogeneous STDP)
                       HRSNN
                 (Homogeneous LIF,       74.03        -1.292       22.47 × 10−3    0.372      -1.102     0.932 × 10−3
                Heterogeneous STDP)
                       HRSNN
                 (Heterogeneous LIF,     80.49        -1.154       24.35 × 10−3    0.195      -1.018     1.725 × 10−3
                Heterogeneous STDP)
                     MRSNN-BP
                 (Homogeneous LIF,       81.42        0.554        16.9 × 10−3     0.182      0.857      1.16 × 10−3
    RSNN
                          BP)
    with BP
                     HRSNN-BP
                 (Heterogeneous LIF,     83.54        1.292        15.42 × 10−3    0.178      1.233      1.09 × 10−3
                          BP)
                                                     0.831∗       17.21∗ × 10−3   0.174∗      0.941∗     1.19∗ × 10−3
                   Adaptive SRNN
                                         84.46
                   (Yin et al., 2020)


5    C ONCLUSION

This paper analytically and empirically proved that heterogeneity in neuronal (LIF) and synaptic
(STDP) dynamics leads to an unsupervised RSNN with more memory capacity, reduced spiking
count, and hence, better spiking efficiency. We show that HRSNN can achieve similar performance
as an MRSNN but with sparse spiking leading to the improved energy efficiency of the network. In
conclusion, this work establishes important mathematical properties of an RSNN for neuromorphic
machine learning applications like time series classification and prediction. However, it is interesting
to note that the mathematical results from this paper also conform to the recent neurobiological
research that suggests that the brain has large variability between the types of neurons and learning
methods. For example, intrinsic biophysical properties of neurons, like densities and properties of
ionic channels, vary significantly between neurons where the variance in synaptic learning rules
invokes reliable and efficient signal processing in several animals (Marder & Taylor, 2011; Douglass
et al., 1993). Experiments in different brain regions and diverse neuronal types have revealed a wide
range of STDP forms with varying neuronal dynamics that vary in plasticity direction, temporal
dependence, and the involvement of signaling pathways (Sjostrom et al., 2008; Korte & Schmitz,
2016). Thus, heterogeneity is essential in encoding and decoding stimuli in biological systems. In
conclusion, this work establishes connections between the mathematical properties of an RSNN
for neuromorphic machine learning applications like time series classification and prediction with
neurobiological observations. There are some key limitations to the analyses in this paper. First, the
properties discussed are derived independently. An important extension will be to consider all factors
simultaneously. Second, we assumed an idealized spiking network where the memory capacity is
used to measure its performance, and the spike count measures the energy. Also, we mainly focused
on the properties of RSNN trained using STDP. An interesting connection between synchronization
and heterogeneous STDP remains a topic that needs to be studied further - whether we can optimally
engineer the synchronization properties to improve the model’s performance. Finally, the empirical
evaluations were presented for the prediction task on a single dataset. More experimental evaluations,
including other tasks and datasets, will strengthen the empirical validations.


                                                          9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
This work is supported by the Army Research Office and was accomplished under Grant Number
W911NF-19-1-0447. The views and conclusions contained in this document are those of the authors
and should not be interpreted as representing the official policies, either expressed or implied, of the
Army Research Office or the U.S. Government.

R EFERENCES
Larry F Abbott and Peter Dayan. The effect of correlated variability on the accuracy of a population
  code. Neural computation, 11(1):91–101, 1999.
Pau Vilimelis Aceituno, Gang Yan, and Yang-Yu Liu. Tailoring echo state networks for optimal
  learning. iscience, 23(9):101440, 2020.
Robert M Blumenthal and Ronald K Getoor. Some theorems on stable processes. Transactions of the
  American Mathematical Society, 95(2):263–273, 1960.
Martin Boerlin and Sophie Denève. Spike-based population coding and working memory. PLoS
 computational biology, 7(2):e1001080, 2011.
Martin Boerlin, Christian K Machens, and Sophie Denève. Predictive coding of dynamical variables
 in balanced spiking networks. PLoS computational biology, 9(11):e1003258, 2013.
Ralph Bourdoukan, David Barrett, Sophie Deneve, and Christian K Machens. Learning optimal
  spike-based representations. Advances in neural information processing systems, 25, 2012.
Nicolas Brunel. Dynamics of sparsely connected networks of excitatory and inhibitory spiking
  neurons. Journal of computational neuroscience, 8(3):183–208, 2000.
György Buzsáki and Kenji Mizuseki. The log-dynamic brain: how skewed distributions affect
  network operations. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 15(4):264–278, 2014.
Biswadeep Chakraborty and Saibal Mukhopadhyay. Characterization of generalizability of spike
  time dependent plasticity trained spiking neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2105.14677, 2021.
Biswadeep Chakraborty and Saibal Mukhopadhyay. Heterogeneous recurrent spiking neural net-
  work for spatio-temporal classification. Frontiers in Neuroscience, 17, 2023. ISSN 1662-453X.
  doi: 10.3389/fnins.2023.994517. URL https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/
  10.3389/fnins.2023.994517.
Biswadeep Chakraborty, Xueyuan She, and Saibal Mukhopadhyay. A fully spiking hybrid neural
  network for energy-efficient object detection. arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.10719, 2021.
Ashesh Chattopadhyay, Pedram Hassanzadeh, and Devika Subramanian. Data-driven predictions
  of a multiscale lorenz 96 chaotic system using machine-learning methods: reservoir computing,
  artificial neural network, and long short-term memory network. Nonlinear Processes in Geophysics,
  27(3):373–389, 2020.
Julien Chevallier, María José Cáceres, Marie Doumic, and Patricia Reynaud-Bouret. Microscopic
  approach of a time elapsed neural model. Mathematical Models and Methods in Applied Sciences,
  25(14):2669–2719, 2015.
ES Chornoboy, LP Schramm, and AF Karr. Maximum likelihood identification of neural point
  process systems. Biological cybernetics, 59(4-5):265–275, 1988.
Lee Cossell, Maria Florencia Iacaruso, Dylan R Muir, Rachael Houlton, Elie N Sader, Ho Ko, Sonja B
  Hofer, and Thomas D Mrsic-Flogel. Functional organization of excitatory synaptic strength in
  primary visual cortex. Nature, 518(7539):399–403, 2015.
Ian Covert, Scott M Lundberg, and Su-In Lee. Understanding global feature contributions with
  additive importance measures. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:17212–
  17223, 2020.


                                                  10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Benjamin Cramer, Yannik Stradmann, Johannes Schemmel, and Friedemann Zenke. The heidelberg
  spiking data sets for the systematic evaluation of spiking neural networks. IEEE Transactions on
  Neural Networks and Learning Systems, 2020.
Sophie Denève and Christian K Machens. Efficient codes and balanced networks. Nature neuro-
  science, 19(3):375–382, 2016.
Alain Destexhe and Eve Marder. Plasticity in single neuron and circuit computations. Nature, 431
  (7010):789–795, 2004.
John K Douglass, Lon Wilkens, Eleni Pantazelou, and Frank Moss. Noise enhancement of information
  transfer in crayfish mechanoreceptors by stochastic resonance. Nature, 365(6444):337–340, 1993.
Céline Duval, Eric Luçon, and Christophe Pouzat. Interacting hawkes processes with multiplicative
  inhibition. Stochastic Processes and their Applications, 148:180–226, 2022.
Igor Farkaš and Peter Gergel’. Maximizing memory capacity of echo state networks with orthog-
  onalized reservoirs. In 2017 International Joint Conference on Neural Networks (IJCNN), pp.
  2437–2442. IEEE, 2017.
Igor Farkaš, Radomír Bosák, and Peter Gergel’. Computational analysis of memory capacity in echo
  state networks. Neural Networks, 83:109–120, 2016.
Jean Feydy, Thibault Séjourné, François-Xavier Vialard, Shun-ichi Amari, Alain Trouvé, and Gabriel
  Peyré. Interpolating between optimal transport and mmd using sinkhorn divergences. In The 22nd
  International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pp. 2681–2690. PMLR, 2019.
Peter I Frazier. A tutorial on bayesian optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:1807.02811, 2018.
Antonio Galves and Eva Löcherbach. Modeling networks of spiking neurons as interacting processes
  with memory of variable length. Journal de la Société Française de Statistique, 157(1):17–32,
  2016.
Erol Gelenbe, Zhi-Hong Mao, and Yan-Da Li. Function approximation with spiked random networks.
  IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks, 10(1):3–9, 1999.
Felipe Gerhard, Moritz Deger, and Wilson Truccolo. On the stability and dynamics of stochastic
  spiking neuron models: Nonlinear hawkes process and point process glms. PLoS computational
  biology, 13(2):e1005390, 2017.
Wulfram Gerstner and Werner M Kistler. Mathematical formulations of hebbian learning. Biological
 cybernetics, 87(5):404–415, 2002.
Aditya Gilra and Wulfram Gerstner. Predicting non-linear dynamics by stable local learning in a
  recurrent spiking neural network. Elife, 6:e28295, 2017.
Mirko Goldmann, Felix Köster, Kathy Lüdge, and Serhiy Yanchuk. Deep time-delay reservoir
 computing: Dynamics and memory capacity. Chaos: An Interdisciplinary Journal of Nonlinear
 Science, 30(9):093124, 2020.
Nathan W Gouwens, Staci A Sorensen, Jim Berg, Changkyu Lee, Tim Jarsky, Jonathan Ting, Susan M
  Sunkin, David Feng, Costas A Anastassiou, Eliza Barkan, et al. Classification of electrophysio-
  logical and morphological neuron types in the mouse visual cortex. Nature neuroscience, 22(7):
 1182–1195, 2019.
David Hansel, Germán Mato, and Claude Meunier. Synchrony in excitatory neural networks. Neural
  computation, 7(2):307–337, 1995.
Niels Richard Hansen, Patricia Reynaud-Bouret, and Vincent Rivoirard. Lasso and probabilistic
  inequalities for multivariate point processes. 2015.
Hatsuo Hayashi and Jun Igarashi. Ltd windows of the stdp learning rule and synaptic connections hav-
  ing a large transmission delay enable robust sequence learning amid background noise. Cognitive
  neurodynamics, 3(2):119–130, 2009.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Nicolangelo Iannella and Andrew D. Back. A spiking neural network architecture for nonlinear
  function approximation. Neural Networks, 14(6):933–939, 2001. ISSN 0893-6080. doi: https:
  //doi.org/10.1016/S0893-6080(01)00080-6. URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/
  science/article/pii/S0893608001000806.
Herbert Jaeger. The “echo state” approach to analysing and training recurrent neural networks-with
  an erratum note. Bonn, Germany: German National Research Center for Information Technology
  GMD Technical Report, 148(34):13, 2001.
Herbert Jaeger. Short term memory in echo state networks. gmd-report 152. In GMD-German
  National Research Institute for Computer Science (2002), http://www. faculty. jacobs-university.
  de/hjaeger/pubs/STMEchoStatesTechRep. pdf. Citeseer, 2002.
Herbert Jaeger et al. Short term memory in echo state networks, volume 5. GMD-Forschungszentrum
  Informationstechnik Bremen, Germany, 2001.
Mina A Khoei, Amirreza Yousefzadeh, Arash Pourtaherian, Orlando Moreira, and Jonathan Tapson.
 Sparnet: Sparse asynchronous neural network execution for energy efficient inference. In 2020
 2nd IEEE International Conference on Artificial Intelligence Circuits and Systems (AICAS), pp.
 256–260. IEEE, 2020.
Daehyun Kim, Biswadeep Chakraborty, Xueyuan She, Edward Lee, Beomseok Kang, and Saibal
  Mukhopadhyay. Moneta: A processing-in-memory-based hardware platform for the hybrid
  convolutional spiking neural network with online learning. Frontiers in Neuroscience, 16, 2022.
Seijoon Kim, Seongsik Park, Byunggook Na, and Sungroh Yoon. Spiking-yolo: Spiking neural
  network for energy-efficient object detection. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial
  Intelligence, volume 34, pp. 11270–11277, 2020.
Diederik P Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1412.6980, 2014.
Martin Korte and Dietmar Schmitz. Cellular and system biology of memory: timing, molecules, and
 beyond. Physiological reviews, 96(2):647–693, 2016.
Łukasz Kuśmierz, Shun Ogawa, and Taro Toyoizumi. Edge of chaos and avalanches in neural
  networks with heavy-tailed synaptic weight distribution. Physical Review Letters, 125(2):028101,
  2020.
Jaehoon Lee, Yasaman Bahri, Roman Novak, Samuel S Schoenholz, Jeffrey Pennington, and Jascha
  Sohl-Dickstein. Deep neural networks as gaussian processes. arXiv preprint arXiv:1711.00165,
  2017.
Hongmin Li, Hanchao Liu, Xiangyang Ji, Guoqi Li, and Luping Shi. Cifar10-dvs: an event-stream
  dataset for object classification. Frontiers in neuroscience, 11:309, 2017.
Eva Löcherbach. Spiking neurons: interacting hawkes processes, mean field limits and oscillations.
  ESAIM: Proceedings and Surveys, 60:90–103, 2017.
Edward N Lorenz. Deterministic nonperiodic flow. Journal of atmospheric sciences, 20(2):130–141,
  1963.
Edward N Lorenz. Predictability: A problem partly solved. In Proc. Seminar on predictability,
  volume 1, 1996.
Cheng Ly. Firing rate dynamics in recurrent spiking neural networks with intrinsic and network
  heterogeneity. Journal of computational neuroscience, 39(3):311–327, 2015.
Rosario N Mantegna and H Eugene Stanley. Scaling behaviour in the dynamics of an economic index.
  Nature, 376(6535):46–49, 1995.
Eve Marder and Adam L Taylor. Multiple models to capture the variability in biological neurons and
  networks. Nature neuroscience, 14(2):133–138, 2011.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Cyrille Mascart. Efficient simulation of point processes with applications to neurosciences. PhD
  thesis, Université Côte d’Azur, Nice, France, 2021.
Sam McKenzie, Roman Huszár, Daniel F English, Kanghwan Kim, Fletcher Christensen, Euisik
  Yoon, and György Buzsáki. Preexisting hippocampal network dynamics constrain optogenetically
  induced place fields. Neuron, 109(6):1040–1054, 2021.
Fernando Montani, Robin AA Ince, Riccardo Senatore, Ehsan Arabzadeh, Mathew E Diamond, and
  Stefano Panzeri. The impact of high-order interactions on the rate of synchronous discharge and
  information transmission in somatosensory cortex. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society
  A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences, 367(1901):3297–3310, 2009.
Emre O Neftci, Hesham Mostafa, and Friedemann Zenke. Surrogate gradient learning in spiking
 neural networks. IEEE Signal Processing Magazine, 36:61–63, 2019.
Erkki Oja. Simplified neuron model as a principal component analyzer. Journal of mathematical
  biology, 15(3):267–273, 1982.
Erkki Oja. Neural networks, principal components, and subspaces. International journal of neural
  systems, 1(01):61–68, 1989.
Ankita Paul, Stefan Wagner, and Anup Das. Learning in feedback-driven recurrent spiking neural
  networks using full-force training. In 2022 International Joint Conference on Neural Networks
 (IJCNN), pp. 1–10. IEEE, 2022.
Nicolas Perez-Nieves, Vincent CH Leung, Pier Luigi Dragotti, and Dan FM Goodman. Neural
  heterogeneity promotes robust learning. Nature communications, 12(1):1–9, 2021.
Balint Petro, Nikola Kasabov, and Rita M Kiss. Selection and optimization of temporal spike
  encoding methods for spiking neural networks. IEEE transactions on neural networks and learning
  systems, 31(2):358–370, 2019.
Peter Pfaffelhuber, Stefan Rotter, and Jakob Stiefel. Mean-field limits for non-linear hawkes processes
  with excitation and inhibition. Stochastic Processes and their Applications, 153:57–78, 2022.
Filip Ponulak and Andrzej Kasinski. Introduction to spiking neural networks: Information processing,
   learning and applications. Acta neurobiologiae experimentalis, 71(4):409–433, 2011.
R Rossi Pool and Germán Mato. Spike-timing-dependent plasticity and reliability optimization: the
  role of neuron dynamics. Neural computation, 23(7):1768–1789, 2011.
Steven A Prescott, Yves De Koninck, and Terrence J Sejnowski. Biophysical basis for three distinct
  dynamical mechanisms of action potential initiation. PLoS computational biology, 4(10):e1000198,
  2008.
Ryan Pyle and Robert Rosenbaum. Spatiotemporal dynamics and reliable computations in recurrent
  spiking neural networks. Physical review letters, 118(1):018103, 2017.
Nitin Rathi, Amogh Agrawal, Chankyu Lee, Adarsh Kumar Kosta, and Kaushik Roy. Exploring
  spike-based learning for neuromorphic computing: Prospects and perspectives. In 2021 Design,
  Automation & Test in Europe Conference & Exhibition (DATE), pp. 902–907. IEEE, 2021.
Patricia Reynaud-Bouret, Vincent Rivoirard, Franck Grammont, and Christine Tuleau-Malot.
  Goodness-of-fit tests and nonparametric adaptive estimation for spike train analysis. The Journal
  of Mathematical Neuroscience, 4:1–41, 2014.
Xueyuan She, Saurabh Dash, and Saibal Mukhopadhyay. Sequence approximation using feedfor-
 ward spiking neural network for spatiotemporal learning: Theory and optimization methods. In
 Proceedings of 10th International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR (forthcoming),
  2022. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=bp-LJ4y_XC.
Michael F Shlesinger, BJ West, and Joseph Klafter. Lévy dynamics of enhanced diffusion: Application
 to turbulence. Physical Review Letters, 58(11):1100, 1987.


                                                  13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Umut Simsekli, Levent Sagun, and Mert Gurbuzbalaban. A tail-index analysis of stochastic gradient
 noise in deep neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1901.06053, 2019.
Umut Simsekli, Ozan Sener, George Deligiannidis, and Murat A Erdogdu. Hausdorff dimension,
 heavy tails, and generalization in neural networks. Advances in Neural Information Processing
 Systems, 33, 2020.
P Jesper Sjostrom, Ede A Rancz, Arnd Roth, and Michael Hausser. Dendritic excitability and synaptic
   plasticity. Physiological reviews, 88(2):769–840, 2008.
Martino Sorbaro, Qian Liu, Massimo Bortone, and Sadique Sheik. Optimizing the energy consump-
 tion of spiking neural networks for neuromorphic applications. Frontiers in neuroscience, 14:662,
 2020.
Nicholas Soures and Dhireesha Kudithipudi. Spiking reservoir networks: Brain-inspired recurrent
  algorithms that use random, fixed synaptic strengths. IEEE Signal Processing Magazine, 36(6):
  78–87, 2019.
Gopalakrishnan Srinivasan and Kaushik Roy. Restocnet: Residual stochastic binary convolutional
  spiking neural network for memory-efficient neuromorphic computing. Frontiers in neuroscience,
 13:189, 2019.
Benjamin Staude, Stefan Rotter, and Sonja Grün. Cubic: cumulant based inference of higher-order
  correlations in massively parallel spike trains. Journal of computational neuroscience, 29(1):
  327–350, 2010.
Tobias Thornes, Peter Düben, and Tim Palmer. On the use of scale-dependent precision in earth
  system modelling. Quarterly Journal of the Royal Meteorological Society, 143(703):897–908,
  2017.
Yujie Wu, Lei Deng, Guoqi Li, Jun Zhu, Yuan Xie, and Luping Shi. Direct training for spiking neural
  networks: Faster, larger, better. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence,
  volume 33, pp. 1311–1318, 2019.
Bojian Yin, Federico Corradi, and Sander M Bohté. Effective and efficient computation with multiple-
  timescale spiking recurrent neural networks. In International Conference on Neuromorphic Systems
  2020, pp. 1–8, 2020.
Wenrui Zhang and Peng Li. Temporal spike sequence learning via backpropagation for deep spiking
 neural networks. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:12022–12033, 2020.
Yan Zhou, Yaochu Jin, and Jinliang Ding. Surrogate-assisted evolutionary search of spiking neural
  architectures in liquid state machines. Neurocomputing, 406:12–23, 2020.


                                                14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Supplementary Section
Table of Contents
      A Supplementary Section A                                                                          15
        A.1 Experimental Setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     15
        A.2 Maximum entropy distribution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       17
        A.3 Optimal Hyperparameter Selection using Bayesian Optimization . . . . . . . . . .             18
        A.4 Comparing Bayesian Optimization Objective Functions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .            20
        A.5 Comparing the Generalizability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       20
        A.6 Results on Limited Training Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       21
        A.7 Further Evaluations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    22

      B Supplementary Section B                                                                          24
        B.1 Approximations and assumptions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         24
        B.2 Mean-Field Reduction Model of HRSNN . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .            24
        B.3 Analytical Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   26
        B.4 Memory Capacity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      27
        B.5 Spiking Efficiency . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   30

      C Supplementary Section C                                                                          35
        C.1 Higher Order Correlation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     35



A     S UPPLEMENTARY S ECTION A
A.1     E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP

A.1.1    HRSNN AND MRSNN

            Table 3: Table showing the description of the models described in the paper

                                         LIF Neurons           STDP parameters
                          HRSNN          Heterogeneous          Heterogeneous
                          MRSNN          Homogeneous             Homogeneous

The models used in this paper were the Heterogeneous Recurrent SNN (HRSNN) and the Homoge-
neous Recurrent SNN (MRSNN). Both models use STDP as the learning method. For MRSNN, we
use STDP with uniform parameters for all the synapses. However, for HRSNN, we use a distribution
for each parameter to get a rich class of diverse LTP/LTD dynamics. But, at the core, all the training
is done using STDP.

A.1.2    LIF N EURON N UMERICAL I MPLEMENTATION
To implement the LIF model, we discretize time into multiples of a small-time step ∆t so that spikes
can only happen at multiples of ∆t. (Cramer et al., 2020; Perez-Nieves et al., 2021) Thus, we can
approximately solve Eq. 1 as
 vi (t+∆t) = vi [t+1] = β (vi [t] − v0 )+v0 +(1−β)Ii [t]−(vth − vr ) Si [t] s.t. β = exp(−∆t/τm ) (7)

It is to be noted here that we use this approximation for numerically solving the LIF neurons. Hence,
although we use continuous notations for the remainder of the paper, it is to be noted that we use the
discrete form discussed here for numerical solutions.


                                                       15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A.1.3    S PIKE C ODING
Encoding: For the RSNN to process our time series, the signal must be represented as spikes.
We use a temporal encoding technique for representing signals in this paper. The spikes are only
generated whenever the signal changes in value. The implementation of the temporal encoding used
in this research is based on the Step-Forward (SF) algorithm (Petro et al., 2019). The percentage of
neurons to input the spikes to (α) is also chosen to provide good recurrent layer dynamics.
Decoding: To represent the recurrent state, we use an exponentially decreasing rate decoding
strategy by taking the sum of all the spikes s over the last τ timesteps into account as follows:
                                              τ
                                  xX          n
                                   i (t) = ∑ γ si (t − n)        ∀i ∈ E
                                             n=0

where X denotes the model representation. The parameters τ and γ are balanced to optimize the
memory size of the stored data (e.g., τ ≤ 50 ) and its containment of information, which includes
adjusting τ to the pace at which the temporal data is presented and processed. The state of the
recurrent layer will be only based on the output of excitatory neurons. Thus, it is crucial for the
discount γ not to be too small, as it possibly flattens older values in the window to 0, making part of
the sliding window unusable. Recent spikes hardly affect the recurrent layer state when setting γ
too high in combination with a large window size. This causes the decoder to react too late to recent
information provided by the recurrent layer and complicates the learning process of the readout layer.

A.1.4    R EADOUT
After the initialization of the recurrent layer, the readout is the only component of the LSM with
trainable parameters. It consists of a single fully connected layer for regression or classification.
The readout does not have to be any deeper, as the output of the recurrent layer is already a high-
dimensional representation of the processed input. x and y present the continuous signals of the time
series T and model representation X.
                              xT (t + k) = y T (t) ≈ ŷ X (t) = fθ (xX (t))
The mean squared error (MSE) is used as the loss function to train the readout, and the network was
trained using the stochastic optimizer Adam (Kingma & Ba, 2014).
                                                       1 n T       X 2
                                   L (y T , ŷ X ) =     ∑ (yi − ŷi )
                                                       n i=0

A.1.5    DATASETS
Lorenz96: (Lorenz, 1996)Our objective is more clearly demonstrated using the canonical chaotic
system we will use as a test bed for the prediction capabilities of the HRSNN model. We use a
multiscale Lorenz 96 system which is a set of coupled nonlinear ODEs and an extension of Lorenz’s
original model (Thornes et al., 2017), (Chattopadhyay et al., 2020).


                dXk                                    hc
                     = Xk−1 (Xk+1 − Xk−2 ) + F − Σj Yj,k
                 dt                                     b
                 dYj,k                                             hc     he
                        = − cbYj+1,k (Yj+2,k − Yj−1,k ) − cYj,k + Xk − Σi Zi,j,k
                   dt                                               b     d
                dZi,j,k                                                he
                        =edZi−1,j,k (Zi+1,j,k − Zi−2,j,k ) − geZi,j,k + Yj,k                        (8)
                  dt                                                   d

This set of coupled nonlinear ordinary differential equations (ODEs) is a three-tier extension of
Lorenz’s original model (Lorenz, 1963) and has been proposed by Thornes et al.Thornes et al. (2017)
as a fitting prototype for multiscale chaotic variability of the weather and climate system and a useful
test bed for novel methods. In these equations, F = 20 is a large-scale forcing that makes the system
highly chaotic, and b = c = e = d = g = 10 and h = 1 are tuned to produce appropriate spatiotemporal
variability. For this paper, we focus on predicting Y axes, which have relatively moderate amplitudes
compared to X, Z and demonstrate high-frequency variability and intermittency, which makes the


                                                       16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 5: Figure showing a snippet for the Y dimension of the Lorenz96 time series used for the
prediction problem



prediction problem difficult. It is to be noted here that the Lorenz 96 is a complex, difficult dataset
for climate modeling. A snippet of the time series is shown in Fig. 5.
SHD dataset: We use the Spoken Heidelberg Digits spiking dataset to benchmark the HRSNN
model with other standard spiking neural networks (Cramer et al., 2020). It was created based on the
Heidelberg Digits (HD) audio dataset which comprises 20 classes of spoken digits from zero to nine
in English and German, spoken by 12 individuals. For training and evaluation, the dataset (10420
samples) is split into a training set (8156 samples) and test set (2264 samples). To apply our RSNNs,
we converted all audio samples into 250- by-700 binary matrices. For this, all samples fit within
a 1 the second window, shorter samples were padded with zeros, and longer samples were cut by
removing the tail. Spikes were then binned in time bins, both of sizes 10ms and 4ms; for the RSNNs,
the presence or non-presence of any spikes in the time bin is noted as a single binary event.


A.1.6       H YPERPARAMETERS

The hyperparameters used in this paper are summarized in Table 4


        Table 4: Table showing the hyperparameters used in the experiments and their values

     Parameter                      Value                                    Description
       |E|/|N|                      80%                              Excitatory/inhibitory ratio
          λ                            2                                    Leak Exponent
          τ                           50                                 Sliding window size
        γ τ −1                       0.02                               Sliding Window Leak
               SHD Parameters                                  Lorenz-63 Parameters
 Parameter Value          Description            Parameter        Value             Description
     τ           17       Time delay                 ρ             28.0              ρ-parameter
     a          0.2       a parameter                σ             10.0             σ-parameter
     b          0.1       b parameter                β              8/3             β-parameter
     n           10       n parameter               x0         [1.0,1.0,1.0]      Initial Condition
                                                                                 Time delta between
      x0         1.2       Initial Condition           h           0.03
                                                                                two discrete timesteps
                         Time delta between
        h        1.0
                        two discrete timesteps


A.2     M AXIMUM ENTROPY DISTRIBUTION

This subsection proves that the maximum entropy distribution with a fixed covariance matrix is
Gaussian.


                                                  17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Lemma: Let q(r) be any density satisfying ∫ q(r)xi xj dr = Σij . Let p = N (0, Σ). Then h(q) ≤ h(p)
Proof.
                                                            q(r)
                               0 ≤ KL(q∥p) = ∫ q(r) log           dr
                                                            p(r)
                                   = −h(q) − ∫ q(r) log p(r)dr

                                   =     −h(q) − ∫ p(r) log p(r)dr
                                = −h(q) + h(p)
since q and p yield the same moments for the quadratic form encoded by log p(r).

A.3    O PTIMAL H YPERPARAMETER S ELECTION USING BAYESIAN O PTIMIZATION

Most recent research in Bayesian Optimization (BO) applications is limited to low-dimensional
problems, as BO fails catastrophically when generalizing to high-dimensional problems (Frazier,
2018). However, in this paper, we aim to use BO to optimize the neuronal and synaptic parameters of
a heterogeneous RSNN model. This BO problem thus entails a huge number of hyperparameters to be
optimized; hence, using standard BO algorithms remains a significant challenge. Hence, to overcome
this issue, we used a novel BO algorithm based on the assumption that our hyperparameters to be
optimized are not completely random and uncorrelated but can be thought of as being drawn from a
probability distribution as shown by Perez et al.Perez-Nieves et al. (2021). Thus, instead of searching
for the individual parameters themselves, we use a modified BO to estimate parameter distributions
for the LIF neurons and the STDP dynamics. After learning the optimal distributions, we simply
sample from the distribution to get the distribution of hyperparameters used in the model. To learn
the probability distribution of the data, we modify BO’s surrogate model and acquisition function
to treat the parameter distributions instead of individual variables. This makes our modified BO
highly scalable over all the variables (dimensions) used. The loss for the surrogate model’s update is
calculated using the Wasserstein distance between the parameter distributions.
BO uses a Gaussian process to model the distribution of an objective function and an acquisition
function to decide on points to evaluate. For data points in a target dataset x ∈ X and the corresponding
label y ∈ Y , an SNN with network structure V and neuron parameters W acts as a function fV,W (x)
that maps input data x to predicted label ỹ. The optimization problem in this work is defined as
                                       min     ∑     L (y, fV,W (x))                                  (9)
                                       V,W x∈X,y∈Y

where V is the set of hyperparameters of the neurons in R (Details of hyperparameters given in
the Supplementary) and W is the multi-variate distribution constituting the distributions of (i) the
membrane time constants τm−E , τm−I of the LIF neurons, (ii) the scaling function constants (A+ , A− )
and (iii) the decay time constants τ+ , τ− for the STDP learning rule in SRR .
Again, BO needs a prior distribution of the objective function f (⃗      x) on the given data D1∶k =
 x1∶k , f (⃗
{⃗         x1∶k )} . In the Gaussian Process (GP)-based BO, we assume that the prior distribution of
f (⃗
   x1∶k ) follows the multivariate Gaussian distribution, which follows a GP with mean µ       ⃗D1∶k and
covariance Σ ⃗ D . Thus, we estimate Σ ⃗ D using the modified Matern kernel function. We use the loss
function as d(x, x′ ), which is the Wasserstein distance between the multivariate distributions of the
                 1∶k                      1∶k


different parameters. That is, given two distributions of hyperparameters x1 , x2 , the distance between
these two distributions (given as d(x1 , x2 ) is used as the loss function in the Matern kernel for the
modified BO. We want to learn the optimal distribution of hyperparameters x′ , which maximizes the
performance. It is to be noted here that for higher-dimensional metric spaces, we use the Sinkhorn
distance as a regularized version of the Wasserstein distance to approximate the Wasserstein distance
(Feydy et al., 2019).
D1∶k are the points evaluated by the objective function. The GP will estimate the mean µ   ⃗Dk∶n and
         ⃗Dk∶n for the rest unevaluated data Dk∶n . The acquisition function used in this work is the
variance σ
expected improvement (EI) of the prediction fitness as:
                        EI (⃗          µD − f (xbest )) Φ(Z)
                             xk∶n ) = (⃗     k∶n
                                                            ⃗ +σ  ⃗D ϕ(Z)
                                                                       k∶n
                                                                          ⃗                      (10)
where Φ(⋅) and ϕ(⋅) denote the probability distribution function and the cumulative distribution
function of the prior distributions, respectively. f (xbest ) = max f (⃗
                                                                       x1∶k ) is the maximum value that


                                                     18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Table 5: The list of parameter settings for the Bayesian Optimization-based hyperparameter search
                                    Parameter               Initial Value       Range
                                         η                        10            (0,50)
                                         γ                        5             (0,10)
                                         ζ                       2.5            (0,10)
                                        η∗                        1              (0,3)
                                         g                        2             (0,10)
                                        ω                        0.5             (0,1)
                                         k                        50           (0,100)
                                     λ (SHD)                      1              (0,2)
                                    λ (Lorenz)                   1.5             (0,4)
                                       PIR                       0.05          (0,0.1)
                               τn−E , τn−I (SHD)                50ms        (0ms, 100ms)
                              τn−E , τn−I (Lorenz)             100ms        (0ms, 300ms)
                           Aen−R , AEE , AEI , AIE , AII          30            (0,60)



           Table 6: Table showing the average final distributions of the hyperparameters

                                          Parameter        Distribution
                                                                            µ̄ = 18.235
                                              τ+                Normal
                                                                             σ̄ = 1.522
                             STDP
                                                                            µ̄ = 22.382
                           Parameter          τ−                Normal
                                                                             σ̄ = 1.768
                                                                             µ̄ = 0.516
                                              η+                Normal
                                                                            σ̄ = 0.0055
                                                                             µ̄ = 0.448
                                              η−                Normal
                                                                            σ̄ = 0.0057
                                               (e)                            ᾱ = 2.89
                              LIF            τm                 Gamma
                                                                            1/β̄ = 0.248
                           Parameter
                                               (i)                            ᾱ = 5.14
                                              τm                Gamma
                                                                            1/β̄ = 0.313



                                                                                     ⃗
                                                                                     µ    −f (xbest )
has been evaluated by the original function f in all evaluated data D1∶k and Z⃗ = Dk∶nσ⃗D             . BO
                                                                                           k∶n
will choose the data xj = argmax {EI (⃗xk∶n ) ; xj ⊆ x
                                                     ⃗k∶n } as the next point to be evaluated using the
original objective function.


A.3.1    O PTIMIZED H YPERPARAMETERS

The list of the hyperparameters optimized using the Bayesian Optimization technique is shown in
Table 5. We also show the range of the hyperparameters used and the initial values. In addition to
this, Table 6 enlist the final optimized distributions of the STDP and the LIF parameters obtained
using BO.


Figure 6: Figure Showing the convergence behaviors of the three types of BO described in the paper
(a) BO optimizing the memory capacity C (b) BO optimizing the average spike count S̃ and (c) BO
optimizing the spike efficiency E


                                                           19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Table 7: Table showing the performance of the Bayesian Optimization on the SHD Classification
dataset for the three different cases where BO 1 optimizes C , BO 2 optimizes S̃ and BO 3 optimizes
E
            BO 1            BO 1                              BO 2              BO 2                              BO 3             BO 3
                                             BO 1                                                BO 2                                                BO 3
 N_R      Memory        Average Spike                       Memory          Average Spike                       Memory         Average Spike
                                            Accuracy                                            Accuracy                                            Accuracy
          Capacity          Count                           Capacity            Count                           Capacity           Count
 100     5.31 ± 0.36   1399.14 ± 113.66    67.41 ± 4.86    5.22 ± 0.58     1189.37 ± 86.95     66.23 ± 5.74    5.12 ± 0.31    1268.86 ± 91.15     68.67 ± 4.97
 200     5.45 ± 0.39   1479.86 ± 133.72    67.85 ± 4.16    5.38 ± 0.53     1233.19 ± 122.56    67.21 ± 5.49    5.28 ± 0.34    1328.18 ± 131.45    69.54 ± 4.27
 300     6.72 ± 0.4    1541.14 ± 148.83    68.41 ± 4.87    6.42 ± 0.57     1325.25 ± 128.47    67.95 ± 5.11    6.54 ± 0.36    1391.68 ± 140.37    70.1 ± 4.69
 400     7.21 ± 0.44   1682.68 ± 239.95    70.11 ± 4.33    6.91 ± 0.51     1425.69 ± 129.57    68.23 ± 5.27    7.01 ± 0.35    1511.79 ± 200.96    71.54 ± 4.06
 500     8.59 ± 0.48   1768.24 ± 287.94    71.05 ± 3.98    7.69 ± 0.46     1555.29 ± 139.17    69.31 ± 5.03    8.63 ± 0.38    1621.8 ± 250.46     73.05 ± 3.87
 1000   11.22 ± 0.46   2251.17 ± 319.75    72.93 ± 3.38    9.03 ± 0.44     2015.24 ± 147.44    70.89 ± 4.91   12.25 ± 0.39    2102.59 ± 279.86    75.32 ± 3.44
 2000    13.3 ± 0.51   2566.21 ± 348.68    75.36 ± 3.29    9.89 ± 0.46     2314.59 ± 151.18    72.33 ± 4.88   13.95 ± 0.37    2410.08 ± 301.57    77.25 ± 3.17
 3000   14.47 ± 0.53   2825.47 ± 355.87    77.14 ± 3.38   10.48 ± 0.41     2623.41 ± 177.94    74.63 ± 4.93   14.88 ± 0.42    2708.52 ± 315.34    78.21 ± 3.24
 4000   15.17 ± 0.52   3551.07 ± 366.19    78.05 ± 3.25   11.57 ± 0.45     3045.28 ± 225.53    75.15 ± 4.85   15.87 ± 0.38    3218.42 ± 328.19    79.36 ± 3.13
 5000   15.64 ± 0.57   4186.49 ± 383.09    78.92 ± 3.31   11.68 ± 0.48     3294.62 ± 241.14    75.87 ± 4.81   16.03 ± 0.41    3573.51 ± 331.18    80.49 ± 3.15


Table 8: Table showing the performance of the Bayesian Optimization on the Lorenz System
Prediction dataset for the three different cases where BO 1 optimizes C , BO 2 optimizes S̃ and BO 3
optimizes E
           BO 1             BO 1                             BO 2              BO 2                               BO 3            BO 3
                                             BO 1                                                BO 2                                               BO 3
 N_R     Memory         Average Spike                      Memory          Average Spike                        Memory        Average Spike
                                             RMSE                                                RMSE                                               RMSE
         Capacity           Count                          Capacity            Count                            Capacity          Count
  100   3.56 ± 0.36    1354.35 ± 108.96   0.617 ± 0.019   3.02 ± 0.52     1101.25 ± 75.93     0.684 ± 0.026     3.45 ± 0.3   1207.52 ± 67.26     0.654 ± 0.0207
  200   4.12 ± 0.39    1443.59 ± 127.23    0.587 ± 0.02   3.89 ± 0.48     1207.35 ± 118.57    0.639 ± 0.027    4.01 ± 0.33   1302.47 ± 96.05     0.613 ± 0.0218
  300   5.26 ± 0.37    1499.62 ± 141.73   0.503 ± 0.027   4.44 ± 0.55    1257.26 ± 1257.26    0.558 ± 0.034    5.15 ± 0.34   1335.81 ± 168.02    0.531 ± 0.0287
  400   6.37 ± 0.41    1528.73 ± 228.87   0.459 ± 0.033   5.87 ± 0.49     1304.35 ± 126.18     0.467 ± 0.04    6.05 ± 0.35   1415.32 ± 213.49    0.482 ± 0.0347
  500   7.25 ± 0.45    1601.27 ± 277.97   0.389 ± 0.036   6.25 ± 0.45     1365.35 ± 137.04    0.421 ± 0.043    6.87 ± 0.36   1507.29 ± 219.58    0.411 ± 0.0377
 1000   10.12 ± 0.43   1868.14 ± 301.17    0.316 ± 0.04   7.41 ± 0.51     1563.25 ± 146.76    0.396 ± 0.047    9.03 ± 0.37   1699.27 ± 275.79    0.332 ± 0.0417
 2000   11.84 ± 0.48   2105.95 ± 331.54   0.293 ± 0.045    8.02 ± 0.5     1854.35 ± 150.28    0.351 ± 0.052   11.44 ± 0.39   2014.12 ± 280.03    0.301 ± 0.0467
 3000   13.71 ± 0.51   2408.35 ± 348.26   0.258 ± 0.042   8.94 ± 0.53     2195.82 ± 179.75    0.335 ± 0.058    13.87 ± 0.4   2236.59 ± 281.05    0.241 ± 0.0482
 4000   14.15 ± 0.52   2951.56 ± 352.66   0.242 ± 0.063   9.55 ± 0.55     2445.31 ± 217.73     0.326 ± 0.07   14.63 ± 0.41   2546.25 ± 289.81    0.227 ± 0.0649
 5000   14.45 ± 0.54   3784.44 ± 353.51   0.203 ± 0.064   9.96 ± 0.58     2684.59 ± 234.63    0.302 ± 0.071   15.12 ± 0.42   2898.27 ± 307.14    0.195 ± 0.0655


A.3.2        C ONVERGENCE A NALYSIS
We compare the convergence analysis of the three Bayesian Optimization techniques and the results
are shown in Fig. 6. Each of the experiments was repeated five times and the mean and variance
of the observations are shown in the Figure. It is to be noted here that since we define the BO as a
minimization principle, we minimize C1 , S̃ and E1 .

A.4      C OMPARING BAYESIAN O PTIMIZATION O BJECTIVE F UNCTIONS

We show the results of Bayesian Optimization results for the three cases we are considering in this
paper for both the classification and prediction problems. The results for the classification problem
are shown in Table 7. We tabulate the memory capacity, the average spike count and the observed
accuracy for the three BO cases. Similarly, the results for the prediction problem are shown in Table
8. In that case, we tabulate the memory capacity, the average spike count and the observed NRMSE
for the three BO cases. We rerun each of the experiments 5 times and report the mean and standard
deviation of the results obtained.

A.5      C OMPARING THE G ENERALIZABILITY

We observed that increasing the neuronal heterogeneity increases the memory capacity of the network.
However, this increment in the memory capacity might lead to a model which overfits the training data.
However, the heterogeneous STDP model with varying synaptic dynamics gives rise to a heavy-tailed
Feller process. Recent works Simsekli et al. (2020), Chakraborty & Mukhopadhyay (2021) show
that the Hausdorff dimension of the trajectories of the sample paths of the learning algorithm can
control the generalization error. This is intimately linked to the tail behavior of the driving process.
The authors showed that heavier-tailed processes achieve better generalization. Thus, the tail index of
the process can be used as a notion of capacity metric that estimates the generalization error, which
does not necessarily grow with the number of parameters. The authors discuss that the stochastic
process for the synaptic weights behaves like a Lévy motion around a local point. Because of this
locally regular behavior, the Hausdorff dimension can be bounded by the Blumenthal-Getoor (BG)
index (Blumenthal & Getoor, 1960), which depends on the tail behavior of the Lévy process. Thus,
we can use the BG index as a bound for the Hausdorff dimension of the trajectories from the STDP


                                                                             20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Table 9: Table showing the Ablation Study for the comparison of the Generalizability of heterogeneous
networks
                                           Training         Testing      Generalization Error
                              BG Index
                                         Accuracy (A)     Accuracy (B)         (|A-B|)
                  Hom LIF
                                1.522        87.33           73.58              13.75
                 Hom STDP
                  Hom LIF
                                1.438        85.31           74.03              11.28
                 Het STDP
                  Het LIF
                                1.835        95.29           78.87              16.42
                 Hom STDP
                  Het LIF
                                1.711        94.32           80.49              13.83
                 Het STDP

                      Table 10: Table showing results with limited training data

                    Train          Test    Generalization         Train            Test    Generalization
  Percentange
                   Accuracy     Accuracy      Error              Accuracy       Accuracy      Error
 Training Data
                     (A)           (B)         |A-B|               (A)             (B)         |A-B|
                             Heterogeneous LIF,                               Homogeneous LIF,
                             Heterogeneous STDP                              Homogeneous STDP
       100           94.32        80.49        13.83                 87.33        73.58        13.75
        90           94.89        78.34        16.55                 87.83        67.84        19.99
        80           95.47        76.72        18.75                 88.86        65.86         23
        70           96.15        74.92        21.23                 89.95        62.19        27.76
        60           96.92        70.34        26.58                 91.58        61.25        30.33
        50           97.69        69.44        28.25                 94.38        59.51        34.87
        40           98.21        63.76        34.45                 96.85        55.93        40.92
        30           98.43        54.01        44.42                 98.43        45.86        52.57
        20           99.43        43.87        55.56                 99.49        42.68        56.81
        10            100         31.43        68.57                  100         30.18        69.82
        5             100         15.32        84.68                  100         14.38        85.62
                             Heterogeneous LIF,                               Homogeneous LIF,
                             Homogeneous STDP                                Heterogeneous STDP
       100           97.29        78.87        18.42                 86.31        74.03        12.28
        90           97.41        77.48        19.93                 86.94        68.59        18.35
        80           97.65        76.32        21.33                 87.75        67.58        20.17
        70           97.95        74.03        23.92                 88.17        65.25        22.92
        60           98.03        71.16        26.87                 89.52        63.11        26.41
        50           98.43        68.48        29.95                 90.48        60.86        29.62
        40           98.79        61.93        36.86                 93.15        57.31        35.84
        30           99.56        51.68        47.88                 96.34        48.41        47.93
        20            100         44.52        55.48                 98.43        43.59        54.84
        10            100         30.68        69.32                 99.56        32.57        66.99
        5             100         14.15        85.85                  100         18.48        81.52


learning process. Now, as the Hausdorff dimension is a measure of the generalization error and is
also controlled by the tail behavior of the process, heavier tails imply less generalization error. In this
paper, we empirically study the generalization ability of the HRSNN network using the BG index as a
metric. We did the experiments on the 4 ablation study models for the classification task on the SHD
dataset, and the results are reported in Table 9. From the table, we see that the heterogeneity in STDP
improves the generalization error the most, while the heterogeneity in the LIF neurons increases the
training and testing accuracies.

A.6    R ESULTS ON L IMITED T RAINING DATA

We have trained the models with limited training data. We observe that the HRSNN model with
heterogeneous LIF and STDP dynamics not only has better testing accuracy but also shows better
generalization behavior when compared to other homogeneous RSNN or the other ablation heteroge-
neous models (with heterogeneity in only one of them). Also, we see that the HRSNN model with
heterogeneous STDP shows distinctly better generalization ability than the generalization ability of


                                                     21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                        SHD                                            SSC                                       CIFAR10 DVS
                     Training        Testing      Generalization    Training        Testing      Generalization     Training       Testing    Generalization
                     Accuracy       Accuracy          Error         Accuracy       Accuracy          Error         Accuracy       Accuracy        Error
                        (A)            (B)           ∣A − B∣           (A)            (B)           ∣A − B∣            (A)           (B)         ∣A − B∣
Hom LIF Hom STDP    86.92 ± 1.35   72.89 ± 1.85    14.03 ± 1.67    74.69 ± 1.72   47.94 ± 1.94    26.75 ± 1.42     82.41 ± 1.8   65.33 ± 3.41  17.08 ± 1.35
Hom LIF Het STDP    85.76 ± 1.27   73.91 ± 1.49    11.85 ± 1.25    76.79 ± 1.58   52.96 ± 1.73    23.86 ± 1.29    83.48 ± 1.52   67.06 ± 2.97  16.42 ± 1.24
Het LIF Hom STDP    95.29 ± 1.16   78.36 ± 1.42    16.93 ± 1.13    84.26 ± 1.33   55.11 ± 1.65    29.15 ± 1.12    86.93 ± 1.79   68.37 ± 3.05  18.56 ± 1.42
 Het LIF Het STDP   94.07 ± 1.03   80.01 ± 1.13    14.06 ± 1.02    86.41 ± 1.49   59.28 ± 1.35    27.13 ± 0.97    87.49 ± 1.76   70.54 ± 1.82  16.95 ± 1.38


HRSNN with heterogeneous LIF neurons. On the other hand, the latter showcases significantly higher
training and testing accuracy compared to the former model. This can be interpreted as follows:
since heterogeneous LIF dynamics increase the memory capacity, it leads to an overfitting of the data.
Heterogeneous STDP dynamics help in obtaining more generalizable solutions from this. Each has
its own downsides; however, using HRSNN with both heterogeneous LIF and STDP dynamics shows
better performance and generalization abilities, as seen from Table 10.


A.7    F URTHER E VALUATIONS

In Section B, we argued that as the heterogeneity in the neuronal parameters increases, the covariance
decreases; hence the neurons become less correlated. In this section, we give empirical results to
support the theory. We tested the model on more complex datasets - (i) The Spiking Heidelberg Digits
(SHD) dataset (ii) the Spiking Speech Command (SSC) dataset are both audio-based classification
datasets for which input spikes and output labels are provided Cramer et al. (2020) and (iii) CIFAR10
DVS dataset Li et al. (2017).

        • Impact of Heterogeneity on Covariance: We plot the covariance matrices for different
          levels of heterogeneity J (Eq. 46) for a small network with 50 neurons. The covariance
          matrix is calculated by taking the average neuronal states before the appearance of the first
          spike in the final layer. We see that as the heterogeneity in the neuronal parameters increases,
          the correlation between the neurons decreases. The results are shown in Fig. 7

        • Impact of Heterogeneity on Principal Components: From the covariance plots, we see
          that increasing J . reduces the correlation between neurons. We also plot the probability
          density functions of the eigenvalues of the covariance matrix of the neurons with increasing
          heterogeneity in the neuronal parameters. We see that with higher heterogeneity in the
          neuronal parameters J , the distribution of the eigenvalues of the covariance becomes
          flatter. This signifies that the covariance matrix has a lower variance for higher J . A flatter
          distribution also indicates that a larger number of principal components are active. This
          supports our hypothesis that heterogeneity in the neuronal parameters increases the number
          of principal components and helps increase the model’s memory capacity. The result is
          shown in this Fig. 8

        • Impact of Heterogeneity in STDP on Firing Rate: We plot the mean firing rate of the
          neurons for the four types of HRSNNs and MRSNN with homogeneous LIF and STDP
          dynamics. We plot the results for a smaller network with 100 neurons and a Poisson
          input process. The MRSNN model shows a much higher firing rate, especially at a higher
          frequency, demonstrating that MRSNN requires significantly more spikes than the HRSNN
          model. The result is shown in Fig. 9

        • Coupling Strength: We note here that in this paper, we use (homogeneous or heterogeneous)
          STDP to learn the synaptic conductance connecting various neurons in the SNN. Therefore,
          we do not control the synaptic coupling strength as independent variables and hence, cannot
          perform control experiments with various extents of coupling strength. An interesting
          future extension of the results will be quantifying the coupling strength for HRSNN with
          heterogeneity in LIF and STDP dynamics. We can leverage McKenzie et al.McKenzie et al.
          (2021), where the authors proposed statistical tools to estimate synaptic coupling dynamics
          from spike-spike correlations.



                                                                           22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 7: Figure showing as the heterogeneity in the neuronal parameters increases, the covariance
between the neurons decreases


Figure 8: With higher heterogeneity in the neuronal parameters H, the distribution of the eigenvalues
of the covariance becomes flatter. This signifies that the covariance matrix has a lower variance for
higher H. A flatter distribution also signifies a greater number of principal components are active,
which supports our hypothesis that heterogeneity in the neuronal parameters increases the number of
principal components and helps in increasing the memory capacity of the model.


Figure 9: Figure showing the histograms of the firing rates for the four kinds of heterogeneous RSNN
with homogeneous /heterogeneous neurons and synapses



                                                 23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


B     S UPPLEMENTARY S ECTION B

B.1   A PPROXIMATIONS AND ASSUMPTIONS

We make several approximations and assumptions for this section’s theoretical analysis of the
heterogeneous RSNN networks. Firstly, it must be noted that in this paper, the analytical relations are
derived by taking the heterogeneity individually. i.e., when we consider heterogeneity in the neuronal
parameters, we consider homogeneous STDP dynamics and vice-versa. In addition to this, we assume
diffusion approximation. That is, if a neuron receives Poissonian uncorrelated input spike trains and
the contribution of a single synaptic connection is small compared to the distance between reset and
threshold w ≪ (VΘ − V0 ), the random input can be approximated by Gaussian white noise with mean
µ and noise intensity σ 2 . This approximation does not hold if the network features highly correlated
activity or receives strong external input common to many neurons. Also, we assume a fast/slow
synaptic regime in which the synaptic time constant τs is much shorter/longer than the membrane
time constant τm . In this work, we consider a mean-field approximation of the HRSNN network with
heterogeneity in the parameters of the LIF neurons and the STDP dynamics independently.

B.2   M EAN -F IELD R EDUCTION M ODEL OF HRSNN

In this section, we model the HRSNN network using heterogeneity in only the LIF neuron parameters.
Following the works of Ly et al.Ly (2015), we can write the equations for the excitatory neurons
indexed by j ∈ {1, 2, . . . , Ne } are:


                       dvj
                   τm        = −vj − gie (t) (vj − EI ) − gee (t) (vj − EE ) + σE ηj (t)             (11)
                         dt
                    vj (t ) ≥ θj ( refractory period ) ⇒ vj (t∗ + τref ) = 0
                          ∗
                                                                                                     (12)
                       dηj            √
                    τn       = −ηj + τn ξj (t)                                                       (13)
                        dt
                                   γee
                     gee (t) = qj                  ∑            Gj ′ (t)                             (14)
                                  pee Ne j ′ ∈{ presyn E cells}
                                 γei
                     gei (t) =                 ∑            Gk′ (t)                                  (15)
                               pei Ni k′ ∈{ presyn I cells}
                      dGj
                   τd     = −Gj + Aj                                                                 (16)
                       dt
                      dAj
                   τr     = −Aj + τr α ∑ δ (t − tl )                                                 (17)
                       dt              l

where the inhibitory and excitatory reversal potentials are EI , and EE , respectively, with EI < 0 < EE .
ξj (t) are uncorrelated white noise processes, pxy is the proportion of neuron type y (randomly chosen)
that provides presynaptic input to neuron type x (x, y ∈ {e, i}). The second line in the equations
describes the refractory period at spike time t∗ . When the neuron’s voltage crosses threshold θj , the
neuron goes into a refractory period for τref where the voltage is undefined, after which we set the
neuron’s voltage to 0. In the last equation, tl denotes the spike times of the j th excitatory neuron.
Now, for the mean-field analysis, we use qji to model the synaptic heterogeneity between the pre-and
post-synaptic neurons by modulating the synaptic conductance for both the excitatory and inhibitory
neurons.
We note here the numerical assumptions for the mean-field analysis:

      1. finite size effects are negligible (N e/i ≫ 1 )
      2. the firing rate of presynaptic neurons is governed by a Poisson process
      3. the population firing rate averaged over q and τm is a good approximation to the average
         presynaptic input rate and
      4. a single p.d.f. function is sufficient to describe the population behavior) (finite N )


                                                    24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Similarly, for the inhibitory neurons indexed by k ∈ {1, 2, . . . , Ni }, the equations are:
                       dvk
                    τm       = −vk − gii (t) (vk − EI ) − gei (t) (vk − EE ) + σI ηk (t)              (18)
                        dt
                    vk (t ) ≥ 1( refractory period ) ⇒ vj (t∗ + τref ) = 0
                          ∗
                                                                                                      (19)
                       dηk            √
                    τn       = −ηk + τn ξk (t)                                                        (20)
                        dt
                                   γie
                     gie (t) = qj                 ∑            Gk′ (t)                                (21)
                                  pie Ne k′ ∈{ presyn I cells}
                                 γii
                     gii (t) =                 ∑            Gk′ (t)                                   (22)
                               pii Ni k′ ∈ {presyn I cells}
                       dGk
                    τd     = −Gk + Ak                                                                 (23)
                        dt
                       dAk
                    τr     = −Ak + τr α ∑ δ (t − tl )                                                 (24)
                        dt              l


Please refer to the paper by Ly et al. Ly (2015) for details regarding the equations. Since the recurrent
coupled stochastic network is difficult to describe theoretically, we use population density methods,
where an equation determines the probability of a neuron being in a particular state. The variables in
the populations are determined using distribution functions. The two forms of heterogeneity introduce
a large number of dimensions. For simplicity, one can track a family of probability density functions
for each (qj , τj ) pair for each neuron. The subsequent equations are a good approximation to the
HRSNN network with the following assumptions: (i) finite size effects are negligible (Ne/i ≫ 1) (ii)
the firing rate of presynaptic neurons is governed by a Poisson process (iii) the population firing rate
averaged over q and τm is a good approximation to the average presynaptic input rate (iv) a single
p.d.f. function is sufficient to describe the population behavior, and the heterogeneity is driven by
(qj , τm , j) For each pair of values (qj , τm , j), the probability density function ρ is defined by:



    ∫ ρ (vE , wE , vI , wI , t) dvE dwE dvI dwI = Pr((vE (t), wE (t), vI (t), wI (t))          ∈ Ω)   (25)
     Ω


where wX denotes the other states variables of the corresponding neuron type X ∈ {E, I}, consisting
of conductance, colored noise: wX = (gX , aX , ηX ). The evolution of the p.d.f.’s is governed by a
continuity equation and boundary conditions:


                ∂ρ
                    = −∇ ⋅ J                                                                          (26)
                ∂t
                J ∶= (JvE , JgE , JaE , JηE , JvI , JgI , JaI , JηI )                                 (27)
                           1
                JvE ∶= −      [vE + qγei gI (vE − EI ) + qγee gE (vE − EE ) + σE ηE ] ρ               (28)
                          τm
                          1
                JvI ∶= −      [vI + γii gI (vI − EI ) + γie gE (vI − EE ) + σI ηI ] ρ                 (29)
                         τm
                           1
                JgX ∶= − [gX − aX ] ρ                                                                 (30)
                          τd
                          aX                aX
                JaX ∶= −       + vX (t) ∫           ρ (. . . , a′X , . . .) da′X                      (31)
                           τr              aX −αX
                           1          1 ∂2ρ
                JηX ∶= − ηX ρ +             2
                                                                                                      (32)
                          τn         τn ∂ηX
                          y 1
                vX (t) ∶=           Jv dwX dqdτm                                                      (33)
                                τm X
                JwX ∣ ∂wX = 0                                                                         (34)


                                                    25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 10: (a)Figure showing the variation of memory capacity with neuronal heterogeneity (b)
Figure showing the variation of efficiency E with number of neurons NR


The definitions of gXY in the LIF neuron equations defined above result in a total conductance of
γXY gY on average.
We describe an insightful analytic reduction that captures how the range of excitatory firing rates
changes in different regimes. We focus on only the excitatory neurons, which have fewer state
variables if the inhibitory population is ignored or assumed to be known.
Let us denote the approximate excitatory firing rate(s) vE as r. The deterministic firing rate of the
equation
                         dvE
                      τm     = −vE − q g˜I (vE − EI ) − q g˜E (vE − EE ) + η˜E                   (35)
                          dt
is given by

                                                                              EE +g˜I EI )+η˜E
                                                                     if q(g˜E1+q(
                                       ⎧
                                       ⎪0,
                                       ⎪
                                       ⎪                                          g˜E +g˜I )
                                                                                               ≤θ
                   r0 (q, τm ; w̃E ) = ⎨      1+q(g˜E +g˜I )                  EE +g˜I EI )+η˜E          (36)
                                       ⎪
                                       ⎪ τm (g˜E∗ EE +g˜I EI )+η˜E   if q(g˜E1+q( g˜E +g˜I )
                                                                                               >θ
                                       ⎪
                                       ⎩
We define: g˜E ∶= γee gE , g˜I ∶= γei gI , η˜E ∶= σE ηE . Finally, the given state variables are integrated
against their marginal density to get:
                                         r0              r0
                    r(q, θ) = E [                ]=∫             ρ̃ (g˜E , g˜I , η˜E ) dw˜E             (37)
                                     1 + r0 τref     1 + r0 τref

There is a slight abuse of notation because the auxiliary variables aX effect the conductances but are
not written in the previous equation; the emphasis is on how (g˜E , g˜I , η˜E ) directly effects r. Since the
external noise is applied indiscriminately, η˜E is independent of the other variables and the marginal
density factors into:
                                                                        e−(η˜E /σE )
                                                                                     2

                                ρ̃ (g˜E , g˜I , η˜E ) = ρ̃ (g˜E , g˜I )       √                          (38)
                                                                          σE π

However, ρ̃ (g˜E , g˜I ) is still not analytically tractable, leading us to rely on Monte Carlo simulations
to numerically estimate ρ̃ (g˜E , g˜I ).
It must be noted here that this is a reduction model for the HRSNN network with many simplifying
assumptions. It is not a complete mean-field derivation of the HRSNN model with heterogeneous
LIF neurons, and heterogeneous STDP dynamics is a fascinating research question but beyond the
scope of this paper.

B.3    A NALYTICAL R ESULTS

Analytical Results of Memory Capacity Neuroscience networks of spiking neurons are increasingly
used to understand mechanisms underlying phenomena observed in electrophysiological recordings.


                                                          26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


There are two complementary strategies for studying such a recurrent network of spiking neurons
- (a) numerical simulations and (b) analytical methods using mean field models. With numerical
simulations, we can simulate any network model without any approximation. However, this method
typically works in high dimensional parameter space and is, thus, hard to interpret. Also, it is generally
hard to characterize parameter regions where specific behaviors are found using numerical simulations.
On the other hand, with analytical calculations, we obtain deeper insights into mechanisms underlying
specific behaviors and can obtain critical parameters that control specific behaviors. So, now, we
analytically study the variance of the estimated memory capacity with the change in the heterogeneity
of neuronal parameters. We plot the change in the estimated memory capacity C, calculated using
Eq. 3. We plot this with respect to the neuronal heterogeneity H, measured using the entropy of the
neuronal parameters for the HRSNN model. The result is plotted in Fig. 10(a). We use a HRSNN
model with NR = 1000 and sequences of 4,000 random inputs chosen from U[−1; 1]. We see that, as
predicted, the memory capacity of the model increases linearly with the increase in heterogeneity
within the limits of the application, as proved in Theorem 1. The error bars in Fig. 10(a) represent the
standard deviation of the observations.
Analytical Study of Spike Efficiency We calculate the average firing rate of the heterogeneous
spiking neural network for the prediction task during inference, and the results are shown in Fig 10(b).
Using heterogeneity in the STDP parameters reduces the average number of spiking activations while
keeping the memory capacity almost equal. This result shows that Heterogeneous STDP leads to
sparse activation of neurons, as proved in Theorem 2.
Comparison with Neuroscience Works: We compare the analytical results obtained with some of
the standard recurrent LIF network models in the literature. Brunel et al.Brunel (2000) analytically
study the dynamics of sparsely connected a network of sparsely connected excitatory and inhibitory
integrate-and-fire neurons. The authors showed the existence of a diverse set of states, including
synchronous states in which neurons fire regularly; asynchronous states with stationary global activity
and very irregular individual cell activity; and states in which the global activity oscillates but
individual cells fire irregularly, typically at rates lower than the global oscillation frequency. In this
paper, we use heterogeneity in the LIF neurons. This leads to a diverse set of states for the neurons,
which consequently helps orthogonalize the state space dynamics to increase the information stored
in the memory of the network.
Deneve et al. Denève & Machens (2016) discussed the inefficiency of irregular Poisson rate encoding
in the brain. The authors argue that the Poisson point process, which we use to model the spike firing
rate, is extremely inefficient as it exponentially increases the number of spikes required to convey
information. The authors further discuss that a continuum exists between loosely balanced and tightly
balanced spike-coding networks in neuroscience. Though loosely balanced networks are inefficient,
they are cheap in terms of the number of connections per neuron and structure (Boerlin et al., 2013;
Boerlin & Denève, 2011; Bourdoukan et al., 2012). On the other hand, tightly-balanced spike-coding
networks are highly efficient but extremely structured, dense connections that STDP rules must
constantly maintain. For the HRSNN model, since we are engineering an artificial spiking neural
network model, our network is highly structured and constantly updated using the heterogeneous
STDP rules. Thus, we might say that the HRSNN model is a tightly-coupled network that helps in an
efficient transfer of information. This hypothesis is supported by the results shown in Table 2, where
the HRSNN model shows a higher performance using a lesser number of spikes.

B.4    M EMORY C APACITY

Let x(t) ∈ U (where −∞ < t < +∞ and U ⊂ R is a compact interval) be a single-channel stationary
input signal. Assume that we have an RSNN, specified by its internal weight matrix W, its input
weight vector win and the unit output functions f , f out . The network receives x(t) at its input unit.
For a given delay τ and an output unit yτ with connection weight vector wτout we consider the
determination coefficient
                                 d [wτout ] (x(t − τ ), yτ (t)) =
                                                               x(t)
                                     = d (x(t − τ ), wτout (        )
                                                               r(t)
                                         Cov2 (x(t − τ ), yτ (t))
                                     =
                                          σ 2 (x(t))σ 2 (yτ (t))

                                                    27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


where Cov denotes covariance and σ 2 variance. The τ -delay Memory capacity of the network is
                                                                                                 ∞
defined by Cτ = max  d [wτout ] (x(t − τ ), yτ (t)). The Memory capacity of the network is C = ∑ Cτ .
                                                                                                τ =1
                 out
                 wτ
The determination coefficient of two signals is the squared correlation coefficient. It ranges between
0 and 1 and represents the fraction of variance explainable in one signal by the other. Thus, the
Memory capacity measures how much variance of the delayed input signal can be recovered from
optimally trained output units, summed over all delays. Note that the output units do not interfere;
arbitrarily, many output units yτ can be attached to the same network.
The performance of the heterogeneous network model derives from its ability to retain the memory of
previous inputs. To quantify the relationship between the recurrent layer dynamics and the memory
capacity, we note that the extraction of information from the recurrent layer is made through a linear
combination of the neurons’ states. Hence, more linearly independent neurons would offer more
variable states and, thus, more extended memory.
For reservoir computing (RC), Jaeger et al. Jaeger (2002) shows that C is bounded by the reservoir
network size of the linear RC with the identity activation function and the independent and identically
distributed (i.i.d.) model input. Memory capacity ( C) is used to quantify the memory of RSNN. Such
memory capacity measures the ability of RC to reconstruct precisely the past information of the model
input. Also, the network’s structural properties can greatly impact the C of the linear RC. Now, the
question arises what is the need to maximize the memory capacity of the network? The C normally
serves as a global index to quantify the memory property of the network. To comprehensively
examine the memory property deeply, the local measurement of its memory property is indispensable.
Thus, maximizing the C acts as an estimator for better prediction results of the trained network.
Since the first-order approximation of the model is linear, the heterogeneity between state variables
depends on all the eigenvalues of the adjacency matrix, with a larger mean eigenvalue meaning
higher heterogeneity. Hence we can use the eigenvalues {λi } of the weight matrix W to quantify
approximately how fast the input decays in the recurrent layer. In other words, the eigenvalues of
W should be related to the memory capacity of the heterogeneous neural network model. Indeed,
we find that the average eigenvalue modulus: ⟨∣λ∣⟩ = 1/NR ∑N      R
                                                                i=1 ∣λi ∣ strongly correlates with H and
therefore with C as well. Note that, instead of C and H, ⟨∣λ∣⟩ is much easier to compute and is solely
determined by the recurrent layer network.
The memory capacity reflects the precision with which previous inputs can be recovered. The
nonlinearity of the recurrent layer and other far-in-the-past inputs induce noise that complicates
recovery. Thus, similar to the analysis done by Aceituno et al.Aceituno et al. (2020) for Echo state
networks, the variance of the linear part of the recurrent layer is placed to maximize the recoverable
information. Thus, the inputs are projected into orthogonal directions of the recurrent layer state
space to not add noise to each other. The variance spread across the different dimensions should be
evenly distributed within those orthogonal directions, quantified by the neurons’ covariance.
We start by noticing that the linear nature of the projection vector wout implies that we are treating
the system as
                                             ∞
                                     r(t) = ∑ aτ x(t − τ ) + ε(t)                                    (39)
                                            τ =0

where the vectors aτ ∈ RNR correspond to the linearly extractable effect of x(t − τ ) onto r(t) and
ε(t) is the nonlinear contribution of all the inputs onto the state of r(t).
Previous works have shown that linear recurrent layers have more extended memory, but nonlinearity
is needed to perform interesting computations. Here we show that for a fixed ratio of the nonlinearity,
greater heterogeneity leads to a lesser neuronal correlation, leading to a higher memory capacity.
To maintain this trade-off between linear and non-linear behavior, we will assume that linear and
non-linear strengths distribution is fixed. This can be achieved if we impose that the probabilities of
the neuron states do not change, meaning that the mean, variance, and other moments of the neuron
outputs are unchanged; hence, the strength of the non-linear effects is unchanged. A first constraint
can also be obtained from the maintained strength of the linear side of Eq.39
                                             ∞
                                      Var ( ∑ aτ x(t − τ )) = c                                      (40)
                                            τ =1


                                                   28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


where c is a constant.
Lemma 3.1.1: The state of the neuron can be written as follows:
                                      NR NR
                              ri (t) = ∑ ∑ λkn ⟨vn−1 , win ⟩ (vn )i x(t − k)                           (41)
                                      k=0 n=1


where vn , vn−1 ∈ V are, respectively, the left and right eigenvectors of W, and λkn ∈ λ belongs to the
diagonal matrix containing the eigenvalues of W; ai = [ai,0 , ai,1 , . . .] represents the coefficients that
the previous inputs xt = [x(t), x(t − 1), . . .] have on ri (t).
Proof: We build on the work of Aceituno et al.Aceituno et al. (2020) where they showed that higher
heterogeneity among the neuronal states implies higher memory capacity. Here we aim to show that
as the number of neurons NR in the recurrent layer decreases, heterogeneity increases the spectral
radius. More formally, the spectral radius ∣λn ∣ is directly proportional to H as NR decreases. We
express the state of a neuron ri (t) as

                              ∞                               ∞
                     ri (t) = ∑ (W k win )i x(t − k) = ∑ ai,k x(t − k) = ⟨ai , xt ⟩                    (42)
                              k=0                            k=0
where the vector ai = [ai,0 , ai,1 , . . .] represents the coefficients that the previous inputs xt =
[x(t), x(t − 1), . . .] have on ri (t). We can then plug this into the covariance between two neu-
rons,
                                                1 t+T
                           Cov (ri , rj ) = lim   ∑ ⟨ai , xq ⟩ ⟨aj , xq ⟩
                                           T →∞ T q=t

                                                             1 T T
                                         = ⟨ai , aj ⟩ lim       ∑ ∑ ⟨xqi , xqj ⟩
                                                        T →∞ T q =0 q =0
                                                                i    j


                                                             1 T
                                         = ⟨ai , aj ⟩ lim      ∑ ⟨xq , xq ⟩
                                                        T →∞ T q=0

                                         = ⟨ai , aj ⟩ × E [x2 (t)]
                                         = ⟨ai , aj ⟩                                                  (43)

Now we write ai as a function of the eigenvalues of W. Using the eigenvalue decomposition of the
weight matrix W, we rewrite the state of the neuron as follows:
                                      NR NR
                              ri (t) = ∑ ∑ λkn ⟨vn−1 , win ⟩ (vn )i x(t − k)                           (44)
                                      k=0 n=1


where vn , vn−1 ∈ V are, respectively, the left and right eigenvectors of W, and λkn ∈ λ belongs to the
diagonal matrix containing the eigenvalues of W; ai = [ai,0 , ai,1 , . . .] represents the coefficients that
the previous inputs xt = [x(t), x(t − 1), . . .] have on ri (t). ∎
Theorem 1: If the memory capacity of the HRSNN and MRSNN networks are denoted by CH and CM
respectively, then, CH ≥ CM , where the heterogeneity in the neuronal parameters H varies inversely
to the correlation among the neuronal states measured as ∑N      NR      2
                                                           n=1 ∑m=1 Cov (xn (t), xm (t)) which in
                                                             R

turn varies inversely with C.
Proof: As shown by Aceituno et al.Aceituno et al. (2020), the memory capacity increases when
the variance along the projections of the input into the recurrent layer state has higher heterogeneity.
This can be expressed in terms of the state space of the recurrent layer. Now, we aim to project the
inputs into orthogonal directions of the network state space. Thus, we model the system as
                                                ∞
                                      r(t) = ∑ aτ x(t − τ ) + ε(t)                                     (45)
                                              τ =1

where the vectors aτ ∈ RN correspond to the linearly extractable effect of x(t − τ ) onto r(t) and
ε(t) is the nonlinear contribution of all the inputs onto the state of r(t).


                                                        29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Since our goal is to have a variance as homogeneous as possible along with the directions of aτ , we
need a variance that is as homogeneous along with orthogonal directions, where the vectors aτ ∈ RN
correspond to the linearly extractable effect of the input variable x(t) onto the states of the neurons
(r(t)). Since the eigenvectors of Σ preserve orthogonality across the covariance matrix Σ, the new
variances are given by the eigenvalues of the covariance matrix, λn (Σ). Thus, we work on the
distribution of the eigenvalues of the covariance matrix. Specifically, we want to show that increasing
the heterogeneity in the neuronal membrane time constants decreases the correlation between the
neuron states, which decreases the variance of the neuronal states of the eigenvalues, which would
increase the memory capacity C. We quantify the heterogeneity using the mean with respect to the
square root of the raw variance of the eigenvalues of the covariance matrix given by
                                                       N
                                                       R
                                                     ∑n=1 λ2n (Σ)
                                              J =                   2
                                                                                                     (46)
                                                    (∑N
                                                      n=1 λn (Σ))
                                                        R


where λn (Σ) is the nth eigenvalue of Σ. To get an intuition of how this metric reflects the hetero-
geneity in the neuronal parameters, consider the case of two eigenvalues λ1 , λ2 ; when λ1 = λ2 -very
homogeneous − then J = 12 , but when λ1 > 0, λ2 = 0− heterogeneity is more and hence, J = 1. The
membrane time constant is given by the product of the membrane resistance Rm and membrane
capacitance Cm , such that τm = Rm Cm . Rm is the inverse of the permeability; the higher the
permeability, the lower the resistance, and vice versa. Thus, the lower the time constant, the faster or
more rapidly a membrane will respond to a stimulus. The effects of the time constant on propagation
velocity will become clear below. Hence, variability in the membrane time constants will lead to
variability in the propagation velocity of action potentials.
Now,
                              NR              2                NR
                             ( ∑ λn (Σ)) = (tr[Σ])2 = ( ∑ Var (rn (t)))2                             (47)
                              n=1                              n=1
which is constant by the assumption that the probability distributions of the neuron activities are fixed.
Hence we can focus on the value of ∑N        2
                                      n=1 λn (Σ) which is true since
                                        R


                                                                            NR
             Σk en (Σ) = λn (Σ)Σk−1 en (Σ) = λkn (Σ)en (Σ) ⇒ ∑ λ2n (Σ) = tr [Σ2 ]                    (48)
                                                                            n=1

 where en (Σ) and λn (Σ) are, resp. the nth eigenvector and eigenvalue of Σ. Hence, we can compute
this by decomposing the square of the covariance matrix as follows:
                   NR               NR NR                   NR NR
                         2                                              2
                   ∑ λn (Σ) = ∑ ∑ Σnm Σmn = ∑ ∑ Cov (xn (t), xm (t))                                 (49)
                   n=1              n=1 m=1                 n=1 m=1


where Σij are the factor matrices obtained using Cholesky decomposition of Σ. Thus, ∑N    2
                                                                                     n=1 λn (Σ)
                                                                                      R

increases as the neurons become more correlated; hence heterogeneity decreases.
Thus, from Eqs.        46, 49 we can write the heterogeneity as inversely proportional to
   NR
∑n=1  Cov2 (xn (t), xm (t)). We see that increasing the correlations between neuronal states de-
creases the heterogeneity of the eigenvalues, which would reduce the memory capacity of the model.
We show that the determinant of the covariance between neuronal parameters bounds the heterogene-
ity. Thus, as H increases → covariance decreases → neurons become less correlated. Aceituno et
al.Aceituno et al. (2020) proved that the neuronal state correlation is inversely related to the memory
capacity of the network. Hence, we claim that as H increases, the memory capacity C also increases.
Hence, for HRSNN, with H > 0, CH ≥ CM . ∎

B.5    S PIKING E FFICIENCY

In this section, we model the spiking activity using a point process called the multivariate Point
process model. A point process is a collection of random points on some underlying mathematical
space, such as the real line, the Cartesian plane, or more abstract spaces.
The notion of using point process models, especially the interactive Hawkes processes, to model the
spiking dynamics of LIF network dynamics has been studied in the literature previously (Löcherbach,


                                                       30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


2017; Galves & Löcherbach, 2016; Mascart, 2021; Pfaffelhuber et al., 2022). We leverage these
results to prove that heterogeneity in the synaptic dynamics can help reduce the spike count, as
already discussed in the paper. We highlighted the key assumptions used in deriving the results in the
Suppl. Sec. C. We apologize if there is still confusion, and we will add more in-depth discussion in
the final manuscript as discussed below. In their paper, Locherbach et al.Löcherbach (2017) survey
some aspects of the study of Hawkes processes in high dimensions to model biological neural systems
and study their long-term behavior. Galves et al.Galves & Löcherbach (2016) provided an overview
of point processes used as stochastic models for interacting neurons in discrete and continuous time.
Similarly, Hawkes processes have met a recent interest in the mathematical neuroscience literature
for their ability to model the dependence of a neuron’s activity in the network’s history (Mascart,
2021; Pfaffelhuber et al., 2022; Galves & Löcherbach, 2016; Gerhard et al., 2017; Zhou et al., 2020;
Duval et al., 2022). Other works have also used a nonlinear interactive Hawkes process to model
spiking neural networks with excitatory and inhibitory neurons (Chevallier et al., 2015; Chornoboy
et al., 1988; Hansen et al., 2015; Reynaud-Bouret et al., 2014). Drawing from these works, we use a
microscopic model describing a large network of interacting neurons that can generate oscillations
in a macroscopic frame. In the model, the activity of each neuron is represented by a point process
indicating the successive times at which the neuron emits a spike, where each realization of this point
process is the spike train. We take the spiking intensity of a neuron as the probability of emitting
a spike during the next instant, depending on the history of the neuron and the activity of other
neurons in the network. The neurons interact through their synapses. This means that a spike of a
pre-synaptic neuron leads to an increase of the membrane potential of the post-synaptic neuron if
the synapse is excitatory or a decrease if the synapse is inhibitory, possibly after some delay, like
the process of synaptic integration. The neuron fires a spike when the membrane potential reaches a
certain upper threshold. Thus, excitatory inputs from the neurons in the network increase the firing
intensity, and inhibitory inputs decrease it. Hawkes processes provide good models of this synaptic
integration phenomenon by the structure of their intensity processes. This paper uses a general
class of mean-field interacting Hawkes processes, modeling the reciprocal interactions between a
population of excitatory neurons and a population of inhibitory neurons.
Let us consider a subsection of the HRSNN network as shown in Fig. 11 denoted by Nx . We use
the multivariate Point process model to create a probabilistic model that relates the inner structure
of the sub-network and its spiking activity. In this model, each neuron i has a background spiking
intensity νi caused by neurons outside the network. We know that when a neuron spikes, it impacts
its spiking activity and the spiking activity of its output neurons. The impact of a neuron j on neuron
i is modeled by a real function hj→i (t). This impact can be excitatory or inhibitory depending on
whether the pre-synaptic neuron is excitatory or inhibitory, as shown in Fig. 11. While the spikes
from excitatory neurons try to excite another spike, spikes originating from inhibitory neurons try to
inhibit the spiking of the cascading neuron.
A Hawkes process is a point process in which each point is commonly associated with event
occurrences in time, where every event time impacts the probability that other events will take place
subsequently. These processes are characterized by the conditional intensity function, seen as an
instantaneous measure of the probability of event occurrences. A Hawkes process is a point process
in which each point is commonly associated with event occurrences. In this past-dependent model,
every event time impacts the probability that other events take place subsequently. These processes
are characterized by the conditional intensity function, seen as an instantaneous measure of the
probability of event occurrences. Although the self-exciting Hawkes process remains widely studied,
there has been a growing interest in modeling the opposite effect, known as inhibition, in which the
apparition of certain events lowers the probability of observing an event. In practice, this amounts to
considering negative kernel functions. To maintain the positivity of the intensity function, a non-linear
operator is added to the expression, which in turn entails the loss of the cluster representation. This
model is known as the non-linear Hawkes process, where the existence of such processes was proved
via construction using bi-dimensional marked Poisson processes. The general Hawkes framework
can be written as:
                                        ⎛          t                  ⎞
                                λit = Φi ∑ ∫ hj→i (t − u)dZuj ,                                      (50)
                                        ⎝j∈Si,E 0                     ⎠

where λit is the intensity of neuron i, Φi a positive function, Zj,t is the counting process associated
with neuron j, hj→i (t) is the synaptic kernel associated with the synapse between neurons j and i.


                                                   31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 11: Figure showing the excitatory and inhibitory pre-synaptic neurons with excitatory and
inhibitory spikes respectively incident on the post-synaptic neuron. We use this model to model the
nonlinear interacting Hawkes process with inhibition.


To simplify the notation, we can rewrite Eq. 50 as

                              λi (t) = Φi ( ∑ ∫           hki (t − s)dZk (s)) .                       (51)
                                            k∈I   (0,t)

where hik (t − s) measures the influence of neuron k on neuron i and how this influence vanishes
with the time. More precisely, hik (t − s) describes how a spike of neuron k lying back t − s time
units in the past influences the present spiking rate at time t.
The goal of using heterogeneity in the STDP dynamics is to get better orthogonalization among
the recurrent network states to lower higher-order correlations in spike trains. Studies have shown
that the correlation of higher order progressively decreases the information available through neural
population (Montani et al., 2009; Abbott & Dayan, 1999). Since we are trying to engineer a spike-
efficient model, we leverage the heterogeneity in the STDP dynamics to reduce the higher-order
correlations. The hypothesis is that using heterogeneity in STDP helps us orthogonalize the recurrent
layer that can help us achieve an efficient representation of the input spike patterns with fewer
spikes. This may be interpreted as the recurrent layer acting as an orthogonal bases function where
inputs are projected onto these bases. Thus, having orthogonal bases can efficiently map inputs
without much loss. While heterogeneous LIF neurons help us increase the number of principal
components, thereby enabling us to store a greater subclass of features, heterogeneous STDP helps
us efficiently encode this orthogonalization of the recurrent layer, resulting in fewer spikes compared
to a homogeneous RSNN. Thus, in effect, heterogeneous STDP parameters can learn the output
more precisely, which is projected back into the recurrent network. One of the primary reasons why
heterogeneous STDP helps project the input to orthogonal activations of the recurrent network can be
attributed to the distribution of LTD dynamics, as this increases the competition and helps distribute
the input projection to multiple principal components. We discuss that the heterogeneous LTP/LTD
dynamics in STDP lead to fewer spikes in the transmission of information.
Lemma 3.2.1: If the neuronal firing rate of the HRSNN network with only heterogeneity in LTP/LTD
dynamics of STDP is represented as ΦR and that of MRSNN represented as ΦM , then the HRSNN
model promotes sparsity in the neural firing which can be represented as ΦR < ΦM .
Proof: In this lemma, we show that the average firing rate of the model with heterogeneous STDP
(LTP/LTD) dynamics (averaged over the population of neurons) is lesser than the corresponding
average neuronal activation rate for a model with homogeneous STDP dynamics. We prove this by
taking a sub-network of the HRSNN model as illustrated by Fig. 11. Now, we model the input spike
trains of the pre-synaptic neurons using a multivariate interactive, nonlinear Hawkes process with
multiplicative inhibition (Duval et al., 2022).
We consider a population of neurons of size N that is divided into population A (excitatory) with size
NA ∶= αN and a population B (inhibitory) with size NB = (1 − α)N . A particular instance of the
model is then given in terms of a family of counting processes (Zt1 , . . . , ZtNA ) (population A) and
(ZtNA +1 , . . . , ZtN ) (population B ) with coupled conditional stochastic intensities given respectively
by λA and λB . Consider on a filtered probability space (Ω, F, (Ft )t≥0 , P) an independent family
of i.i.d. Poisson measures (πi ( ds, dz), i ∈ {1, . . . , N }) with intensity measure ds × dz on [0, ∞) ×
[0, ∞). Let (x, y) ↦ F (x, y) and (x, y) ↦ G(x, y) two nonnegative functions defined on (0, ∞)2 .


                                                    32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


We assume that F and G satisfy
                       F (x, y) = ΦA (x)ΦB→A (y), G(x, y) = ΦB (x) + ΦA→B (y),
where ΦA , ΦB→A , ΦB and ΦA→B are nonnegative functions, each of them globally Lipschitz with
ΦB→A bounded (and with no loss of generality we assume 0 ≤ ΦB→A ≤ 1 ).
Let us consider the family of càdlàg (Ft )t≥0 point processes (Zti )t≥0,i=1,...,N given by
                                            t           ∞
                              Zti = ∫           ∫           1z⩽λis πi ( ds, dz), i = 1, . . . , N,
                                        0           0

where the intensity λi , i = 1, . . . , N , is given as:


                      ⎛1               t−                     ⎞     ⎛1                        t−                    ⎞
           λA,N
            t   ∶= ΦA        ∑∫                 h1 (t − u)dZuj ΦB→A                 ∑∫             h2 (t − u)dZuj       (52)
                         ⎝ N j∈A 0                                   ⎠          ⎝ N j∈B 0                           ⎠
                                        −                                                          −
                         ⎛1        t                  ⎛1        t
                                             j⎞                           j⎞
           λB,N
            t   ∶= ΦB        ∑ ∫ h3 (t − u)dZu + ΦA→B     ∑ ∫ h4 (t − u)dZu                                             (53)
                         ⎝ N j∈B 0            ⎠       ⎝ N j∈A 0             ⎠
, where A&B are the populations of the excitatory and inhibitory neurons, respectively.
The dynamics given by Eq. 53 is of Hawkes type: each particle’s intensity depends on the whole
system’s history, through memory kernels hi , i = 1, . . . , 4 and firing rate functions ΦA and ΦB .
The multiplicative influence of inhibitory population B onto population A, is represented using the
inhibition kernel ΦB→A which is a decreasing nonnegative function on [0, +∞), with ΦB→A (0) = 1
and ΦB→A (x) Ð→ 0- i.e., activity of population A should decrease as activity of population B
                x→∞
rises. The model secondly incorporates retroaction from population A onto population B, which is
supposed to be mostly additive, although possibly modulated by a nonlinear feedback kernel ΦA→B .
Now, without loss of generality we assume that ΦA and ΦB are linear - i.e., ΦA (x) = µA +x, ΦB (x) =
µB + x, x ≥ 0, where µA , µB ≥ 0, and hi ≥ 0 for i = 1, . . . , 4.
Hence, Eq. 53 becomes
             ⎧  A             t            A                    t           B
             ⎪ λt = (µA + α ∫0 h1 (t − u)λu du) ΦB→A ((1 − α) ∫0 h2 (t − u)λu du) ,
             ⎪
             ⎨ B                   t           B                t           A
                                                                                                                        (54)
             ⎩ λt = µB + (1 − α) ∫0 h3 (t − u)λu du + ΦA→B (α ∫0 h4 (t − u)λu du) .
             ⎪
             ⎪
For heterogeneous neuron populations, there exists an asymmetry of the weights. Based on balanced
spiking neural networks with heterogeneous connection strengths, previous works have revealed
that such heterogeneous networks possess heavy-tailed Lévy fluctuations (Shlesinger et al., 1987;
Mantegna & Stanley, 1995; Cossell et al., 2015). The heterogeneous heavy-tailed distributions of
synaptic weights have been fitted to lognormal distributions (Buzsáki & Mizuseki, 2014; Kuśmierz
et al., 2020). We model the inputs to neuron i ∈ E as:


            li (t) = WEX τmE ∑ cij sj (t) + WEE τmE ∑ cij sj (t) − WEI τmE ∑ cij sj (t)                                 (55)
                                 j∈X                                      j∈E                           j∈I

                  = µ1 E + ∆µi + ηi (t)                                                                                 (56)
where µ denotes the mean inputs such that µE = KτmE (WEX rX + WEE rE − WEI rl );
∆µi = ’quenched’ fluctuations (from neuron to neuron) with variance ⟨∆µ2 ⟩E =
   2        2    2       2        2     2     2       2
KτmE   (WEX    (rX  + ∆rX   ) + WEE   (rE + ∆rE ) + WEI (rI2 + ∆rI2 )) due to random connectivity.
Finally, ηi denotes temporal fluctuations due to spiking activity. We assume that the pre-synaptic
neurons fire as using the interactive Hawkes process described above.
Consider a case where µA ≫ 1, µB = 0 and h = 1[0,θ]
               ⎧                   t                               t
               ⎪ λA
               ⎪    ∶= (µA + α ∫0 h1 (t − u)dλA                                 B
                                               u ) ΦB→A ((1 − α) ∫0 h2 (t − u)dλu ) ,
               ⎨ t               t                    t                                                                 (57)
               ⎪  B                           B                    A
               ⎩ λt ∶= (1 − α) ∫0 h3 (t − u)dλu + α ∫0 h4 (t − u)dλu .
               ⎪

                                                                    33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


In a normal case, the excitatory and inhibitory populations follow the following steps: (1) t ≈ 0, λA t ≈
µA is high and λB t  ≈ 0 is small (2) Feedback  from  A to B ∶ λ B
                                                                 t increases  (3) Inhibition   of B to A:
when λB t gets high, Φ B→A   reduces  λA
                                       t (4) h4 has compact support:  after a time θ 4 , B no longer feels
the influence of A : intensity of B is back to µB ≈ 0 and A to its normal high activity µA (State 1)
This leads to oscillations which lead to spikes. However, heterogeneity in the synaptic dynamics
increases the stochasticity of the pre-synaptic spike arrival. Thus, due to the heterogeneity, ΦB→A
promotes the system in the inhibition state (state 3) and inhibits the system’s movement to system 4
and system 1, thereby creating a spike. Hence, ΦA        A
                                                   R < ΦM . Similarly, for the inhibitory neurons, we
                 B     B
can show that ΦR < ΦM . Thus, we get ΦR < ΦM ∎
This lemma might be interpreted as the heterogeneous STDP dynamics increasing the synaptic noise,
which reduces the number of spikes of the post-synaptic neuron. A heterogeneous STDP leads to
a non-uniform scaling of correlated spike trains leading to de-correlation. Hence, we can say that
heterogeneous STDP models have learned a better-orthogonalized subspace representation, leading
to a better encoding of the input space with fewer spikes.
It is to be mentioned here that the synaptic noise might be thought of as analogous to the stochasticity
in the gradient descent algorithm. As recently proved by Simsekli et al. (Simsekli et al., 2020; 2019),
stochasticity plays an important role in the generalization ability of the model. We might interpret the
synaptic noise in the heterogeneous STDP to play a similar role and helps in better generalizability of
the HRSNN model. This hypothesis is empirically proven in Supplementary Section A. However, a
detailed theoretical analysis would be a very interesting direction for future work.
Theorem 2: For a given number of neurons NR , the spike efficiency of the model E = C(NSR ) for
HRSNN (ER ) is greater than MRSNN (EM ) i.e., ER ≥ EM
Proof: To study the effect of the spike time when the weight wk changes, we look into the expected
value of the time difference in the post-synaptic spikes, which is given as:

                             E [∆tpost ] = E [tpost − tpost ] = (E [tpost ] − tpost ) Pr[s]                          (58)

where Pr[∃s] is the probability of occurrence of the post-synaptic spike. Thus, the expected input
to the neuron at time t(E [i(t)]), which comprises of its excitatory and inhibitory components
E [ie (t)] , E [ii (t)] can be expressed as:

                  E [∆i(t)] = ∆E [ie (t)] − ∆E [ii (t)]                  for t < tpost                               (59)
                                             ∞                                                    ∞
         where E [ie (t)] = ρe ∫                 µwe (w, t)dw       ;     E [ii (t)] = ρi ∫           µwi (w, t)dw   (60)
                                         0                                                    0

where ρe , ρi are the rates of incoming spikes and µwe (w, t), µwi (w, t) the probabilities of the weights
associated to time t. Now, considering the case for RSNNs with homogeneous STDP (M ) and with
heterogeneous STDP (R), the difference in the variances of the two populations is given as:
                                                         t
            ∆Var[VM ] − ∆Var[VR ] = ∆ ∫                      [E [i2M (t)] − (E [i2R (t)] − E[iR (t)]2 )]dt           (61)
                                                        −∞


Since t < tpost , STDP potentiates both inhibitory and excitatory synapses, so ∆E [i2i (t)] >
0, ∆E [i2e (t)] > 0. The term E[iM (t)]2 = 0 by the symmetry of the weights, and it is main-
tained at zero by the symmetry of the STDP. But for heterogeneous neuron populations, as described
above, there exists an asymmetry of the weights. Based on balanced spiking neural networks with
heterogeneous connection strengths, previous works have revealed that such heterogeneous networks
possess heavy-tailed, Lévy fluctuations (Shlesinger et al., 1987; Mantegna & Stanley, 1995; Cossell
et al., 2015). This implies E[iR (t)]2 > 0 ⇒ ∆Var[VR ] < ∆Var[v(t)M ] We calculate the number of
post-synaptic spikes triggered when the stimulus is present. Now, representing the spike rate of the
HRSNN and the MRSNN as ΦR , ΦM resp.,
                         t                       t                     T        T
                   ∫         ΦR (t)dt ≤ ∫            ΦM (t) ⇒ SR = NR ISI ≤ NR ISI = SM                              (62)
                     0                       0                       t̂R      t̂M


                                                               34
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Thus, spikes decrease when we use heterogeneity in the LTP/LTD Dynamics. Hence, we compare the
efficiencies of the HRSNN with that of MRSNN as follows:
                                                                                   ∞
                                               N     Cov2 (x(t−τ ),aR
                                                                    τ rR (t))
                                             ∑τ =1                                 ∫ tΦR dt
                                                R
                                                               τ rR (t))
                                                         Var(aR
                                                                              ×
                ER MR (NR ) × SM                                                  tref
                  =              =                                                  ∞               (63)
                EM SR × MM (NR )             NR Cov2 (x(t−τ ),aM
                                                               τ rM (t))
                                            ∑τ =1   Var(aMτ rM (t))
                                                                         ×         ∫ tΦM dt
                                                                                  tref
Since SR ≤ SM and also,the covariance increases when the neurons become correlated, and as
neuronal correlation decreases, H increases (Theorem 1), we see that EEM
                                                                       R
                                                                         ≥ 1 ⇒ ER ≥ EM ∎

C     S UPPLEMENTARY S ECTION C
C.1   H IGHER O RDER C ORRELATION

In this paper, we took inspiration from results in reservoir computing, which show that we can
maximize memory capacity using orthogonalization among reservoir states in the case of reservoir
computers (Farkaš & Gergel’, 2017; Farkaš et al., 2016). The goal of using heterogeneous STDP
dynamics is to get better orthogonalized recurrent network states to achieve more efficient information
transfer with lower higher-order correlations in spike trains. Recent studies (Montani et al., 2009;
Abbott & Dayan, 1999) have shown that the correlation of higher order progressively decreases the
information available through the neural population. The decrease in information becomes larger
as the interaction order grows. Since we are trying to engineer a spike-efficient model, we leverage
the heterogeneity in neuronal parameters to reduce the higher-order correlations. The hypothesis is
that an orthogonal recurrent layer can help us efficiently represent the input spike patterns with fewer
spikes. This may be interpreted as the recurrent layer acting as an orthogonal bases function where
the inputs are projected onto these bases. Thus, having orthogonal bases can efficiently map the inputs
without much loss. The heterogeneous STDP helps us efficiently achieve this orthogonalization of
the recurrent layer, resulting in a lesser voltage variance across the neuron population. This leads
to fewer spikes (since the mean is constant) compared to a homogeneous RSNN. Thus, in effect,
heterogeneous STDP parameters can learn the output more precisely, which is projected back into the
recurrent network. Hence, using heterogeneous STDP parameters leads to a better orthogonalization
among the neuronal states and hence, a higher C.
In this paper, we show that using a distribution of LTP/LTD dynamics in the STDP parameters helps
us in mappings the input onto the orthogonal activations of the recurrent network to capture the
principal components of the input signal. The LTD dynamics play an important role in determining
the orthogonality of neuronal activations. LTD windows of the STDP rules enable robust sequence
learning amid background noise in cooperation with a large signal transmission delay between
neurons and a theta rhythm (Hayashi & Igarashi, 2009). The LTD window in the range of positive
spike-timing plays an important role in preventing noise influences with sequence learning. Oja
(Oja, 1982; 1989) showed that the LIF neuron’s time constant is very fast compared to the time
constant of learning in which the weights wji change. The learning is assumed to take place according
to the STDP type conjunction of the inputs ξi and the integrated effect of the inputs, νj , with an
                                                                dw
additional forgetting term attributed to the LTD dynamics: dtji = ανj ξi − f (νj , ξi , wji ) In the
case of homogeneous STDP, f (.) is a constant; hence, the model can only efficiently learn the first
principal component of the input. However, quite interesting functions emerge when considering
STDP to have a distribution. This also helps us determine the next principal components other
than the first one. Hence the diversity in the different LTD dynamics increases the competition and
helps that not all inputs are mapped to the first principle component. Thus, the diversity in the LTD
dynamics helps in projecting the input to orthogonal activations of the recurrent network.
Now, for homogeneous RSNNs, several higher-order correlations, which according to our hypothesis,
arise because of the poor orthogonalization among the network states. This results in the redundancies
of spikes for encoding the same information. In this paper, we use heterogeneous STDP dynamics to
learn an efficient orthogonal representation of the state space, which result in the network learning the
same patterns but using fewer spikes. (theorem: 3) We also show that heterogeneity in the neuronal
parameters decreases the neuronal correlation (theorem 1 And fig 2a). Thus, since heterogeneity
results in better orthogonalization among the neuronal states, it results in fewer higher-order cor-
relations. Moreover, recent studies have shown that the correlation of higher order progressively


                                                     35
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Table 11: Table Showing the estimated highest order of correlation for HRSNN vs. MRSNN using
CuBIC

                                                       Estimated Highest-
                                       ξˆ   p-value    order of correlation
                                                             (ξˆ + 1)
                           HRSNN       2     0.423               3
                           MRSNN       5     0.358               6


decreases the information available through the neural population, and the decrease in information
becomes larger as the interaction order grows. Since we are trying to engineer an efficient model, we
aim to reduce the higher-order correlations using heterogeneity in neuronal parameters (as shown
in Theorem 1). In addition to this, to verify this, we used CuBIC (Staude et al., 2010), a cumulant-
based inference of higher-order correlations in massively parallel spike trains. The details of the
experimental methodology are given in Supplementary Section C. The outcome of CuBIC is a lower
bound ξˆ on the order of correlation in the spiking activity of large groups of simultaneously recorded
neurons. CuBIC can provide statistical evidence for large correlated groups without the discouraging
requirements on a sample size that direct tests for higher-order correlations have to meet. This is
achieved by exploiting constraining relations among correlations of different orders. However, it
must be noted that CuBIC is not designed to estimate the order of correlation directly; the inferred
lower bound might not always correspond to the maximal order of correlation present in a given data
set.


                                                 36
