Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


M ETA T EMPORAL P OINT P ROCESSES
 Wonho Bae                                            Mohamed Osama Ahmed
 University of British Columbia & Borealis AI         Borealis AI
 whbae@cs.ubc.ca                                      mohamed.o.ahmed@borealisai.com

 Frederick Tung                                       Gabriel L. Oliveira
 Borealis AI                                          Borealis AI
 frederick.tung@borealisai.com                        gabriel.oliveira@borealisai.com



                                            A BSTRACT
         A temporal point process (TPP) is a stochastic process where its realization is a
         sequence of discrete events in time. Recent work in TPPs model the process using
         a neural network in a supervised learning framework, where a training set is a
         collection of all the sequences. In this work, we propose to train TPPs in a meta
         learning framework, where each sequence is treated as a different task, via a novel
         framing of TPPs as neural processes (NPs). We introduce context sets to model
         TPPs as an instantiation of NPs. Motivated by attentive NP, we also introduce
         local history matching to help learn more informative features. We demonstrate
         the potential of the proposed method on popular public benchmark datasets and
         tasks, and compare with state-of-the-art TPP methods.


1   I NTRODUCTION
With the advancement of deep learning, there has been growing interest in modeling temporal point
processes (TPPs) using neural networks. Although the community has developed many innovations
in how neural TPPs encode the history of past events (Biloš et al., 2021) or how they decode these
representations into predictions of the next event (Shchur et al., 2020; Lin et al., 2022), the general
training framework for TPPs has been supervised learning where a model is trained on a collection
of all the available sequences. However, supervised learning is susceptible to overfitting, especially
in high noise environments, and generalization to new tasks can be challenging.
In recent years, meta learning has emerged as an alternative to supervised learning as it aims to
adapt or generalize well on new tasks, which resembles how humans can learn new skills from a
few examples. Inspired by this, we propose to train TPPs in a meta learning framework. To this
end, we treat each sequence as a “task”, since it is a realization of a stochastic process with its
own characteristics. For instance, consider the pickup times of taxis in a city. The dynamics of
these event sequences are governed by many factors such as location, weather and the routine of
a taxi driver, which implies the pattern of each sequence can be significantly different from each
other. Under the supervised learning framework, a trained model tends to capture the patterns seen
in training sequences well, but it easily breaks on unseen patterns.
As the goal of modeling TPPs is to estimate the true probability distribution of the next event time
given the previous event times, we employ Neural Processes (NPs), a family of the model-based
meta learning with stochasticity, to explain TPPs. In this work, we formulate neural TPPs as NPs
by satisfying some conditions of NPs, and term it as Meta TPP. Inspired by the literature in NP, we
further propose the Meta TPP with a cross-attention module, which we refer to as Attentive TPP. We
demonstrate the strong potential of the proposed method through extensive experiments.
Our contributions can be summarized as follows,
       • To the best of our knowledge, this is the first work that formulates the TPP problem in a
         meta learning framework, opening up a new research direction in neural TPPs.
       • Inspired by the NP literature, we present a conditional meta TPP formulation, followed by
         a latent path extension, culminating with our proposed Attentive TPP model.


                                                  1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


       • The experimental results show that our proposed Attentive TPP model achieves state-of-
         the-art results on four widely used TPP benchmark datasets, and is more successful in
         capturing periodic patterns on three additional datasets compared to previous methods.
       • We demonstrate that our meta learning TPP approach can be more robust in practical de-
         ployment scenarios such as noisy sequences and distribution drift.

2   P RELIMINARIES

Neural processes. A general form of optimization objective in supervised learning is defined as,
                                                                      
                                                   X
                       θ∗ = arg max EB∼p(D)             log pθ (y | x)                      (1)
                                         θ
                                                      (x,y)∈B

                           |D|
where D := {(x(i) , y (i) )}i=1 for an input x and label y, and B denotes a mini-batch set of (x, y)
data pairs. Here, the goal is to learn a model f parameterized by θ that maps x to y as fθ : x → y.
In recent years, meta learning has emerged as an alternative to supervised learning as it aims to
adapt or generalize well on new tasks (Santoro et al., 2016), which resembles how humans learn
new skills from few examples. In meta learning, we define a meta dataset, a set of different tasks,
                 |M|
as M := {D(i) }i=1 . Here, D(i) is a dataset of i-th task consisting of a context and target set as
D := C ∪ T . The objective of meta learning is then defined as,
                                                                             
                                                   X
                    θ∗ = arg max EBD ∼p(M)               log pθ (YT | XT , C)                 (2)
                                 θ
                                                  (C,T )∈BD

where BD denotes a mini-batch set of tasks. Also, XT and YT represent inputs and labels of a target
set, respectively. Unlike supervised learning, the goal is to learn a mapping from x to y given C:
more formally, fθ (·, C) : x → y. Although meta learning is a powerful framework to learn fast
adaption to new tasks, it does not provide uncertainty for its predictions, which is becoming more
important in modern machine learning literature as a metric to measure the reliability of a model.
To take the uncertainty into account for meta learning, Neural processes (NPs) have been proposed
(Garnelo et al., 2018b;a). Instead of finding point estimators as done in regular meta learning models,
NPs learn a probability distribution of a label y given an input x and context set C: pθ (y|x, C). In
this work, we frame TPPs as meta learning instead of supervised learning, for the first time. To
this end, we employ NPs to incorporate the stochastic nature of TPPs. In Section 3.1, we propose
a simple modification of TPPs to connect them to NPs, which enables us to employ a rich line of
works in NPs to TPPs as described in Section 3.2 and Section 3.3.
Neural temporal point processes. TPPs are stochastic processes where their realizations are se-
quences of discrete events in time. In notations, a collection of event time sequences is defined as
             |D|                  (i) (i)        (i)
D := {s(i) }i=1 where s(i) = (τ1 , τ2 , . . . , τLi ) and Li denotes the length of i-th sequence. The
history of studying TPPs started decades ago (Daley & Vere-Jones, 2003), but in this work, we focus
on neural TPPs where TPPs are modeled using neural networks (Shchur et al., 2021). As described
in Figure 1a, a general form of neural TPPs consists of an encoder, which takes a sequence of previ-
ous event times and outputs a history embedding, and a decoder which takes the history embedding
and outputs probability distribution of the time when the next event happens.
Previous works of neural TPPs are auto-regressively modeled in a supervised learning framework.
More formally, the objective of neural TPPs are defined as,
                                                                             
                                                |B| Li −1
                                                                   (i)    (i)
                                                X    X
                      θ∗ = arg max EB∼p(D)               log pθ (τl+1 | τ≤l )             (3)
                                     θ
                                                  i=l l=1

where B ∼ p(D) denotes a mini-batch of event time sequences. To frame TPPs as NPs, we need to
define a target input and context set shown in Equation (2), from an event time history τ≤l , which
will be described in the following section.


                                                  2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                       Attention
                        Mask                                                          Attention
                                                                                       Mask
                                                                                                         Latent Path

      𝜏!                   𝑟!                                                            𝑟!                   𝜇
                                                                       𝜏!                                             𝑧
    𝜏$       Encoder       𝑟$                                                            𝑟$        𝐺          𝜎
                                   Decoder                             𝜏$   Encoder


                                                                                         …
      …


                           …
      𝜏"                   𝑟"                          𝜏"#!                            𝑟"%!


                                                                       …
                                                                       𝜏"
                       (a) Neural TPP                                                    𝑟"
                                                                                                       Decoder
                                                                            Weight                                          𝜏"#!
                       Attention
                                                                            Sharing
                        Mask

                                                                                         𝑟!
                          𝑟!                                           𝜏!
      𝜏!                                                                                 𝑟$         Cross             𝑟"&
                          𝑟$       𝐺                                   𝜏$   Encoder                Attention


                                                                                         …
      𝜏$     Encoder                       Decoder                                     𝑟"%!


                                                                       …
                          …


                        𝑟"%!                                           𝜏"
      …


                                                            𝜏"#!                                  𝑘! … 𝑘"#!       𝑞
      𝜏"                                                                                 𝑟"
                          𝑟"

                (b) Conditional Meta TPP                                              (c) Attentive TPP

                                       Figure 1: Overall architectures of TPP models.

3      M ETA T EMPORAL P OINT P ROCESS AND I TS VARIANTS
3.1        T EMPORAL P OINT P ROCESSES AS N EURAL P ROCESSES

To frame TPPs as NPs, we treat each event time sequence s as a task for meta learning, which
intuitively makes sense since each sequence is a realization of a stochastic process. For instance, the
transaction times of different account holders are very different from each other due to many factors
including an account holder’s financial status and characteristics.
With the new definition of tasks, we define a target input and context set for a conditional probability
distribution of meta learning shown in Equation (2), using previous event times τ≤l . There are many
ways to define them but a target input and context set need to be semantically aligned since the target
input will be an element of the context set for the next event time prediction. Hence, we define a
target input for τl+1 as the latest “local history” τl−k+1:l where k is the window size of the local
history. Similarly, a context set for τl+1 is defined as Cl := {τt−k+1:t }l−1
                                                                            t=1 . Here, if t − k ≤ 0, we
include event times from τ1 . With Transformer structure, it is easy to efficiently compute the feature
embeddings for the context set C. Figure 1b shows a schematic of the Conditional Meta TPP with a
mask (shaded) used for an example case of 5 event times with a local history window size of k = 3.
Then, the feature embedding rl contains information of τl−k+1:l . With the notations for target inputs
and context sets, we propose the objective of TPPs in a meta learning framework as,
                                                                                      
                                              |B| Li −1
                                                                 (i)    (i)        (i)
                                              X    X
                  θ∗ = arg max EB∼p(D)                 log pθ (τl+1 | τl−k+1:l , Cl ) .             (4)
                                       θ
                                                       i=l l=1

                                                      (i)
Note that we have only one target label τl+1 to predict per event unlike the general meta learning
objective in Equation (2) where usually |T | > 1. It is because TPP models in general are trained
to predict the next event time. Modeling TPPs to predict multiple future event times would be an
interesting future work, but it is out of scope of this work.
                                                                            |T |                         |T |
Requirements for neural processes. Let XT := {xi }i=1 and YT := {yi }i=1 be a set of target
inputs and labels, respectively, and π be an arbitrary permutation of a set. To design NP models, it
is required to satisfy the following two conditions.
Condition 3.1 (Consistency over a target set). A probability distribution pθ is consistent if it
is consistent under Rpermutation: pθ (YT | XT , C) = pθ (π(YT ) | π(XT ), C), and marginalization:
pθ (y1:m | XT , C) = pθ (y1:n | XT , C) dym+1:n for any positive integer m < n.


                                                                   3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Condition 3.2 (Permutation invariance over a context set). pθ (YT | XT , C) = pθ (YT | XT , π(C))

According to Kolmogorov extension theorem (Oksendal, 2013), a collection of finite-dimensional
distributions is defined as a stochastic process if condition 3.1 is satisfied. In NP literature, condition
3.1 is satisfied through factorization: it assumes target labels are independent to each other given a
                                                                             |T |
target input and a context set C, in other words, pθ (YT | XT , C) = Πi=1 pθ (yi | xi , x<i , y<i , C) ≈
  |T |
Πi=1 pθ (yi | xi , C) (Dubois et al., 2020). This assumption can be unrealistic if target labels are
strongly dependent to previous target inputs and labels even after context representations are ob-
served. It is, however, not necessary to assume factorization to make TPPs as NPs. As previously
mentioned, we only care about predicting the next event time, which means |YT | = 1. When a
set contains only one element, its permutation is always itself. More formally, the consistency un-
der permutation of Condition 3.1 in TPPs: pθ (τl+1 | τl−k+1:l , Cl ) = pθ (π(τl+1 ) | π(τl−k+1:l ), Cl ),
is satisfied since π({τl+1 }) = {τl+1 } and π({τl−k+1:l }) = {τl−k+1:l }. Also, the marginal-
ization under permutation in Condition 3.1 is satisfied as marginalization is not applicable for
pθ (τl+1 | τl−k+1:l , Cl ) since the target label set τl+1 contains only one element.
Recall that NP models learn a probability distribution of a target label pθ given a target input and
context set. For computational efficiency (to make inference O(|C| + |T |) time), the feature repre-
sentation of C should be invariant to the size of the context set, for which Condition 3.2 is required.
To satisfy Condition 3.2, we average-pool all the context features r1 , r2 , . . . rl−1 to generate the
global feature for a task G as shown in Figure 1b, and term it as conditional Meta TPP following
the terminology used in the NP literature. Each context feature r1 , r2 , · · · , rl−1 represents a feature
from a transformer encoder such as Transformer Hawkes Processes (THP), that encodes the corre-
sponding local history of the context set Cl . For instance, ri contains information of τi−k+1:i . To
make ri only encode the subset of previous event times τi−k+1:i (instead of the whole previous event
times τ≤i ), we mask out events that are outside of the local history window using an attention mask
as shown in Figure 1(b) and (c), which is different from a regular attention mask shown in Figure
1(a). Using the permutation invariant feature G not only satisfies Condition 3.2, but also lets the de-
coder approximate the probability distribution of a target label given both a target input and context
set instead of just a target input. Now that we satisfy both requirements with a new architectural
design, we can treat TPPs as NPs.
Implementation. It can be expensive to compute the individual context feature rt for all 1 ≤ t < l,
from each element of the context set τt−k+1:t ∈ Cl : the time complexity of computing all the
context features for a sequence is O(L2 ). Instead of passing each element of a context set, using the
Transformer architecture (Vaswani et al., 2017), we can simply pass the event times to obtain all the
context features at once, of which time complexity is O(kL) where k is the window size of a local
history. To this end, we employ the THP as the encoder. Please refer to Zuo et al. (2020) for details.

3.2   M ETA T EMPORAL P OINT P ROCESS

In the NP literature, NPs are generally modeled as latent variable models. Instead of using the
deterministic global feature G as an input to the decoder (Garnelo et al., 2018a), a latent variable z is
sampled from a probability distribution e.g. multi-variate Gaussian, using parameters inferred from
the global feature G (Garnelo et al., 2018b). As it is intractable to compute the log-likelihood for
a latent variable model, amortized variational inference (VI) can be used to approximate inference.
In the setting of TPPs, the evidence lower bound (ELBO) of variational inference with an inference
network pθ (z | CL ) can be derived as,
                                        Z
    log pθ (τl+1 | τl−k+1:l , Cl ) = log pθ (τl | τl−k+1:l , z)pθ (z | Cl )dz                        (5)

                               ≥ Ez [log pθ (τl+1 | τl−k+1:l , z)] − KL(pθ (z | CL ) | pθ (z | Cl ))      (6)
                                      N
                                   1  X
                               ≈         log pθ (τl | τl−k+1:l , zn ) − KL(pθ (z | CL ) | pθ (z | Cl ))   (7)
                                   N n=1
where N denotes the number of samples of z ∼ pθ (z | CL ) for Monte-Carlo approximation. Here,
pθ (z | CL ) is the posterior given the context at the last (L-th) event, which contains all the events
of the sequence s (it is accessible in training time). Minimizing KL-divergence between pθ (z | CL )
and pθ (z | Cl ) is to make the global latent variable z inferred from Cl to be similar to the latent


                                                     4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


variable of a sequence z from CL , in training time. To sample z, we use the reparameterization trick
as z = µ + σ ⊙ ϵ where ϵ ∼ N (0, I) as described in the latent path of Figure 1c. In inference,
we approximate evaluation metrics such as negative log-likelihood or root mean squared error using
Monte-Carlo samples. But, as we do not have access to CL at l-th event when l < L, we use z from
pθ (z | Cl ). The detailed description of the evaluation metrics are provided in Appendix C.
An advantage of a latent variable model is that it captures stochasticity of functions, which can
be particularly beneficial to model TPPs since TPPs are stochastic processes. Experiments in Sec-
tion 5.4 demonstrate it indeed helps to model TPPs over the deterministic case. In particular, it is
robust to noises (Section 5.2). We term the latent variable model as Meta TPP throughout the paper.
Discussion. The existing TPP models treat all event sequences as realization of the same process
whereas the Meta TPP treats each sequence as a realization of a distinct stochastic process. We
achieve this by conditioning on the global latent feature z that captures task-specific characteristics.
For z to be task-specific, it has to be distinct for different sequences but similar throughout different
events l ∈ [1, L − 1] within the same sequence. It is natural for the global features to be distinct by
sequence but we need further guidance to make the global feature shared across all the event times in
a sequence. Due to the permutation invariance constraint implemented in average-pooling, z cannot
be very different at different event time: adding some addition context feature ri will not change G
as well as z much. In addition, the KL-divergence between pθ (z | CL ) and pθ (z | Cl ) further enhances
the task-specific characteristics of z. We provide more detailed discussion in Appendix B

3.3   ATTENTIVE T EMPORAL P OINT P ROCESS

Early works in NPs suffered from the underfitting problem. To alleviate this, Kim et al. (2019)
proposed AttentiveNP, which explicitly attends the elements in a context set to obtain a better fea-
ture for target inputs. Inspired by this, we add a cross-attention module that considers the sim-
ilarity between the feature of a target input and previous event times as described in Figure 1c.
Given the local history (context) features r1 , r2 , . . . rl−1 at l-th time step, the key-query-value pairs
K ∈ Rl−1×D , q ∈ R1×D , and V ∈ Rl−1×D for the cross-attention, are computed using their
corresponding projection weights WK ∈ RD×D , WQ ∈ RD×D as,

               K = R · WK , q = rl T · WQ , V = R where R = [r1 , r2 , . . . , rl−1 ]T .                (8)

Here, K corresponds to [k1 , k2 , . . . , kl−1 ]T in Figure 1c. The feature of i-th attention head hi are
then computed as follows,
                                                               √
                                  hi = Sof tmax(q · K T / D) · V.                                     (9)

With W ∈ RHD×D and some fully connected layers denoted as F C, rl′ ∈ R1×D is computed as,
                                   rl′ = F C( [h1 , h2 , . . . , hH ] · W ).                           (10)
Finally, the decoder takes the concatenated feature of z, rl , and rl′ as an input to infer a distribution.
In the TPP setting, it is common that there are multiple periodic patterns in the underlying stochastic
process. The cross-attention module provides an inductive bias to a model that the repeating event
subsequences should have similar features. Our experiments in Section 5.2 demonstrate that the
explicit attention helps to model TPPs in general, especially when there are periodic patterns.
Decoder. The decoder takes the concatenated feature of the global latent feature z, target input
feature rl that encodes τl−k:l−1 , and attention feature r′ from the attention module. For the Meta
TPP (without the attention module), the decoder takes as input the concatenated feature of z and
rl . Here, z, rl , and r′ are all D-dimensional vectors. The decoder consists of two fully connected
layers, and the input and hidden dimension of the decoder layers are either 2D or 3D depending on
whether we use the feature from the attention module r′ .
The decoder outputs the parameters of the probability distribution of the next event time or
pθ (τl+1 | τl−k+1:l , zm ). Inspired by the intensity-free TPP (Shchur et al., 2020), we use a mix-
ture of log-normal distributions to model the probability distribution. Formally, for l ∈ [1, L − 1],
τl+1 ∼ M ixLogN orm(µl+1 , σl+1 , ωl+1 ) where µl+1 are the mixture means, σl+1 are the stan-
dard deviations, and ωl+1 are the mixture weights.


                                                      5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


4     R ELATED W ORK

Neural temporal point processes. Neural temporal point processes (NTPPs) have been proposed
to capture complex dynamics of stochastic processes in time. They are derived from traditional
temporal point processes (Hawkes, 1971; Isham & Westcott, 1979; Daley & Vere-Jones, 2003).
Models based on RNNs are proposed by (Du et al., 2016) and (Mei & Eisner, 2017) to improve
NTPPs by constructing continuous-time RNNs. More recent works use Transformers to capture
long-term dependency (Kumar et al., 2019; Zhang et al., 2020; Zuo et al., 2020; Yang et al., 2022;
Zhang et al., 2022). (Omi et al., 2019; Shchur et al., 2020; Sharma et al., 2021) propose intensity-free
NTPPs to directly model the conditional distribution of event times.
Omi et al. (2019) propose to model a cumulative intensity with a neural network. But, it suffers from
problems that the probability density is not normalised and negative event times receives non-zero
probabilities. Alternatively, Shchur et al. (2020) suggest modelling conditional probability density
by log-normal mixtures. Transformer-based models like Zuo et al. (2020); Zhang et al. (2020)
propose to leverages the self-attention mechanism to capture long-term dependencies. Another class
of TPP methods called Neural Flows (Biloš et al., 2021), are proposed to model temporal dynamics
with ordinary differential equations learned by neural networks. Unlike the previous TPP methods,
we frame TPPs as meta learning (not supervised learning) for the first time.
Neural processes. Meta learning is a learning framework that aims to adapt or generalize well on
new tasks. There are three approaches in meta learning: metric-based (Koch et al., 2015; Vinyals
et al., 2016; Sung et al., 2018; Snell et al., 2017), model-based (Santoro et al., 2016; Munkhdalai &
Yu, 2017; Grant et al., 2018) and optimization-based (Finn et al., 2017; 2018; Nichol et al., 2018).
Neural processes (NPs) is the model-based meta learning with stochasticity. Garnelo et al. (2018a)
propose a conditional neural process as a new formulation to approximate a stochastic process us-
ing neural network architecture. It succeeds the advantage of Gaussian Processes (GPs) as it can
estimate the uncertainty of its predictions, without having expensive inference time. Garnelo et al.
(2018b) generalize a conditional neural process by adding latent variables, which are approximated
using variational inference. Although NPs can adapt to new tasks quickly without requiring much
computation, it suffers from underfitting problem. To alleviate it, Kim et al. (2019) propose a cross-
attention module, which explicitly attends the elements in the context set to obtain better representa-
tions for the elements in the target set. As another way to address the underfitting problem, Gordon
et al. (2020) propose a set convolutional layer under the assumption of translation equivariance of
inputs and outputs, which is expanded to the latent variable counterpart in Foong et al. (2020).
Transformer NP (Nguyen & Grover, 2022) is the most relevant work to ours. Although it also models
event sequences, it focuses on modeling regular time series: discrete and regularly-spaced time
inputs with corresponding label values. TPPs are different as they are continuous and irregularly-
spaced time sequences not necessarily with corresponding label values.


5     E XPERIMENTS

5.1   E XPERIMENT S ETTING

Datasets. To compare the effectiveness of models, we conduct experiments on 4 popular benchmark
datasets – Stack Overflow, Mooc, Reddit, and Wiki, and 3 datasets with strong periodic patterns we
introduce – Sinusoidal wave, Uber, and NYC Taxi. Please refer to Appendix H for details.
Metrics. We use the root mean squared error (RMSE) as the main metric along with the negative
log-likelihood (NLL) as a reference since NLL can go arbitrary low if probability density is placed
mostly on the ground truth event time. RMSE may not be a good metric, either, if one ignores
stochastic components of TPPs and directly trains a baseline on the ground truth event times to
obtain point estimations of event times (Shchur et al., 2021). We train all the methods on NLL
and obtain RMSE in test time to not abuse RMSE scores, keeping stochastic components of TPPs.
For marked TPP datasets, we extend the proposed method to make class predictions, and report
accuracy. For details about marked cases, please refer to Appendix G.
Baselines. We use intensity-free TPP (Shchur et al., 2020), Neural flow (Biloš et al., 2021), and
Transformer Hawkes Processes (THP) (Zuo et al., 2020) as baselines. For intensity-free TPP and


                                                   6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                      Stack Overflow               Mooc                        Reddit                   Wiki
   Methods
                  RMSE     NLL     Acc     RMSE    NLL        Acc     RMSE      NLL     Acc    RMSE     NLL     Acc
                  3.64     3.66    0.43     0.31   0.94       0.40     0.18     1.09    0.60   0.60     7.76    0.26
 Intensity-free
                  (0.26)   (0.02) (0.005) (0.006) (0.03) (0.004) (0.006) (0.04) (0.008)        (0.05)   (0.40) (0.03)
                     –       –       –      0.47   0.43   0.30    0.32    1.30   0.60           0.56    11.55 0.05
  Neural flow
                     –       –       –    (0.006) (0.02) (0.04) (0.04) (0.33) (0.07)           (0.05)   (2.22) (0.01)
                   1.68     3.28   0.46     0.18   0.13    0.38    0.26   1.20    0.60          0.17     6.25   0.23
      THP+
                  (0.16)   (0.02) (0.004) (0.005) (0.02) (0.004) (0.005) (0.04) (0.007)        (0.02)   (0.39) (0.03)
                   1.15     2.64   0.46    0.16   -0.72    0.36    0.11   0.03    0.60          0.15     6.25   0.25
 Attentive TPP
                  (0.02)   (0.02) (0.004) (0.004) (0.02) (0.003) (0.002) (0.04) (0.007)        (0.01)   (0.38) (0.03)

Table 1: Comparison of the Attentive TPP to the state-of-the-art methods on a bootstrapped test sets.

                                   Sinusoidal                        Uber                      NYC Taxi
          Methods
                               RMSE          NLL          RMSE                NLL        RMSE             NLL
      Intensity-free         1.29 (0.08)   0.88 (0.02) 51.23 (2.89) 4.46 (0.02) 46.59 (26.16) 2.06 (0.07)
       Neural flow           1.13 (0.07)   0.99 (0.02)      –            –            –            –
          THP+               1.72 (0.10)   0.84 (0.02) 90.25 (4.53) 3.63 (0.03) 10.31 (0.47) 2.00 (0.01)
  Attentive TPP (Ours)       1.45 (0.11)   0.66 (0.02) 22.11 (1.94) 2.89 (0.04) 8.92 (0.42) 2.00 (0.009)

          Table 2: Experiment results on bootstrapped test sets with strong periodic patterns.

neural flow, we add the survival time of the last event to NLL and fix some bugs specified in their
public repositories. THP and its variants are originally based on intensity: they predict intensities
from which log-likelihood and expectation of event times are computed. It is, however, computa-
tionally expensive to compute them as it requires to compute integrals: especially, to compute the
expected event times, it requires to compute double integrals, which can be quite expensive and
complex to compute even with thinning algorithms described in Mei & Eisner (2017). To work
around it without losing performance, we add the mixture of log-normal distribution proposed in
(Shchur et al., 2020) as the decoder, and we call it THP+ . For fair comparison, we fix the number
of parameters of the models in between 50K and 60K except the last fully-connected layer for class
predictions since it depends on the number of classes.
Hyperparameters. We grid-search on every combination of dataset and method for learning rate
∈ {0.01, 0.001, 0.0001, 0.00001} and weight decay ∈ {0.01, 0.001, 0.0001, 0.00001} for fair com-
parison. We bootstrap for 200 times on test sets to obtain the mean and standard deviation (in
parentheses) for the metrics in Figure 2a and Table 1–3 following Yang et al. (2022). All the other
hyperparameters are fixed throughout the experiments, and are reported in Appendix I. Our imple-
mentation is publicly available at https://github.com/BorealisAI/meta-tpp.


5.2    E XPERIMENT R ESULTS

In this section, we begin by comparing our attentive meta temporal point process (denoted as Atten-
tive TPP) with state-of-the-art supervised TPP methods on 4 popular benchmarks. We then inves-
tigate how Attentive TPP captures periodic patterns, and show how Attentive TPP can be used to
impute missing events in noisy sequences. Finally, we consider robustness under distribution drift.
Comparison with state-of-the-art methods. Table 1 summarizes our comparison of Attentive TPP
with state-of-the-art baselines – intensity-free (Shchur et al., 2020), neural flow (Biloš et al., 2021)1 ,
and THP+ (Zuo et al., 2020) on the Stack Overflow, Mooc, Reddit, and Wiki benchmarks. THP+
generally performs better than the intensity-free and neural flow baselines. Attentive TPP further
improves over THP+ on all datasets and metrics except for mark accuracy on Mooc and Wiki.

    1
      Neural flow results on Uber, NYC Taxi and Stack Overflow (in Table 1) datasets are missing because the
official implementation runs into NaN values for long event sequences in inversion step.


                                                          7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                   THP+               Meta TPP                 Attn TPP                                     THP+          Meta TPP
        50                                                                          140
                                                                                    120
        40
                                                                                    100
 RMSE


                                                                             RMSE
        30                                                                          80
        20                                                                          60
                                                                                    40
        10
                                                                                    20
        0
              10     20       30       40          50      60       70                Jan-Feb Mar-AprMay-Jun Jul-Aug Sep-Oct Nov-Dec
                             Drop ratio (%)                                                          Target domains
            (a) Imputation with different drop rates                                (b) Distribution drift in NYC Taxi dataset
                            Figure 2: Experiment results on imputation and distribution drift.
                                        Reddit                        Uber                                                Reddit
 Attention         Latent
                              RMSE          NLL         Acc      RMSE        NLL          Methods     # Params     RMSE     NLL      Acc
                                                                                                 +
        ✗            ✗         0.16         0.92        0.59      63.71      3.68          THP          113K       0.26     1.19     0.60
        ✗            ✓         0.13         -0.39       0.61      63.35      3.25                       170K       0.29     0.79     0.59
      ✓              ✗         0.12         0.29        0.61      47.91      3.72                       226K       0.28     1.44     0.57
      ✓              ✓         0.12         0.07        0.60      21.87      2.98         AttnTPP       222K       0.12     0.07     0.60

Table 3: Comparison of the variants of Meta TPPs                                          Table 4: Comparison of diff. model size

Periodic patterns. As previously mentioned in Section 3.3, the cross-attention module is designed
to capture periodic patterns by matching the local history of the current event to the local histories
of the previous event times, in addition to alleviating the underfitting problem. To validate the effec-
tiveness of the cross-attention, we experiment on the datasets with strong periodicity – Sinusoidal,
Uber, and NYC Taxi (please refer to Appendix H for details). Table 2 shows that the Attentive TPP
generally outperforms the state-of-the-art methods, except for RMSE on Sinusoidal. To investigate
the behavior of the cross-attention, we provide an example in Figure 3a where we highlight 15 (out
of 64) the most attended local history indices (in red) to predict the target event (in green) in a se-
quence from Sinusoidal. The dotted grey lines represent the start and end of periods. We can observe
that the attention refers to the local histories with similar patterns more than the recent ones.

5.3         A PPLICATIONS

Imputation. We study the robustness of Meta and Attentive TPP to noise by randomly dropping
events, simulating partial observability in a noisy environment, and measuring imputation perfor-
mance. For the experiment, we drop n percentage of all the event times drawn independently at
random per sequence on the Sinusoidal wave dataset. In Figure 2a, we report the bootstrapped im-
putation performance of THP+ , Meta TPP, and Attentive TPP, in terms of RMSE. As the drop ratio
increases, RMSE increases for all three models but the gap exponentially increases. Given that the
performance gap between three models on ‘next event’ predictions is not as large (mean RMSE –
THP+ : 1.72, Meta TPP: 1.49, Attentive TPP: 1.45), the results shown in Figure 2a imply that the
Meta and Attentive TPP are significantly more robust to the noise coming from partial observability.
Distribution drift. Distribution drift occurs when the distribution observed during training becomes
misaligned with the distribution during deployment due to changes in the underlying patterns over
time. This is a common deployment challenge in real-world systems. Figure 2b shows how THP+
and Meta TPP models trained on the January-February data of the NYC Taxi dataset generalize to
subsequent months. Both models show a decrease in performance, suggesting the presence of non-
stationary or seasonal patterns in the data that are not captured in the training months; however, Meta
TPP is comparatively more robust across all out-of-domain settings. It is also worth mentioning that
although the Attentive TPP generally performs better than Meta TPP in the conventional experimen-
tal setting, it is not the case for distribution drifts. We conjecture it is because the cross-attention is
designed to alleviate the underfitting problem, which results in being less robust to distribution drift.


                                                                             8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                                                       Attentive TPP   Targets
                        Most attended events         Target event                   30


                                                                       Bin counts
                5                                                                   20
    Bin count   4                                                                   10
                3                                                                    0
                                                                                                              THP+     Targets
                2                                                                   30


                                                                       Bin counts
                1                                                                   20
                                                                                    10
                0
                    0      10       20          30   40       50                     0
                                                                                         0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100
                                         Unit                                                         Days
    (a) Self-attention in THP and proposed cross-attention             (b) Visualization of test predictions vs. targets
                        Figure 3: Qualitative analysis on the cross-attention and prediction results.

5.4             A BLATION S TUDIES

Meta TPP and its variants. In Table 3, we compare the proposed Meta TPP and its variants
on Reddit, and Uber datasets. The result shows that both cross-attention and latent variable path
generally help to improve the performance. When they are combined (resulting in the Attentive
TPP), it generally performs the best in terms of both RMSE and NLL.
Different model sizes. Both latent path and cross-attention components introduce additional learn-
able parameters (for the Reddit dataset with 984 classes, THP+ : 113K, Meta TPP: 126K, and Atten-
tive TPP: 209K parameters). We provide an ablation study with varying number of model parameters
for the THP+ baseline to validate the performance improvement does not come from the increased
number of model parameters. In Table 4, we increase the number of model parameters for THP+ on
Reddit along with the result of the Attentive TPP. The result shows that the larger model does not
necessarily help to improve the performance: as the number of parameters increases, NLL some-
times improves but it may hurt RMSE as in the case of Table 4. The significant improvement in
performance of our proposed method shows the importance of providing an effective inductive bias.
Parameter sharing. In Attentive NP, the encoders of the latent path and attention path are separated
to provide different features. However, it can significantly increase computational overhead, and for
this reason, we share the weights for the encoders. As an ablation study, we provide the performance
with and without sharing the weights for the encoders of the Attentive TPP on the Stack Overflow
dataset. Although the number of parameters of ‘with sharing’ is 50% less than ‘without sharing’
(‘without sharing’: 86K vs. ‘with sharing’: 136K), it performs better than ‘without sharing’ (RMSE
/ NLL – ‘without sharing’: 1.08 / 3.20 vs. ‘with sharing’: 1.03 / 2.81).
Visualization of event time predictions. In TPP literature, the evaluation relies only on the RMSE
and NLL metrics. It is, however, often hard to measure how practically useful a trained TPP model is.
To qualitatively evaluate TPP models, we convert an event time sequence into time series sequence:
we count the number of event times falling into each bin (in Figure 3b, each bin is a day). Figure 3b
shows how close overall predictions of the Attentive TPP and THP+ (in red) are to the ground truth
event times (in blue). In the figure, we can see that the Attentive TPP’s predictions closely align
with the targets whereas the predictions of the THP+ are off at some regions. Note that as the y-axis
represents bin counts, even a slight off from the ground truth implies large values in terms of RMSE.

6         C ONCLUSION
Previously, neural temporal point processes (TPPs) train neural networks in a supervised learning
framework. Although performing well on event sequences similar to a training set, they are sus-
ceptible to overfitting, and may not generalize well on sequences with unseen patterns. To alleviate
this, we proposed a novel framework for TPPs using neural processes (NPs). We proposed the Meta
TPP where TPP is formulated as NP, and further developed the Attentive TPP using a cross-attention
module, which forces a model to use similar features for repeating local history patterns. Our exper-
iments demonstrate that the proposed models outperform strong state-of-the-art baselines on several
event sequence datasets, effectively capture periodic patterns, and increase robustness to noise and
distribution drift. We believe this work opens up a new research direction to meta learning for TPPs.


                                                                   9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT
Hyperparameters and implementation details are available in Section 5.1 and Appendix I. The code
for the baselines and the proposed Meta TPP is provided in meta-tpp repo. Our code is based on
publicly available official intensity-free and neural flow code.

R EFERENCES
Marin Biloš, Johanna Sommer, Syama Sundar Rangapuram, Tim Januschowski, and Stephan
 Günnemann. Neural flows: Efficient alternative to neural odes. In NeurIPS, 2021.
D. J. Daley and D. Vere-Jones. An introduction to the theory of point processes. Vol. I. Probability
  and its Applications (New York). Springer-Verlag, New York, second edition, 2003. ISBN 0-387-
  95541-0. Elementary theory and methods.
Nan Du, Hanjun Dai, Rakshit Trivedi, Utkarsh Upadhyay, Manuel Gomez-Rodriguez, and Le Song.
  Recurrent marked temporal point processes: Embedding event history to vector. In SIGKDD,
  2016.
Yann Dubois, Jonathan Gordon, and Andrew YK Foong. Neural process family. http://
  yanndubs.github.io/Neural-Process-Family/, September 2020.
Chelsea Finn, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. Model-agnostic meta-learning for fast adaptation
  of deep networks. In ICML, pp. 1126–1135. PMLR, 2017.
Chelsea Finn, Kelvin Xu, and Sergey Levine. Probabilistic model-agnostic meta-learning. In
  NeurIPS, 2018.
Andrew YK Foong, Wessel P Bruinsma, Jonathan Gordon, Yann Dubois, James Requeima, and
  Richard E Turner. Meta-learning stationary stochastic process prediction with convolutional neu-
  ral processes. In NeurIPS, 2020.
Marta Garnelo, Dan Rosenbaum, Christopher Maddison, Tiago Ramalho, David Saxton, Murray
 Shanahan, Yee Whye Teh, Danilo Rezende, and SM Ali Eslami. Conditional neural processes. In
 ICML, 2018a.
Marta Garnelo, Jonathan Schwarz, Dan Rosenbaum, Fabio Viola, Danilo J Rezende, SM Eslami,
 and Yee Whye Teh. Neural processes. In ICML Workshop, 2018b.
Jonathan Gordon, Wessel P Bruinsma, Andrew YK Foong, James Requeima, Yann Dubois, and
  Richard E Turner. Convolutional conditional neural processes. In ICLR, 2020.
Erin Grant, Chelsea Finn, Sergey Levine, Trevor Darrell, and Thomas Griffiths. Recasting gradient-
  based meta-learning as hierarchical bayes. In ICLR, 2018.
Alan G Hawkes. Spectra of some self-exciting and mutually exciting point processes. Biometrika,
  1971.
Valerie Isham and Mark Westcott. A self-correcting point process. Stochastic processes and their
  applications, 1979.
Hyunjik Kim, Andriy Mnih, Jonathan Schwarz, Marta Garnelo, Ali Eslami, Dan Rosenbaum, Oriol
  Vinyals, and Yee Whye Teh. Attentive neural processes. In ICLR, 2019.
Gregory Koch et al. Siamese neural networks for one-shot image recognition. In ICML, 2015.
Srijan Kumar, Xikun Zhang, and Jure Leskovec. Predicting dynamic embedding trajectory in tem-
  poral interaction networks. In SIGKDD, 2019.
Haitao Lin, Lirong Wu, Guojiang Zhao, Pai Liu, and Stan Z Li. Exploring generative neural temporal
  point process. TMLR, 2022.
Hongyuan Mei and Jason M Eisner. The neural hawkes process: A neurally self-modulating multi-
  variate point process. In NeurIPS, 2017.


                                                10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Tsendsuren Munkhdalai and Hong Yu. Meta networks. In ICML, 2017.
Tung Nguyen and Aditya Grover. Transformer neural processes: Uncertainty-aware meta learning
  via sequence modeling. In ICML, 2022.
Alex Nichol, Joshua Achiam, and John Schulman. On first-order meta-learning algorithms. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1803.02999, 2018.
Bernt Oksendal. Stochastic Differential Equations: an Introduction with Applications. Springer
  Science & Business Media, 2013.
Takahiro Omi, Kazuyuki Aihara, et al. Fully neural network based model for general temporal point
  processes. In NeurIPS, 2019.
Adam Santoro, Sergey Bartunov, Matthew Botvinick, Daan Wierstra, and Timothy Lillicrap. Meta-
  learning with memory-augmented neural networks. In ICML, 2016.
Karishma Sharma, Yizhou Zhang, Emilio Ferrara, and Yan Liu. Identifying coordinated accounts
  on social media through hidden influence and group behaviours. In SIGKDD, 2021.
Oleksandr Shchur, Marin Biloš, and Stephan Günnemann. Intensity-free learning of temporal point
  processes. In ICLR, 2020.
Oleksandr Shchur, Ali Caner Türkmen, Tim Januschowski, and Stephan Günnemann. Neural tem-
  poral point processes: A review. In IJCAI, 2021.
Jake Snell, Kevin Swersky, and Richard S. Zemel. Prototypical networks for few-shot learning. In
  NeurIPS, 2017.
Flood Sung, Yongxin Yang, Li Zhang, Tao Xiang, Philip HS Torr, and Timothy M Hospedales.
  Learning to compare: Relation network for few-shot learning. In CVPR, 2018.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez,
  Łukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. In NeurIPS, 2017.
Oriol Vinyals, Charles Blundell, Timothy Lillicrap, Daan Wierstra, et al. Matching networks for one
  shot learning. In NeurIPS, 2016.
Chenghao Yang, Hongyuan Mei, and Jason Eisner. Transformer embeddings of irregularly spaced
  events and their participants. In ICLR, 2022.
Qiang Zhang, Aldo Lipani, Omer Kirnap, and Emine Yilmaz. Self-attentive hawkes process. In
  ICML, 2020.
Yunhao Zhang, Junchi Yan, Xiaolu Zhang, Jun Zhou, and Xiaokang Yang. Learning mixture of
  neural temporal point processes for multi-dimensional event sequence clustering. In IJCAI, 2022.
Simiao Zuo, Haoming Jiang, Zichong Li, Tuo Zhao, and Hongyuan Zha. Transformer hawkes
  process. In ICML, 2020.


                                                11
