Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


M EMORIZATION C APACITY OF N EURAL N ETWORKS
WITH C ONDITIONAL C OMPUTATION

 Erdem Koyuncu
 Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
 University of Illinois Chicago
 ekoyuncu@uic.edu



                                             A BSTRACT

         Many empirical studies have demonstrated the performance benefits of conditional
         computation in neural networks, including reduced inference time and power
         consumption. We study the fundamental limits of neural conditional computation
         from the perspective of memorization capacity. For Rectified Linear Unit (ReLU)
         networks without conditional computation, it is known that memorizing a collection
         of n
            √ input-output relationships can be accomplished via a neural network with
         O( n) neurons.
                  √       Calculating the output of this neural network can be accomplished
         using O( n) elementary arithmetic operations of additions, multiplications and
         comparisons for each input. Using a conditional ReLU network, we show that the
         same task can be accomplished using only O(log n) operations per input. This
         represents an almost exponential improvement as compared to networks without
         conditional computation. We also show that the Θ(log n) rate is the best possible.
         Our achievability result utilizes a general methodology to synthesize a conditional
         network out of an unconditional network in a computationally-efficient manner,
         bridging the gap between unconditional and conditional architectures.



1     I NTRODUCTION

1.1   C ONDITIONAL C OMPUTATION

Conditional computation refers to utilizing only certain parts of a neural network, in an input-adaptive
fashion (Davis & Arel, 2013; Bengio et al., 2013; Eigen et al., 2013). This can be done through
gating mechanisms combined with a tree-structured network, as in the case of “conditional networks”
(Ioannou et al., 2016) or neural trees and forests (Tanno et al., 2019; Yang et al., 2018; Kontschieder
et al., 2015). Specifically, depending on the inputs or some features extracted from the inputs, a gate
can choose its output sub-neural networks that will further process the gate’s input features. Another
family of conditional computation methods are the so-called early-exit architectures (Teerapittayanon
et al., 2016; Kaya et al., 2019; Gormez et al., 2022). In this case, one typically places classifiers at
intermediate layers of a large network. This makes it possible to exit at a certain layer to reach a final
verdict on classification, if the corresponding classifier is confident enough of its decision.
Several other sub-techniques of conditional computation exist and have been well-studied, including
layer skipping (Graves, 2016), channel skipping in convolutional neural networks (Gao et al., 2019), or
reinforcement learning methods for input-dependent dropout policies (Bengio et al., 2015). Although
there are many diverse methods (Han et al., 2021), the general intuitions as to why conditional
computation can improve the performance of neural networks remain the same: First, the computation
units are chosen in an adaptive manner to process the features that are particular to the given input
pattern. For example, a cat image is ideally processed by only “neurons that are specialized to cats.”
Second, one allocates just enough computation units to a given input, avoiding a waste of resources.
The end result is various benefits relative to a network without conditional computation, including
reduced computation time, and power/energy consumption (Kim & Seo, 2020). Achieving these
benefits are especially critical in edge networks with resource-limited devices (Li et al., 2021a;b).
Moreover, conditioning incurs minimal loss, or in some cases, no loss in learning performance.


                                                    1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Numerous empirical studies have demonstrated the benefits of conditional computation in many
different settings. Understanding the fundamental limits of conditional computation in neural networks
is thus crucial, but has not been well-investigated in the literature. There is a wide body of work on a
theoretical analysis of decision tree learning (Maimon & Rokach, 2014), which can be considered
as an instance of conditional computation. These results are, however, not directly applicable to
neural networks. In Cho & Bengio (2014), a feature vector is multiplied by different weight matrices,
depending on the significant bits of the feature vector, resulting in an exponential increase in the
number of free parameters of the network (referred to as the capacity of the network in Cho & Bengio
(2014)). On the other hand, the potential benefits of this scheme have not been formally analyzed.

1.2   M EMORIZATION C APACITY

In this work, we consider the problem of neural conditional computation from the perspective of
memorization capacity. Here, the capacity refers to the maximum number of input-output pairs of
reasonably-general position that a neural network of a given size can learn. It is typically expressed
as the minimum number of neurons or weights required for a given dataset of size, say n.
Early work on memorization capacity of neural networks include Baum (1988); Mitchison & Durbin
(1989); Sontag (1990). In particular, Baum (1988) shows that, for thresholds networks, O(n) neurons √
and weights are sufficient for memorization. This sufficiency result is later improved to O( n)
neurons and O(n) weights by Vershynin (2020); Rajput et al. (2021). There are also several studies on
other activation functions, especially the Rectified Linear Unit (ReLU), given its practicality and wide
utilization in deep learning applications. Initial works Zhang et al. (2017); Hardt & Ma (2016) show
that O(n) neurons√ and weights are sufficient for memorization in the case of ReLU networks. This is
improved to O( n) weights and O(n) neurons in Yun et al. (2019). In addition, Park et al. (2021)
proves the sufficiency of O(n2/3 ) weights and√ neurons, and finally, Vardi et al. (2022) shows that
memorization can be achieved with only O( n) weights   √ and neurons, up to logarithmic factors. For
the sigmoid activation function, it is known that O( n) neurons and O(n) weights (Huang, 2003),
or O(n2/3 ) weights and neurons (Park et al., 2021) are sufficient. Memorization and expressivity
have also been studied in the context of specific network architectures such as convolutional neural
networks (Cohen & Shashua, 2016; Nguyen & Hein, 2018).
The aforementioned achievability results have also been proven to be tight in certain cases. A very
useful tool in this context is the Vapnik-Chervonenkis (VC) dimension (Vapnik & Chervonenkis,
2015). In fact, applying the VC dimension theory to neural networks (Anthony et al., 1999), it can be
shown that the number of neurons and weights
                                          √ should be both polynomial in the size of the dataset for
successful memorization. Specifically, Ω( n) weights and Ω(n1/4 ) neurons are optimal for ReLU
networks, up to logarithmic factors. We will justify this statement later on for completeness.

1.3   S COPE , M AIN R ESULTS , AND O RGANIZATION

We analyze the memorization capacity of neural networks with conditional computation. We describe
our neural network and the associated computational complexity models in Section 2. We describe a
general method to synthesize conditional networks from unconditional networks in Section 3. We
provide our main achievability and converse results for memorization capacity in Sections 4 and 5,
respectively. We draw our main conclusions in Section 6. Some of the technical proofs are provided
in the supplemental material.
We note that this paper is specifically on analyzing the theoretical limits on neural conditional compu-
tation. In particular, we show that n input-output relationships can be memorized using a conditional
network that needs only√O(log n) operations per input or inference step. The best unconditional
architecture requires O( n) operations for the same task. This suggests that conditional models
can offer significant time/energy savings as compared to unconditional architectures. In general,
understanding the memorization capacity of neural networks is a well-studied problem of fundamental
importance and is related to the expressive power of neural networks. A related but separate problem
is generalization, i.e. how to design conditional networks that can not only recall the memory patterns
with reasonable accuracy but also generalize to unseen examples. The “double-descent” phenomenon
(Belkin et al., 2019; Nakkiran et al., 2021) suggests that the goals of memorization and generalization
are not contradictory and that a memorizing network can potentially also generalize well. A further


                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


investigation of this phenomenon in the context of conditional networks, and the design of conditional
networks for practical datasets remains beyond the scope of the present work.
Notation: Unless specified otherwise, all vector variables are column vectors. We use ordinary font
(such as u) for vectors, and the distinction between a vector and scalar will be clear from the context.
The symbols O, Ω, and Θ are the standard Bachmann–Landau symbols. Specifically, fn ∈ O(gn )
means there is a constant C > 0 such that fn ≤ Cgn for sufficiently large n. On the other hand, if
fn ∈ Ω(gn ), then there is a constant C > 0 such that fn > Cgn for sufficiently large n. We write
fn ∈ Θ(gn ) if fn ∈ O(gn ) and fn ∈ Ω(gn ). The set Rp is the set of all p-dimensional real-valued
column vectors. The superscript (·)T is the matrix transpose. The function 1(·) is the indicator
function, and d·e is the ceiling operator. A function f (x) of variable x is alternatively expressed as
the mapping x 7→ f (x). Operator rank(·) is the rank of a matrix. Finally, k · k is the Euclidean norm.

2     S YSTEM M ODEL
2.1   U NCONDITIONAL F EEDFORWARD N ETWORKS

Consider an ordinary unconditional feedforward network of a homogeneous set of neurons, all of
which have the same functionality. We also allow skip connections, which are mainly utilized for the
generality of the model for converse results (The construction in our achievability results also skip
layers, but at most one layer at a time). Formally, we consider an L-layer network with the ReLU
operation φ(x) = max{0, x}, and the input-output relationships
                                                          T
                                           T
                           y` = φ W` y`−1      · · · y0T      , ` = 1, . . . , L,                 (1)
where y0 is the input to the neural network, y` is the output at Layer `, and yL is the neural network
output. Also, W` is the weight matrix at Layer ` of appropriate dimensions.

2.2   M EASURING THE C OST OF C OMPUTATION

A recurring theme of the paper will be to calculate the output of a neural network given an arbitrary
input, however with low computational complexity. In particular, in (1), given the outputs of Layer
` − 1, the calculation of the outputs of Layer ` can be accomplished through multiplication with
matrix W` , followed by the activation functions. Each ReLU activation function can be implemented
via a simple comparison given local fields. Hence, calculation of the output of Layer ` can be
accomplished with O(dimW` ) operations (multiplications,P         additions, and comparisons), and the
output yL of the entire network can be calculated using O( ` dimW` ) operations. Here, dimW`
represents the product of the number of rows and columns in W` . In other words, dimW` is the
number of dimensions in W` . Hence, in unconditional architectures, the number of operations to
calculate the output of the network is essentially the same (up to constant multipliers) as the number of
weights in the network. With regards to our basic measure of complexity, which relies on counting the
number of operations, one can argue that multiplication is more complex than addition or comparison,
and hence should be assigned a larger complexity. We hasten to note that the relative difficulty of
different operations will not affect our final results, which will have an asymptotic nature.
                                     P
It is instructive to combine the O( ` dimW` ) complexity baseline with the memorization results
described in Section 1. Let X = {x1 , . . . , xn } ⊂ Rp be a dataset of inputs. Let d1 , . . . , dn ∈ Rr
be the corresponding desired outputs. In the memorization task, one wishes to design a network
                         √ of di for an input of xi for each i ∈ {1, . . . , n}. It is known that, up to
that can provide an output
logarithmic factors, O( n) weights and neurons are sufficient for memorization √     of n patterns (Vardi
et al., 2022). It follows from the discussion in the paragraph above that O( n) operations sufficient
to recall a stored memory pattern (i.e. to calculate the output of the neural network for a given xi ).
The goal of this paper is to accomplish the same task using much fewer operations required per input.
Specifically, we will show how to do perfect recall using only O(log n) operations per input. We
shall later show that Θ(log n) is, in fact, the best possible rate.

2.3   C ONDITIONAL N ETWORKS

In order to achieve perfect recall using a subpolynomial number of operations, we use the idea
of conditional computation. The conditioning model that we utilize in this work is a simple but


                                                   3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


general scenario where we allow executing different sub-neural networks depending on how an
intermediate output of the network compares to some real number. Each conditioning is thus counted
as one operation. Formally, we describe a conditional neural network via a rooted full binary tree
where every vertex has either 0 or 2 children. Every vertex is a sequence of operations of the
form vn+1 ← φ(βn vn + · · · + β1 v1 ), where β1 , . . . , βn are weights, and variables v1 , . . . , vn are
either (i) inputs to the neural network, or (ii) defined as new variables preceding vn+1 at the same
vertex or at one of the ancestor vertices. Every edge is a conditioning v ◦ β, where v should be
defined at any one of the vertices that connects the edge to the root node, β is a constant weight, and
◦ ∈ {≤, <, =, 6=, >, ≥}. We assume that the two edges connected to the same vertex correspond to
complementary conditions; e.g. v1 < 3 and v1 ≥ 3.
An example conditional network, expressed in algorithmic form, is provided in Algorithm 1, where u
represents the input, o is the output, and the subscripts are the vector components. For example, if the
input is a vector u with u1 > 3, resulting in an intermediate feature vector with z3 6= 5, then two
operations are incurred due to the conditionings in Lines 1 and 5, and O(dim(W1 ) + dim(W2 ) +
dim(W5 )) operations are accumulated due to neural computations.
Our model encompasses various neural conditional computation models in the literature. One example
is early exit architectures (Teerapittayanon et al., 2016; Kaya et al., 2019; Gormez & Koyuncu, 2022).
As described in Section 1, a typical scenario is where one places intermediate classifiers to a deep
neural network. If an intermediate classifier is confident enough of
a decision, then an “early exit” is performed with the corresponding Algorithm 1 An example con-
class decision. Here, one skips subsequent layers, saving computa- ditional neural network
tion resources. The decision to exit is often a simple threshold check, 1: if u1 > 3 then
e.g. whether one of the soft probability outputs of the intermediate 2:           z = φ(W2 φ(W1 u))
classifier exceeds a certain threshold. Hence, most early exit net- 3:            if z3 = 5 then
works can be modeled via the simple if-else architecture described 4:                 o = φ(W4 z)
above. Mixture of experts (MoE) architectures Shazeer et al. (2017); 5:           else
Fedus et al. (2022) can also be realized under our model. In this case, 6:            o = φ(W5 z)
there are multiple gating networks, each of which is responsible for 7:           end if
one expert. One routes a feature vector to only a subset of experts 8: else
whose gating networks have the largest outputs. The choice of ex- 9:              o = φ(W3 u)
perts can be accomplished through if-else statements. For example, 10: end if
for two gates and experts, the gate with the largest output can be
found by comparing the difference between the two gates’ outputs against zero. Another gating
approach that can be realized as a special case of our model can be found in Cho & Bengio (2014).


3    S YNTHESIZING A C ONDITIONAL N ETWORK OUT OF AN U NCONDITIONAL
     N ETWORK
                                                                                          P
Consider an arbitrary unconditional network as in (1), whose implementation requires O( ` dimW` )
operations, as discussed in Section 2.2. Suppose that the network is well-trained in the sense that
it can already provide the output di for a given input xi , for every i ∈ {1, . . . , n}. Out of such
an unconditional network, we describe here       P a general methodology to synthesize a conditional
network that requires much fewer than O( ` dimW` ) operations, while keeping the input-output
relationships xi 7→ di , i ∈ {1, . . . , n} intact.
WePfirst recall some standard terminology (Haykin, 2008). Consider the neuron [x1 , . . . , xn ] 7→
φ( i xi wi ). We refer to x1 , . . . , xn as the neuron inputs, and w1 , . . . , wn as the neuron weights.
We can now provide the following definition.
Definition 1. Suppose that the activation function satisfies φ(0) = 0. Given some fixed input to a
neural network, a neuron with at least one non-zero input is called an active neuron. A neuron that is
not active is called an inactive or a deactivated neuron. A weight is called active if it connects an
active neuron to another active neuron and is non-zero. A weight is called inactive if it is not active.

The source of the phrase “inactive” is the following observation: Consider an input to the neural
network and the corresponding output. By definition, we will obtain the same output after removing
all inactive neurons from the network for the same input. We can simply “ignore” inactive neurons.
Likewise, we can remove any inactive weight and obtain the same output.


                                                    4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Our idea is to condition the computation on the set of active neurons and the corresponding active
weights. Note that removing the inactive weights and neurons does not change the network output.
Moreover, often the number of active weights given an input can be significantly lower than the overall
number of neurons of the unconditional architecture (which determines the number of operations
required to perform inference on the unconditional network), resulting in huge computational savings.
The complication in this context is that the set of inactive weights depends on the network input.
Fortunately, it turns out that determining the set of active weights can be accomplished with fewer
operations than actually computing the local fields or outputs of the corresponding active neurons.
The final result is provided by the following theorem.
Theorem 1. Consider an arbitrary dataset X = {x1 , . . . , xn } ⊂ Rp of inputs. Let d1 , . . . , dn ∈ Rr
be the corresponding desired outputs. Suppose that the unconditional neural network defined by (1)
satisfies the desired input-output relationships in the sense that for any i, if the input to the network is
xi , then the output is di . Also suppose that the input xi results in ωi active weights. Then, there is
a conditional network that similarly satisfies all desired input output relationships, and for every i,
performs at most p + 4ωi operations given input xi .

Proof. (Sketch) By an “ input configuration,” we mean a certain subset of neurons that are active at a
certain layer of the unconditional “base” network. We represent input configurations by binary vectors
where “0” represents an inactive neuron, while “1” represents an active neuron. As an example, the
input configuration [1 0 1]T refers to a scenario where only the first and the third neurons at the layer
is active. Analogous to input configurations, “output configurations” are binary vectors that represent
whether neurons provide zero or non-zero outputs. For example, an output configuration of [1 1 0]T
means that only the first and the second neurons provide a non-zero output.
Consider first an unconditional network without skip connections. The key idea is to observe that,
given the output configuration of Layer ` − 1, one can uniquely obtain the input configuration of
Layer `. Hence, a conditional network can be designed to operate in the following manner: Given
an input, we first find the output configuration OC0 at Layer 0, which is nothing but the non-zero
components of the input vector. This can be done by p conditioning statements, where p is the
input dimension. The result is a unique input configuration IC1 at Layer 1. Meanwhile, we can
obtain the output y1 of Layer 1 by only calculating the outputs of neurons that correspond to the
non-zero components of IC1 , since other neurons at Layer 1 are guaranteed to have all-zero inputs
and thus provide zero output. This can be accomplished via O(a1 ) multiplications and additions,
where a` represents the number of active weights in Layer `. Then, we find the output configuration
OC1 at Layer 1, using |IC1 | conditioning statements on y1 . Having obtained OC1 , we can similarly
find the Layer 2 input configuration and output. The conditional network processes the remaining
layers recursively in the same manner. The functionality of the unconditional
                                                                   P            network is reproduced
exactly so all input-output relationships are satisfied. Given that ` a` = ωi , the total complexity is
p + O(ωi ). We refer to the complete proof in Appendix A for the precise bound and generalization
to networks with skip connections.

The proof of the theorem in Appendix A suggests that the true complexity is closer to 2ωi than the
actual formal upper bound provided in the theorem statement. The number 2ωi stems from the ωi
additions and ωi multiplications that are necessary to calculate the local fields of active neurons.
Theorem 1 shows that a design criterion to come up with low computational-complexity neural
networks might be to put a constraint on the number of active weights given any training input to an
ordinary, unconditional feedforward architecture. Using the theorem, we can synthesize a conditional
neural network with the same functionality as the unconditional feedforward network. In the next
section, we will apply this idea to the problem of memorization capacity.
We conclude this section by noting that Theorem 1 may prove to be useful in other applications. For
example, any method that results in sparse representations or weights, such as pruning, will result in
many inactive neurons and weights. Sparsity is useful; however, unstructured sparsity is difficult to
exploit: For example, multiplying by a matrix half of whose entries are zero at random positions will
likely be as difficult as multiplying by a random matrix without sparsity constraints. The construction
in Theorem 1 may provide computational savings for such scenarios.
Another observation is how Theorem 1 can potentially simplify the design of conditional networks.
In any conditional architecture, an important question is where to place the decision gates that route


                                                     5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


information to different parts of the network. It is a combinatorially very difficult if not impossible
to optimize a heterogeneous collection of "ordinary neurons" and "gates." Such an optimization
is also completely unsuitable for a gradient approach. Hence, most previous works provide some
empirical guidelines for gate placement, and do not optimize over the gate locations once they are
placed according to these guidelines. The message of Theorem 1 is that there is no need to distinguish
between gates and neurons. All that needs to be done is to train an unconditional network consisting
only of ordinary neurons to be as “inactive” as possible, e.g. by increased weight sparsity through
regularization Louizos et al. (2018). The theorem can then construct a conditional network that can
exploit the sparsity to the fullest, placing the gates automatically.

4    M EMORIZATION WITH L OW C OMPUTATIONAL C OMPLEXITY
In this section, we introduce our ReLU network to memorize the input-output relationships xi 7→
di , i = 1, . . . , n. Our network will only yield O(log n) active neurons and weights per input.
Application of Theorem 1 will then imply a conditional network that can achieve perfect recall with
only O(log n) operations per input, as desired.
Given a neural network f , and an input x to f , let A(x; f ) and W (x; f ) denote the number of active
neurons and active weights, respectively. Our feedforward ReLU network construction is provided by
the following theorem.
Theorem 2. Let X = {x1 , . . . , xn } ⊂ Rp be a dataset of input patterns such that for every
i, j ∈ {1, . . . , n} with i 6= j, we have xi 6= xj . Let x̄i = [ x1i ] ∈ Rq , where q = 1 + p, be the
augmented dataset patterns for biasing purposes. Let d1 , . . . , dn ∈ Rr be the corresponding desired
outputs. Suppose every component of di is non-negative for each i ∈ {1, . . . , n}. Then, there is a
neural network f : Rq → Rr such that for every i ∈ {1, . . . , n}, we have f (x̄i ) = di ,
              A(x̄i ; f ) ≤ 2(q + 1)dlog2 ne + q + r ∈ O(r + q log n),                               (2)
                                                                                  2
             W (x̄i ; f ) ≤ 12q(q + 1)dlog2 ne + (r + 2)q + r − 2 ∈ O(rq + q log n).                 (3)

Proof. (Sketch) We provide an illustrative sketch of the proof. Suppose we wish to memorize the
two-dimensional dataset given by Fig. 1a. We can divide the datasets to two parts via a line, the
resulting two parts to further two sub-parts, and so on, until reaching singletons, as shown in Fig.
1b. The overall network architecture that achieves the performance in the statement of the theorem
is then shown in Fig. 2. The initial block T is a basic preprocessing translation. The “switch” Sij
corresponds to the line parameterized by weights wij in Fig. 1b. The switch Sij routes the zero vector
to one output path and copy its input to the other output path, depending on the side of the wij -line
its input vector resides. The switches are followed by ReLU neurons with weights γi . These neurons
map the corresponding input pattern on the active path to its desired output. Finally, the output of the
γi -neurons are accumulated. As an example, the signals on the graph for input pattern x̄6 is provided,
      ¯6 , T(x̄6 ). In general, all input-output relationships are satisfied with O(log n) active neurons
with x̄
per dataset sample. We refer to the complete proof in Appendix B for the precise bounds.
Corollary 1. Let xi , di , i = 1, . . . , n be a sequence of arbitrary input-output pairs as stated in
Theorem 2. Then, there is a conditional network that, for every i, provides an output of di whenever
the input is xi by performing only O(rq + q 2 log n) operations.

Proof. We apply the synthesis procedure in Theorem 1 to the network constructed in Theorem 2. An
alternative more “direct” proof (that does not need Theorem 1) is to implement the gating blocks Sij
in Fig. 1 via if-else conditioning statements, resulting in a similar architecture.

We recall that for ReLU networks √ without conditional computation, the best achievability result
(Vardi et al., 2022) requires O( n log n) neurons and weights for memorizing a dataset of size n.
Since the construction in Vardi et al. (2022)
                                           √ is not optimized for conditional computation, it is easily
observed
   √      that every input activates all O(  n log n) neurons and weights of the network, resulting in
O( n log n) active weights per input. In fact, the remarkable
                                                            √ construction in Vardi et al. (2022) is a
narrow network of a finite width of only 12, but√ depth O( n log n). Even if every input activates
only one neuron at each layer, one obtains O( n log n) active neurons or arithmetic operations per
input. In contrast, we only need O(log n) active weights or operations (via Corollary 1) per input.


                                                   6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


The fact that one cannot fundamentally achieve a sub-polynomial number of neurons without con-
ditional computation is an easy consequence of the VC dimension theory. In our setting, the VC
dimension corresponds to the cardinality of the largest dataset that can be memorized. Hence, upper
bounds on the VC dimension translate to lower bounds on the memorization capacity. In this context,
Anthony et al. (1999, Theorem 8.6) provides an O(n2w ) upper bound on the VC dimension for ReLU
networks, where nw denotes the number of weights in the network. Since any upper bound on the
VC dimension is also an upper bound on the cardinality of the √ largest possible dataset that can be
memorized, we have n ∈ O(n2w ). It follows that nw ∈ Ω( n) weights are the best possible for
ReLU networks without conditional computation, meaning that the results of Vardi et al. (2022)
are optimal up to logarithmic factors. Also, using the bound nw ≤ n2e , where ne is the number of
neurons in the network (equality holds in the extreme scenario where every neuron is connected to
every other neuron, including itself), we obtain the necessity of Ω(n1/4 ) neurons.

                                                                                              T
          ū3                                                        ū3                     w21 ū = 0        T
                                                                                                              w32 ū = 0
                        •2                                                       •2
                                     •6                                      T
                                                                            w31 ū = 0           •6
                                        •3                                                        •3
                   •7                         T                             •7                          T
                                             w11 ū = 0                                                w11 ū = 0

                       •1            •4                                           •1             •4

                              •5                                                     •5                     T
                                                                              T                            w22 ū = 0
                                                                             w33 ū = 0
                                             ū2                                                       ū2
      (a) Dividing a set of point to two equal subsets. (b) Continued divisions until reaching singletons.
                                   Figure 1: The divide and conquer strategy.


                                                                              0        γ2
                                                                      S31
                                                                              0        γ7
                                                                0
                                                          S21                               0
                                                                             ¯6
                                                                             x̄        γ6   0
                                                                ¯6
                                                                x̄                          d6
                                                                      S32
                                                   ¯6
                                                   x̄                                  γ3
                                                                              0             0          P
                u = x̄6        T             S11                                                               d6
                                        ¯6
                                   ū = x̄                                                  0
                  = [ x16 ]
                                                                                       γ4   0
                                                   0                   0
                                                                                            0
                                                          S22
                                                                              0        γ1
                                                                0
                                                                      S33
                                                                              0        γ5

Figure 2: An example network architecture for the achievability result. The block T represents the
transformation in Step 1.PBlocks Sij are the routing switches. Blocks γi represent ReLU neurons
with weights γi , and the  block represents a ReLU neuron with all-one weights.

In contrast to the deep and narrow architecture that is optimal for unconditional computation, the
network that achieves the performance in Theorem 2 is considerably wider but much shallower. In
fact, the proof in Appendix B reveals that our network has width O(n), with O(n) nodes, and depth
O(log n). These numbers are a consequence of the classical binary decision tree that we utilize in
our network construction. Thanks to conditional computation, although √ the network has O(n) nodes,
every dataset pattern activates only O(log n) neurons instead of O(√ n) neurons without conditional
computation. Note that the function log n grows much slower than n so that the number of neurons
activated by the conditional computation is asymptotically negligible relative to an unconditional
network. Moreover, every neuron in the conditional computation network has a bounded number of q
weights. The two facts translate to big savings in terms of the cost of computation, thanks to Theorem
1. An interesting open problem that we shall leave as future work is whether one can achieve the


                                                                7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023



                                                                   √
same performance with a much smaller network size, e.g. with O( n) neurons, which is known to
be optimal. This will also help reduce the size of the network synthesized by Theorem 1.
It should be mentioned that the bounds (2) and (3) on the number of active neurons and weights
as stated in Theorem 2 holds only for input patterns that belong to the dataset. For such patterns,
only one path from the input to the output of the neural network is activated. The global behavior
of the neural network for arbitrary inputs is more complex. A careful analysis of the construction
in Appendix B reveals that near the decision boundaries (the lines in Fig. 1b), multiple paths of the
network are activated, This will result in more active neurons and weights than what is suggested by
the upper bounds in (2) and (3), respectively. However, the measure of such pathological inputs can
be made arbitrarily small by tuning the switches appropriately.

5    U LTIMATE C OMPUTATIONAL L IMITS TO M EMORY R ECALL
In the previous section, we showed that O(log n) operations is sufficient to perfectly recall one of
n input-output relationships. We now analyze the necessary number of operations per input for
successful recall. Our main result in this context is provided by the following theorem.
Theorem 3. Let the input vectors x1 , . . . , xn ∈ Rp and the corresponding desired output vectors
d1 , . . . , dn ∈ R satisfy the following property:

                          xi1   ···   xip+1
                      h                     i
       • The matrix                           has rank p + 1 for any subset {i1 , . . . , ip+1 } of {1, . . . , n}.
                          di1   ···   dip+1

Suppose that a conditional network f satisfies the desired input-output relationships: For every i,
the output of the network is di whenever the input is xi . Also, assume that the number of operations
performed on each xi is bounded above by some α ≥ 0. Then, we have α ≥ log2 np ∈ O(log n).

Proof. Since there are at most α operations per input, there are at most α comparisons per input
as well, counting the comparisons needed to implement the neuron activation functions. We can
represent the entire conditional computation graph/network as a binary tree where the distance
between the root and a leaf node is at most α. This results in tree of at most 2α leaf nodes. Each node
of the tree compares real numbers to intermediate variables, which are linear functions of network
inputs or other intermediate variables. Assume now the contrary to the statement of the theorem, i.e.
the number of operations for every input is at most α, all input-output relationships are satisfied, but
n > 2α p. Since there are at most 2α leaf nodes, there is at least one leaf node that admits 1 + p inputs
(i.e. there are 1 + p input patterns of the dataset such that the corresponding path over the tree ends at
the leaf node). Without loss of generality, suppose the indices for these inputs are {1, . . . , 1 + p}.
Writing down the input output relationship of the network for the leaf node, we obtain
                                      [d1 · · · d1+p ] = W0 [x1 · · · x1+p ]                                   (4)
for some q × p matrix W0 . This relationship follows, as by fixing a path on the tree, we obtain the
unique linear transformation W0 that maps the inputs to the neural network to its outputs. According
to the Rouché–Capelli theorem (Shafarevich & Remizov, 2012, Theorem 2.38), a necessary condition
for the existence of W0 to solve (4) is
                                                          x1 · · · xp+1
                                                        h               i
                         rank([x1 · · · xp+1 ]) = rank                    .                      (5)
                                                          d1 · · · dp+1
On the other hand, as a result of the rank condition stated in the theorem, the left hand side rank
evaluates to p, while the right hand side evaluates to 1 + p. We arrive at a contradiction, which
concludes the proof of the theorem.

The condition on the dataset and the desired outputs that appear in the statement of Theorem 3 is, up
to a certain extent, necessary for the lower bound to hold. For example, if the desired outputs can
simply be obtained as a linear transformation of inputs, then one only needs to perform a constant
number of operations for each input to obtain the desired outputs, and the lower bound becomes
invalid. In this context, the rank condition ensures that subsets of outputs cannot be obtained as
linear functions of inputs. However, it should also be mentioned that the condition is not particularly
restrictive in limiting the class of datasets where the theorem holds. For example, if the components


                                                        8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


of the dataset members and the corresponding desired outputs are sampled in an independent and
identically distributed manner over any continuous distribution with positive support, it can be shown
that the rank condition will hold with probability 1. Hence, it can be argued that almost all datasets
satisfy the rank condition and thus obey the converse result.
Corollary 1 has shown that n patterns can be memorized using O(log n) operations per input. The
matching Ω(log n) lower bound in Theorem 3 proves that the Θ(log n) rate is the best possible.
However, the two results do not resolve how the number of operations should scale with respect to
the input and output dimensions.1 This aspect of the problem is left as future work.

6    C ONCLUSIONS AND D ISCUSSIONS
We have studied the fundamental limits to the memorization capacity of neural networks with
conditional computation. First, we have described a general procedure to synthesize a conditional
network out of an ordinary unconditional feedforward network. According to the procedure, the
number of operations required to perform inference on an input in the synthesized conditional
network becomes proportional to the number of so-called “active weights” of the unconditional
network given the same input. This reduces the problem of designing good conditional networks to
the problem of designing ordinary feedforward networks with a low number of active weights or
nodes. Using this idea, we have shown that for ReLU networks, Θ(log n) operations per input is
necessary
   √      and sufficient for memorizing a dataset of n patterns. An unconditional network requires
Ω( n) operations to achieve the same performance. We also described a method to synthesize a
conditional network out of an unconditional network in a computationally-efficient manner.
One direction for future work is to study the memorization capacity for a sum-constraint, as opposed
to a per-input constraint on the number of operations. While a per-input constraint makes sense for
delay-sensitive applications, the sum-constrained scenario is also relevant for early-exit architectures,
where there is a lot of variation on the size of active components of the network. Extensions of
our results to different activation functions or to networks with bounded bit complexity can also
be considered. In this context, Vardi et al. (2022) shows that, for every   ∈ [0, 12 ], Θ(n  ) weights
with Θ(n1−  ) bit complexity is optimal for memorizing n patterns, up to logarithmic factors. This
result was proven under a mild separability condition, which restricts distinct dataset patterns to be
δ-separated in terms of Euclidean distance. The optimality of the results of Vardi et al. (2022) suggests
that under a similar separability condition, the bit complexity of our designs can also potentially be
reduced without loss of optimality. This will remain as another interesting direction for future work.
Many neural network architectures rely heavily on batch computation because matrix multiplications
can be performed very efficiently on modern processors. In this context, one disadvantage of
conditional architectures is their general misalignment with the idea of batching. Nevertheless, if
there are not too many branches on the network, and if the branch loads are balanced, each subbranch
can still receive a relatively large batch size. Fortunately, only a few gates can promise significant
performance gains (Fedus et al., 2022). More work is needed, however, to make networks with
aggressive conditioning more efficient in the batch setting. In this context, our synthesis theorem
can potentially enable conditional networks to be trained as if they are unconditional, enabling batch
computation. We note that in techniques like soft-gating (Shazeer et al., 2017), a batch also traverses
the entire computation graph during training (Kaya et al., 2019).
The main goal of this paper has been to derive theoretical bounds on the memorization capacity. More
research is clearly needed for practical methods to train neural networks that can effectively utilize
conditional computation and also generalize well. We hope that the constructions and theoretical
bounds provided in this paper will motivate further research in the area.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported in part by National Science Foundation (NSF) under Grant CNS-2148182
and in part by Army Research Lab (ARL) under Grant W911NF-2120272.
    1
      Although Theorem 3 only considers scalar desired outputs, it can easily be extended to the multi-dimensional
case. In fact, a successful memorization of, say, two-dimensional output vectors with o(log n) active neurons
would imply the successful memorization of scalar outputs with the same number of neurons (simply by ignoring
the neurons that provide the second component of the output), contradicting Theorem 3.


                                                        9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


R EFERENCES
Martin Anthony, Peter L Bartlett, Peter L Bartlett, et al. Neural network learning: Theoretical
 foundations. Cambridge University Press, 1999.
Eric B Baum. On the capabilities of multilayer perceptrons. Journal of Complexity, 4(3):193–215,
  1988.
Mikhail Belkin, Daniel Hsu, Siyuan Ma, and Soumik Mandal. Reconciling modern machine-learning
 practice and the classical bias–variance trade-off. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
 116(32):15849–15854, 2019.
Emmanuel Bengio, Pierre-Luc Bacon, Joelle Pineau, and Doina Precup. Conditional computation in
  neural networks for faster models. arXiv preprint arXiv:1511.06297, 2015.
Yoshua Bengio, Nicholas Léonard, and Aaron Courville. Estimating or propagating gradients through
  stochastic neurons for conditional computation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1308.3432, 2013.
Kyunghyun Cho and Yoshua Bengio. Exponentially increasing the capacity-to-computation ratio for
  conditional computation in deep learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1406.7362, 2014.
Nadav Cohen and Amnon Shashua. Convolutional rectifier networks as generalized tensor decompo-
  sitions. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 955–963. PMLR, 2016.
Andrew Davis and Itamar Arel. Low-rank approximations for conditional feedforward computation
  in deep neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1312.4461, 2013.
David Eigen, Marc’Aurelio Ranzato, and Ilya Sutskever. Learning factored representations in a deep
  mixture of experts. arXiv preprint arXiv:1312.4314, 2013.
William Fedus, Barret Zoph, and Noam Shazeer. Switch transformers: Scaling to trillion parameter
 models with simple and efficient sparsity. JMLR, 23(120):1–39, 2022.
Xitong Gao, Yiren Zhao, Łukasz Dudziak, Robert Mullins, and Cheng-zhong Xu. Dynamic channel
  pruning: Feature boosting and suppression. In ICLR, May 2019.
Alperen Gormez and Erdem Koyuncu. Class based thresholding in early exit semantic segmentation
  networks. arXiv:2210.15621, 2022.
Alperen Gormez, Venkat Dasari, and Erdem Koyuncu. Class means as an early exit decision
  mechanism. In IJCNN, 2022.
Alex Graves. Adaptive computation time for recurrent neural networks.                arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1603.08983, 2016.
Yizeng Han, Gao Huang, Shiji Song, Le Yang, Honghui Wang, and Yulin Wang. Dynamic neural
  networks: A survey. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 2021.
Moritz Hardt and Tengyu Ma. Identity matters in deep learning. In International Conference on
 Learning Representations, 2016.
Simon Haykin. Neural networks and learning machines, 3rd edition. Pearson, 2008.
Guang-Bin Huang. Learning capability and storage capacity of two-hidden-layer feedforward
  networks. IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks, 14(2):274–281, 2003.
Yani Ioannou, Duncan Robertson, Darko Zikic, Peter Kontschieder, Jamie Shotton, Matthew Brown,
  and Antonio Criminisi. Decision forests, convolutional networks and the models in-between.
  Microsoft Research Technical Report, 2016.
Yigitcan Kaya, Sanghyun Hong, and Tudor Dumitras. Shallow-deep networks: Understanding and
  mitigating network overthinking. In International Conference on Machine Learning, June 2019.
Minkyu Kim and Jae-Sun Seo. An energy-efficient deep convolutional neural network accelerator
 featuring conditional computing and low external memory access. IEEE Journal of Solid-State
 Circuits, 56(3):803–813, 2020.


                                                10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Peter Kontschieder, Madalina Fiterau, Antonio Criminisi, and Samuel Rota Bulo. Deep neural
  decision forests. In IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision, December 2015.
Pengzhen Li, Erdem Koyuncu, and Hulya Seferoglu. Respipe: Resilient model-distributed dnn
  training at edge networks. In ICASSP, 2021a.
Pengzhen Li, Hulya Seferoglu, Venkat R Dasari, and Erdem Koyuncu. Model-distributed dnn training
  for memory-constrained edge computing devices. In LANMAN, 2021b.
Christos Louizos, Max Welling, and Diederik P Kingma. Learning sparse neural networks through
  l_0 regularization. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2018.
Oded Z Maimon and Lior Rokach. Data mining with decision trees: theory and applications. World
  scientific, 2014.
GJ Mitchison and RM Durbin. Bounds on the learning capacity of some multi-layer networks.
  Biological Cybernetics, 60(5):345–365, 1989.
Preetum Nakkiran, Gal Kaplun, Yamini Bansal, Tristan Yang, Boaz Barak, and Ilya Sutskever. Deep
  double descent: Where bigger models and more data hurt. Journal of Statistical Mechanics: Theory
  and Experiment, 2021(12):124003, 2021.
Quynh Nguyen and Matthias Hein. Optimization landscape and expressivity of deep cnns. In
 International conference on machine learning, pp. 3730–3739. PMLR, 2018.
Sejun Park, Jaeho Lee, Chulhee Yun, and Jinwoo Shin. Provable memorization via deep neural
  networks using sub-linear parameters. In Conference on Learning Theory, August 2021.
Shashank Rajput, Kartik Sreenivasan, Dimitris Papailiopoulos, and Amin Karbasi. An exponential
  improvement on the memorization capacity of deep threshold networks. Neurips, 2021.
Igor R Shafarevich and Alexey O Remizov. Linear algebra and geometry. Springer Science &
  Business Media, 2012.
Noam Shazeer, Azalia Mirhoseini, Krzysztof Maziarz, Andy Davis, Quoc Le, Geoffrey Hinton,
  and Jeff Dean. Outrageously large neural networks: The sparsely-gated mixture-of-experts layer.
 International Conference on Learning Representations, 2017. arXiv preprint arXiv:1701.06538.
Eduardo Sontag. Remarks on interpolation and recognition using neural nets. Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 3, 1990.
Ryutaro Tanno, Kai Arulkumaran, Daniel Alexander, Antonio Criminisi, and Aditya Nori. Adaptive
  neural trees. In International Conference on Machine Learning, June 2019.
Surat Teerapittayanon, Bradley McDanel, and Hsiang-Tsung Kung. Branchynet: Fast inference via
  early exiting from deep neural networks. In ICPR, December 2016.
Vladimir N Vapnik and A Ya Chervonenkis. On the uniform convergence of relative frequencies of
  events to their probabilities. In Measures of Complexity. 2015.
Gal Vardi, Gilad Yehudai, and Ohad Shamir. On the optimal memorization power of ReLU neural
  networks. In International Conference on Learning Representations, April 2022.
Roman Vershynin. Memory capacity of neural networks with threshold and rectified linear unit
  activations. SIAM Journal on Mathematics of Data Science, 2(4):1004–1033, 2020.
Yongxin Yang, Irene Garcia Morillo, and Timothy M Hospedales. Deep neural decision trees. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1806.06988, 2018.
Chulhee Yun, Suvrit Sra, and Ali Jadbabaie. Small relu networks are powerful memorizers: a tight
  analysis of memorization capacity. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 32, 2019.
Chiyuan Zhang, Samy Bengio, Moritz Hardt, Benjamin Recht, and Oriol Vinyals. Understanding
  deep learning (still) requires rethinking generalization. In International Conference on Learning
  Representations, April 2017.


                                                11
