Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


C OG V IDEO : L ARGE - SCALE P RETRAINING FOR T EXT-
TO -V IDEO G ENERATION VIA T RANSFORMERS

 Wenyi Hong†∗ Ming Ding†∗ Wendi Zheng† Xinghan Liu† Jie Tang†‡
 †
  Tsinghua University ‡ BAAI
 {hwy22@mails, dm18@mails, jietang@}.tsinghua.edu.cn



                                                 A BSTRACT

              Large-scale pretrained transformers have reached a milestone in text (GPT-3) and
              text-to-image (DALL-E and CogView) generation. However, its application to
              video generation still has several challenges: unaffordable huge computation cost
              and scarcity and weak relevance of the text-video datasets. In this work, we
              present CogVideo, a 9B-parameter transformer for text-to-video generation. The
              CogVideo model has been trained by inheriting a pretrained text-to-image model,
              CogView2, which significantly reduces the training cost and alleviates the problem
              of scarcity and weak relevance. We also propose a multi-frame-rate training
              strategy for better aligning text and video clips. CogVideo achieves state-of-the-art
              performance in machine evaluation and outperforms publicly available models by
              a large margin in human evaluation. Its codes and model are also publicly available
              at https://github.com/THUDM/CogVideo.


      A man is
       skiing.


    A woman is
    riding horse
    on the sea.


  A lion man is
 drinking water.



      A girl is
      dancing,
       anime.


    Nightfall in a
    metropolis.


Figure 1: Samples generated by CogVideo. The actual text inputs are in Chinese. Each sample is a
4-second clip of 32 frames, and here we sample 8 frames uniformly for display purposes.

1        I NTRODUCTION
Autoregressive transformers, e.g. DALL-E (Ramesh et al., 2021) and CogView (Ding et al., 2021),
have revolutionized text-to-image generation. A few other works have also followed the framework
to develop text-to-video transformers (Wu et al., 2021b; Ge et al., 2022), e.g. VideoGPT (Yan et al.,
2021), and demonstrated its superiority over GAN-based methods (Clark et al., 2019; Tulyakov et al.,
     ∗
         Equal contribution.


                                                       1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


2018). However, the performances are still far from satisfactory. Diffusion probabilistic models,
e.g. Imagen (Saharia et al., 2022) and DALLE-2 (Ramesh et al., 2022), represent another line of
research for text-to-image generation and video generation Ho et al. (2022). However, how to better
incorporate the temporal information for text-to-video generation is still a challenge.
In this paper, we focus on designing an autoregressive model for text-to-video generation. The critical
challenge in previous work is that the generated video frames tend to gradually deviate from the text
prompt. This makes vanilla autoregressive models only good at synthesizing videos with regular
(e.g. forward moving cars) or random patterns (e.g. speaking by random moving lips), but fail at text
prompt such as “a lion is drinking water”. The main reason is that in the former case the first frame
already provides sufficient information for the subsequent changes, while in the latter the model has
to precisely understand the action “drink” in order to correctly generate the desired action — the lion
lifts the glass to its lip, drinks and then puts down the glass.
Why could the autoregressive transformers well understand the text-image alignment, but struggle
for the text-action alignment in videos? One fact is that the duration of videos varies a lot. Previous
models split the video into many clips with a fixed number of frames for training (Wu et al., 2021b;
Ge et al., 2022). Such treatment destroys the alignment between the text and its temporal counterparts
in the video. If a “drinking” video is split into four individual clips of “holding a glass”, “lifting”,
“drinking” and “putting down” with the same text “drinking”, the model will be confused to learn the
precise meaning of drinking.
The other challenge is that the perfect aligned text-video data is scarce, compared to the easy-to-
collect billions of text-image pairs (Ramesh et al., 2021). VATEX is probably the largest annotated
text-video dataset (Wang et al., 2019). However, it has only 41,250 videos. The retrieval-based
text-video pairs, e.g. Howto100M (Miech et al., 2019), are weakly relevant and most captions only
describe the scene without temporal information.
Present Work. Here we present a large-scale pretrained text-to-video generative model, CogVideo,
which is of 9.4 billion parameters and trained on 5.4 million text-video pairs. To reduce the com-
putational cost, CogVideo has been developed to inherit the knowledge learned from a text-image
pretraining model CogView2 (Ding et al., 2022). To ensure the alignment between text and its
temporal counterparts in the video, we propose the multi-frame-rate training. The flexibility of the
textual condition makes it possible to simply prepend a piece of text describing the frame rate to the
original text prompt for modeling different frame rates. To keep the text-video alignment, we choose
a proper frame rate description to include the complete action in each training sample. The frame rate
token also controls the intensity of the changes throughout continuous frames in generation. We train
a sequential generation model and a frame interpolation model. The former model generates key
frames according to the text, and the latter recursively fills the middle frames by varying the frame
rates to make the video coherent. As shown in Figure 1, CogVideo can generate high-resolution
(480×480) videos. The human evaluation demonstrates that CogVideo outperforms most publicly
available models by a large margin. Our main contributions include:
       • We present CogVideo, which is the largest and open-source pretrained transformer for
         general text-to-video generation. CogVideo demonstrates state-of-the-art FVD on the UCF-
         101 benchmark.
       • We propose the multi-frame-rate training to better align text-clip pairs, which significantly
         improves the generation accuracy, in particular for movements of complex semantics.
         This training strategy offers CogVideo the capacity of controlling the intensity of changes
         during the generation.
       • We design dual-channel attention to elegantly and efficiently finetune a pretrained text-to-
         image generative model for text-to-video generation, avoiding the expensive full parameter
         pretraining from scratch.

2     R ELATED W ORK
2.1   V IDEO G ENERATION

Video generation is a long-standing research topic. Most previous works focus on the next-frame
prediction task — forecasting the future frames based on the first video frame. Early works, e.g.


                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


CDNA (Finn et al., 2016) and PredRNN (Wang et al., 2017), leverage deterministic methods to
directly predict the next frame via CNNs or RNNs. However, these deterministic models are unable to
capture the stochastic temporal patterns and synthesize coherent complex scenes. Recently, generative
models, especially Generative Adversarial Networks (Goodfellow et al., 2014) (GANs), begin to
dominate the area as they can perform unconditional or class-conditional video synthesis without
the first frames. VGAN (Vondrick et al., 2016) is the first one to use GAN for video generation. It
decomposes video to a static background and a moving foreground, and then generates them with
2D and 3D convolutional networks respectively. TGAN(Saito et al., 2017) proposes to separately
generate the temporal latent variables and spatial information, and MoCoGAN (Tulyakov et al., 2018)
similarly decomposes the latent space into context and motion subspaces. DIGAN (Yu et al., 2022)
applies implicit neural representations for video encoding. Recently, text-to-video generation emerges
as a promising direction. The framework of VQVAE (van den Oord et al., 2017) and autoregressive
transformers (Vaswani et al., 2017; Brown et al., 2020) quickly become the mainstream methods (Wu
et al., 2021a;b; Ge et al., 2022). Ho et al. (2022) proposes a video diffusion model along with a
gradient method recently for text-to-video generation. The previous methods are basically trained on
a specific dataset, e.g. UCF-101 (Soomro et al., 2012), making the trained model domain-specific.
Moreover, most of these models are not publicly available.

2.2   AUTOREGRESSIVE T RANSFORMER

Recent years have witnessed the autoregressive transformer emerging as a powerful generative model.
The autoregressive models become the most prevalent framework for text generation (Sutskever
et al., 2011). With its prominent capacity of fitting, transformer (Vaswani et al., 2017) gradually
becomes a standard neural structure for text generation. Examples are GPT-3 (Brown et al., 2020)
and GLM-130B (Zeng et al., 2023). In computer vision, van den Oord et al. (2017) first proposes to
train a VQVAE to compress the image into a sequence of tokens from a learned dictionary, which
can be then efficiently handled by the autoregressive model. VQ-GAN (Esser et al., 2020) learns a
more semantic-aware dictionary for unconditional image generation. In the text-to-image generation,
pretrained autoregressive transformers such as DALL-E (Ramesh et al., 2021) and CogView (Ding
et al., 2021) have shown superiority in open-domain image generation. Besides the pure GPT-style
generation, CogView2 (Ding et al., 2022) proposes a new language model CogLM for infilling in the
image generation. Recent autoregressive transformers (Rakhimov et al., 2020; Yan et al., 2021; Wu
et al., 2021a;b) have also shown their superiority in video generation. Among them, GODIVA (Wu
et al., 2021a) and NÜWA (Wu et al., 2021b) focus on the open-domain text-to-video generation.
However, they simply generate frames or frame blocks one by one in chronological order, and suffer
from poor text-video alignment (Cf. § 1).
Diffusion probabilistic models, e.g. Imagen (Saharia et al., 2022) and DALLE-2 (Ramesh et al.,
2022), recently showed very promising results in text-to-image generation. However, in this paper we
mainly focus on autoregressive models due to the sequential nature of temporal information.


3     M ETHOD

We first introduce multi-frame-rate training to better align text and video semantics (§ 3.1). To
overcome the data scarcity and accelerate pretraining, we propose efficient dual-channel attention for
video generation by inheriting knowledge from a pretrained text-image model (§ 3.2).

3.1   M ULTI - FRAME - RATE T RAINING

Before the training, we first tokenize each frame into image tokens, a similar strategy also used in the
framework of VQVAE (van den Oord et al., 2017).
Training. The key design here is that we add a variable frame-rate token to the text and sample
frames at this frame rate to compose a fixed-length training sequence. The motivations are two folds:

      1. Directly separating the long video into clips at a fixed frame rate often leads to semantic
         mismatching between clips and captions. The truncated clip might only contain incomplete
         actions, which do not correspond to the full text.


                                                   3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                Input Text:                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Input Frames:                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Image Tokenizer

                      A lion is


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        VQVAE
                  drinking water.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Discretize

                 Ӟ‫ݝ‬ሁৼྋࣁࡆ࿜

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       20*20=400 image tokens per frame * 5 frames
   Text tokenization                      <latexit   sha1_base64="WkmkOQqV4y/G2CwEGjey+GFekFc=">AAACAnicbVDLSgMxFM3UV62vUVfiJlgEV2VGi7osuHFZwT6gM5RMeqcNzWSGJCOUobjxV9y4UMStX+HOvzHTzkJbD4Qczrn3JvcECWdKO863VVpZXVvfKG9WtrZ3dvfs/YO2ilNJoUVjHstuQBRwJqClmebQTSSQKODQCcY3ud95AKlYLO71JAE/IkPBQkaJNlLfPvJiYweSUMi8kUry+9JJ9HTat6tOzZkBLxO3IFVUoNm3v7xBTNMIhKacKNVzzRw/I1IzymFa8VIFZv6YDKFnqCARKD+brTDFp0YZ4DCW5giNZ+rvjoxESk2iwFRGRI/UopeL/3m9VIfXfsZEkmoQdP5QmHKsY5zngQdMAtV8Ygihkpm/YjoiJg9tUquYENzFlZdJ+7zmXtScu3q1US/iKKNjdILOkIuuUAPdoiZqIYoe0TN6RW/Wk/VivVsf89KSVfQcoj+wPn8A712XuA==</latexit>
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     z                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             }|                            {                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Flatten
                   Frame Rate      Text                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              [B]    Frame-1   Frame-2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Frame-3       Frame-4    Frame-5


                               Transformer (Stage 1: Sequential Generation)


                 Interpolate
                   frames



                                  {                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        }|          {z                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 }|                 z
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      C

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          <latexit sha1_base64="WkmkOQqV4y/G2CwEGjey+GFekFc=">AAACAnicbVDLSgMxFM3UV62vUVfiJlgEV2VGi7osuHFZwT6gM5RMeqcNzWSGJCOUobjxV9y4UMStX+HOvzHTzkJbD4Qczrn3JvcECWdKO863VVpZXVvfKG9WtrZ3dvfs/YO2ilNJoUVjHstuQBRwJqClmebQTSSQKODQCcY3ud95AKlYLO71JAE/IkPBQkaJNlLfPvJiYweSUMi8kUry+9JJ9HTat6tOzZkBLxO3IFVUoNm3v7xBTNMIhKacKNVzzRw/I1IzymFa8VIFZv6YDKFnqCARKD+brTDFp0YZ4DCW5giNZ+rvjoxESk2iwFRGRI/UopeL/3m9VIfXfsZEkmoQdP5QmHKsY5zngQdMAtV8Ygihkpm/YjoiJg9tUquYENzFlZdJ+7zmXtScu3q1US/iKKNjdILOkIuuUAPdoiZqIYoe0TN6RW/Wk/VivVsf89KSVfQcoj+wPn8A712XuA==</latexit>                                 <latexit sha1_base64="WkmkOQqV4y/G2CwEGjey+GFekFc=">AAACAnicbVDLSgMxFM3UV62vUVfiJlgEV2VGi7osuHFZwT6gM5RMeqcNzWSGJCOUobjxV9y4UMStX+HOvzHTzkJbD4Qczrn3JvcECWdKO863VVpZXVvfKG9WtrZ3dvfs/YO2ilNJoUVjHstuQBRwJqClmebQTSSQKODQCcY3ud95AKlYLO71JAE/IkPBQkaJNlLfPvJiYweSUMi8kUry+9JJ9HTat6tOzZkBLxO3IFVUoNm3v7xBTNMIhKacKNVzzRw/I1IzymFa8VIFZv6YDKFnqCARKD+brTDFp0YZ4DCW5giNZ+rvjoxESk2iwFRGRI/UopeL/3m9VIfXfsZEkmoQdP5QmHKsY5zngQdMAtV8Ygihkpm/YjoiJg9tUquYENzFlZdJ+7zmXtScu3q1US/iKKNjdILOkIuuUAPdoiZqIYoe0TN6RW/Wk/VivVsf89KSVfQcoj+wPn8A712XuA==</latexit>


                                          Sequence 1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Sequence 2
                   Frame Rate     Text                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               [B]    Frame-1   Frame-2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Frame-3       Frame-4    Frame-5

                           Transformer (Stage 2: Recursive Interpolation)

Figure 2: Multi-frame-rate generation framework in CogVideo. Input sequence includes frame rate,
text, and frame tokens. [B] (Begin-of-image) is a separator token, inherited from CogView2. In
stage 1, Ts frames are generated sequentially on the condition of frame rate and text. Then in stage
2, generated frames are re-input as bidirectional attention regions to recursively interpolate frames.
The frame rate can be adjusted during both stages. Bidirectional attention regions are highlighted in
 blue , and unidirectional regions are highlighted in green .

      2. The adjacent frames are usually very similar. A sudden change from the previous frame
         may incur a large loss. This will lead the models less inclined to explore the long-range
         correlation because simply copying the previous frame acts like a shortcut.

Therefore, for each training sample, we align the text and the frames by sampling videos at variable
frame rates, so that videos of any length are evenly down-sampled to Ts frames. In practice, we set up
a series of predefined frame rates, and select the lowest frame rate for each text-video pair at which
we can sample at least Ts frames. For each video, the frame rate information is described in the form
of text and prepended to the original text.
Although the above method improves the alignment of text and video, a side effect is that the
generated video at a low frame rate could be incoherent due to the large changes between frames.
We thus train another frame interpolation model to insert transition frames to the generated samples
of the sequential generation model. Frame interpolation relies heavily on bidirectional information.
However, previous transformers (Wu et al., 2021a; Yan et al., 2021; Wu et al., 2021b) are mostly
unidirectional. To be aware of the bidirectional context, we adopt Cross-Modal General Language
Model (CogLM) Ding et al. (2022) which unites bidirectional context-aware mask prediction and
autoregressive generation by dividing tokens into unidirectional and bidirectional attention regions.
A token in a unidirectional region can attend to the tokens in all bidirectional regions and previous
unidirectional regions, while a token in bidirectional regions can only attend to the tokens in all
bidirectional regions. As shown in Figure 2, (1) all frames in stage 1 and the 2nd, 4th frames in stage
2 are in the unidirectional region; (2) {Frame Rate}, {Text} and all other frames belong to the
bidirectional region.
In this way, bidirectional attention context in text and given frames is fully exploited without
interfering with auto-regressive frame prediction. The models of the two stages can also share the
same structure and the training process only with different attention masks.
Generation. The multi-frame-rate generation is a hierarchical and recursive process, illustrated in
Figure 2. Specifically, the generation pipeline consists of a sequential generation stage and a recursive
interpolation stage:


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


      1. Sequentially generates Ts key frames based on a low frame rate and text. The input
         sequence is [{Frame Rate}{Text} [B] {Frame1} ... {Frame Ts }]. In
         practice, we set Ts = 5 and the minimum sampling frame rate to 1 frame per second (fps).
         The hyperparameters are determined by the memory of devices and the performance in
         small primary experiments.
      2. Recursively interpolate frames based on the text, frame rate and known frames. In each
         round of interpolation, we split the generated frames into multiple d T2s e-frame blocks
         overlapping at the beginning and the end, and interpolate a frame between the successive
         frames in each block. The input sequence to CogLM is also [{Frame Rate}{Text}
         [B] {Frame1} ... {Frame Ts }], where Frame 2i(i = 1, 2, ..., b T2s c) are to be
         autoregressively generated. By recursively doubling {Frame Rate}, we can conduct
         finer interpolation to generate videos of many frames.

3.2   D UAL - CHANNEL ATTENTION

Large-scale pretraining usually demands a large dataset. For the open-domain text-to-video generation,
ideally we hope the dataset contains sufficient text-video pairs so as to infer both spatial and temporal
correlation between video and text. However, it is rather expensive and time-consuming to collect
high-quality text-video pairs. A compromise method is to leverage the image data to facilitate the
learning of spatial semantics. Video Diffusion Model (Ho et al., 2022) and NÜWA (Wu et al., 2021b)
try to add text-image pairs into text-video training, which helps achieve better results. However,
adding image data will also significantly increase the training cost, especially in large-scale pretraining
scenarios.
In this paper, we propose to inherit the learned knowledge from a pretrained text-to-image generation
model rather than use the raw image data. Pretrained text-to-image models, e.g. CogView2 (Ding
et al., 2022), already have a good command of the text-image relations. The coverage of the data
used to train these models is also larger than that of videos.
How to train a video generation model on top of an im-
age generation model? The proposed technique is dual-            Pretrained
                                                                 CogView2
channel attention. As shown in Figure 3, we augment
                                                                              Addition
the original attention block (the spatial channel) with an
additional cross-frame attention block (the temporal chan-
                                                                          Layer Norm
nel). The temporal channel is implemented by a 3D Swin
attention (Liu et al., 2021). Besides the restriction of the             Weighted Sum
                                                                                          Dual-Channel Attention
receptive window, the temporal channel also follows the
attention mask of CogLM. More specifically, during se-
quential generation, a token attends to the tokens in the               Spatial Channel    Temporal Channel

previous frames and tokens before it in this frame; and
during frame interpolation, the tokens additionally attend
to the known frames.
                                                                    Layer Norm
We freeze all the parameters in the pretrained text-to-image
model to preserve its learned knowledge, and finetune the
parameters in the temporal channel attention block to learn
the cross-frame information. Specifically, the dual-channel Figure 3: The dual-channel attention.
attention block with Sandwich-LN (Ding et al., 2021) can The parameters in CogView2 are frozen.
be formulated as
     x = α · SpatialAttn(LayerNorm(xin )) + (1 − α) · TemporalAttn(LayerNorm(xin )),                         (1)
  xout = xin + LayerNorm(x).                                                                                 (2)
                                                            d
The inter-channel mixture factor α is a vector ∈ (0, 1) , where d is the hidden size of the input
                                                      d
feature xin . To restrict the range of α within (0, 1) , we reparameterize it as α = sigmoid(a), where
       d
a ∈ R is a learnable parameter. Thanks to the decomposition of attention channels in dual-channel
attention, the computation procedure and hyper-parameters of each channel can be flexibly and
independently adjusted under various tasks, as long as the outputs of both channels share the same
hidden size. We initialize the temporal channel the same as the pretrained spatial channel so that the


                                                    5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


attention output x is still in the original CogView2 feature space at the beginning of finetuning. A
detailed analysis of the attention is in Appendix B.
As mentioned above, we adapt Swin Attention (Liu et al., 2021) for the temporal channel attention to
reduce the time and memory overhead. An interesting finding is that, the Swin attention provides a
chance for parallel generation in faraway regions of different frames, which further accelerates the
autoregressive generation. Further details and acceleration results are illustrated in Appendix A.


4       P RETRAINING

Model. CogVideo consists of two models corresponding to two stages. The backbone of the model
in each stage is a 48-layer Transformer with dual-channel attention, with 48 attention heads in each
attention channel and a hidden size of 3,072. Each of the two models has 7.7 billion parameters,
while 6 billion of them are shared between both models, which finally results in a total of 9.4 billion
parameters in CogVideo. To avoid potential gradient explosion, we also use Sandwich LayerNorm
and use PB-Relax for stabilizing training, as suggested in (Ding et al., 2021). Shifted window
attention is adopted in the Stage 2 model with a window size of 10 × 10.
Dataset. We pretrain our model on a dataset of 5.4 million text-video pairs with a resolution of
160 × 160 (can be upsampled to 480 × 480 further). The data is mainly crawled from the Internet,
where each video has its matching caption. About 30% of the captions are in English, which have
been translated into Chinese by machine translation. About 50% of the captions are sentences, while
the others are made of phrases.
Pretraining. Sequences in both stages are of the length 2,065, consisting of 64 text tokens, 5 (frames)
× 400 (per frame) image tokens, and 1 separator token. Both text and images are tokenized using
icetk1 . The model in stage 1 is first pretrained for 76,000 iterations on video clips with a minimum
frame rate of 0.25 fps, then trained for 15,000 iterations with a minimum frame rate of 1 fps. The
model in stage 2 is pretrained for 78,500 iterations with frame rates of 2, 4, and 8 fps. Both models are
trained in FP16 with batch size = 416, and optimized by Adam with max learning rate = 2 × 10−4 ,
β1 = 0.9, β2 = 0.95, weight decay = 1 × 10−2 .


5       E XPERIMENTS

5.1     M ACHINE E VALUATION

Machine evaluation was conducted on two popular benchmarks for video generation,
UCF101 (Soomro et al., 2012) and Kinetics-600 (Carreira et al., 2018). Following Rakhimov
et al. (2020); Yu et al. (2022), we use Fréchet Video Distance (FVD) (Unterthiner et al., 2018) and
Inception Score (IS) (Salimans et al., 2016) as evaluation metrics. IS is calculated based on the C3D
model (Tran et al., 2015) which was first trained on the Sports-1M dataset (Karpathy et al., 2014)
and then finetuned on the UCF101 dataset2 . FVD is calculated based on I3D model (Carreira &
Zisserman, 2017) trained on Kinetics-400, following previous works (Yu et al., 2022; Ge et al., 2022)3 .
As the low-level features brought by the image tokenizer (VQ-VAE) may increase the distribution
difference between generated samples and ground truth, which is not the focus of this work, we also
evaluate FVD using ground truth reconstructed by the tokenizer.
UCF-101 is a human action dataset consisting of 13,320 videos annotated with 101 action classes.
Due to the gaps in image style and frame rate between CogVideo’s training set and UCF-101, we
finetune CogVideo for 10,000 iterations with a batch size of 192. The model is trained on the whole
dataset, following the setting of Clark et al. (2019), Yan et al. (2021), Tian et al. (2021), Yu et al.
(2022). We use class labels as input text and generate samples according to the class distribution
during inference. For a fair comparison with previous works, we follow Ge et al. (2022) to resize
the original 160 × 160 CogVideo generation to 128 × 128, and evaluate FVD and IS over 2,048 and
    1
     https://github.com/THUDM/icetk
    2
     We evaluate IS and FVD with the official code of TGAN-v2 and TATS respectively.
   3
     In a previous version of this paper, we had a bug in the FVD evaluation of both UCF-101 and Kinetics-600
due to using a wrong I3D checkpoint. We corrected the results in this version.


                                                     6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Table 1: Video generation performance on UCF-          Table 2: Video generation performance on
101. Class labels are used as the text inputs. *       Kinetics-600. The metrics are based on the 16-
means trained on the training split of UCF-101         frame generated videos which prime on the first
only. ** means that the ground truth used in           5 frames, following settings of Rakhimov et al.
FVD is reconstructed by the tokenizer.                 (2020). ** means that the ground truth used is
                                                       the reconstruction result of the tokenizer.
 Method                           IS (↑) FVD (↓)
                                                          Method                           FVD(↓)
 VideoGPT (Yan et al., 2021)    24.69       -
 DVD-GAN (Clark et al., 2019)   27.38       -             LVT (Rakhimov et al., 2020)       224.73
 TGANv2 (Saito et al., 2020)*   28.87     1209            VT (Weissenborn et al., 2019)      170
 MoCoGAN-HD (Tian et al., 2021) 32.36     838             DVD-GAN-FP (Clark et al., 2019) 69.15
 DIGAN (Yu et al., 2022)*       29.71      655            TriVD-GAN-FP (Luc et al., 2020) 25.74
 DIGAN (Yu et al., 2022)        32.70      577            Transframer (Nash et al., 2022)    25.4
 TATS-base (Ge et al., 2022)*   79.28      332            Video diffusion (Ho et al., 2022)  16.2
 CogVideo (Ours)                  51.11   305             CogVideo (Ours)                   49.76
 CogVideo (Ours)**                  -     220             CogVideo (Ours)**                 11.08


Figure 4: Human evaluation results. “CogVideo 1Stage” refers to generating videos sequentially by
circularly reinserting the last frame into CogVideo’s Stage 1 model.

10,000 samples respectively. As shown in Table 1, our model achieves state-of-the-art FVD, and
achieves higher IS than most baselines.
Kinetics-600 contains 600 classes of human action videos, with roughly 350,000 train and 50,000
test videos in total. We use the action category as input text, and finetune CogVideo on the training
set for 12,000 iterations with a batch size of 640. Following the setup of Weissenborn et al. (2019);
Rakhimov et al. (2020), we center-crop and downsample each frame to 64×64 to measure FVD.
Results are shown in Table 2. Our result underperforms some methods on the FVD of this dataset.
However, we find that our method achieves much better FVD with reconstructed ground truth, which
verifies the guess that the FVD performance is greatly influenced by the low-level features from the
VQVAE tokenizer, although this influence is hard to distinguish by eyes after resized to 64 × 64
according to the setting (Weissenborn et al., 2019). Unfortunately, none of those previous models
or their evaluation codes on Kinetics is open-source, which prevents us from further analyzing the
reasons.

5.2   H UMAN E VALUATION

To further evaluate CogVideo, we invite 90 anonymous evaluators to rate for CogVideo and other
open-source baselines including the GAN-based model TGANv2 (Saito et al., 2020) and the GPT-
based model VideoGPT (Yan et al., 2021). 30 classes in UCF101 are randomly picked as text
conditions and 4 aspects are rated. For VideoGPT, we use the official unconditional pretrained
model4 . For TGANv2, we use the official source code to train an unconditional generation model
under the same setting as that in Saito et al. (2020). To assign unconditionally generated samples
into corresponding categories, we choose TSM (Lin et al., 2019) as the action recognition model for
post-classification. We only keep the samples whose likelihood of a certain class is at least 80%. See
Appendix C for further details.
   4
     https://github.com/wilson1yan/VideoGPT. We use the unconditional version of VideoGPT
because the conditional checkpoint is not released.


                                                   7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 5: Ablation study for dual-channel attention. The samples are generated with a given first
frame, 1 fps. Dual-channel attention produces more accurate shapes. The three models are trained on
a “fast setting” with fewer data, iterations and batch size than CogVideo described in § 5.3.1.
Table 3: Ablation study for dual-channel attention on Kinetics-600. FVD is evaluated on generated
11-frame samples priming on 5 frames in a 5,000-sample subset of Kinetics-600’s test set.

           Method                       Initialization      Training Setting       FVD (↓)
           Train from scratch             Random         full parameter training   166.13
           Finetune (Naïve)              CogView2        full parameter training   176.57
           Finetune (Dual-Channel)       CogView2        only 1 channel trained    124.92
           Finetune (Dual-Channel)       CogVideo        only 1 channel trained    108.27

Results in Figure 4 show that CogVideo significantly outperforms baselines on multiple important
aspects including frame texture, motion realism, and semantic relevance, and achieves the top score
by the overall quality. 49.53% of evaluators choose CogVideo as the best method, while only 15.42%
and 5.6% favor VideoGPT and TGANv2, respectively.

5.3     A BLATION S TUDY

In this section, we conduct further studies on our two main technical contributions: dual-channel
attention and multi-frame-rate training.

5.3.1    T HE E FFECTIVENESS OF D UAL -C HANNEL ATTENTION
To verify the effectiveness of dual-channel attention, we conduct ablation studies on its two key
components: (1) initializing with text-to-image pretrained model CogView2; (2) training temporal
attention channel while freezing all other parameters. The former provides an initialization point with
rich text-image knowledge, while the latter enforces preserving and exploiting that knowledge. Three
settings are compared against (a) finetuning with dual-channel attention (the same way as CogVideo
— initialized with CogView2 and only train temporal channel); (b) naïve full parameter finetune
(initialize with CogView2 and remove temporal module, and apply full parameter finetuning); (c)
training from scratch (randomly initialize and train all parameters).
First, we evaluate qualitatively on general-domain datasets. The models are trained on a 1 million
subset of the pretraining dataset for 20,000 steps with a batch size of 256, where videos related to
animals are removed to demonstrate the generalization ability. Generated samples are shown in
Figure 5. Dual-channel attention outperforms the other settings with more accurate contours and
details, such as the limbs of the “dancing lion” and the appearance of “sled dogs”, while training from
scratch performs the worst. As there is no animal-related video in this train set, the results indicate
that both finetuning with dual-channel attention and naïve full parameter finetuning can transfer the
knowledge from the text-to-image model, while the former one can better preserve the knowledge
and thereby enhance training efficiency and performance.
Second, we further test the aforementioned 3 settings on Kinetics-600 for quantitative evaluation.
We additionally test finetuning CogVideo to verify the effect of video pretraining. Each model is
trained on Kinetics-600 train set for 11,000 iterations with a batch size of 160. Results were shown
in Table 3, from which we can see that finetuning CogVideo scores the best, and finetuning with
dual-channel attention get better FVD than both naïve full parameter finetuning and training from
scratch, which indicates the superiority of dual-channel attention.


                                                   8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 6: The frame-rate token controls the intensity of change during generation. (The top 3 groups)
Generating the following 4 frames with different frame-rate tokens. (The bottom 2 groups) 4-second
clips generated with different frame-rate tokens in Stage 1 and then interpolated to 16 frames.
5.3.2   C ASE STUDIES OF M ULTI -F RAME -R ATE T RAINING
Multi-frame-rate training strategy not only enables CogVideo to generate videos of multiple frame
rates, but also helps better align texts and videos of varying lengths. To demonstrate its effectiveness,
we compare the samples generated with different frame rates in Stage 1 in Figure 6.
First, we use the Stage 1 model to generate 4 following frames conditioning on the 1, 2, and 4 fps
tokens. A lower frame rate corresponds to a longer time interval between neighboring frames. For
example, in Figure 6 (top 3 groups) the water level rises faster and the posture of people changes
more between adjacent frames with a lower frame rate. These results verify that multi-frame-rate
training is able to control the intensity of the changes throughout continuous frames with the frame
rate tokens.
In order to verify how the multi-frame-rate training help align videos and texts, we process samples
generated as above to the same duration and frame rate. To be concrete, we first extend samples to 4
seconds by circularly reinserting the last frame into the Stage 1 model, then interpolate to 4 fps with
the Stage 2 model. As shown in Figure 6 (the bottom 2 groups), samples generated with a relatively
low frame rate in the first stage may have more precise modeling of longer-term movements, e.g. the
periodicity of push-ups and the whole process of “lifting a glass, drinking, then putting it down”. On
the other hand, CogVideo can generate realistic movements with a high frame rate in the first stage
when only short-term dependency is needed, e.g. “talking”. In other words, a higher frame rate is
better at capturing the action details and modeling short-term actions, and a lower frame rate is more
capable of capturing global information in the time dimension and modeling long-term actions.


6    C ONCLUSION AND L IMITATIONS

We present CogVideo, to the best of our knowledge, the largest and the first open-source pretrained
transformer for text-to-video generation in the general domain. CogVideo exhibits a way to efficiently
leverage the pretrained text-to-image generative model for a text-to-video generation without hurting
its image generation capacity. With the proposed multi-frame-rate training framework, CogVideo
is endowed with a better understanding of text-video relations and abilities to control the intensity
of changes during generation. There are still several limitations in CogVideo, e.g. restriction on the
length of the input sequence still exists due to the large scale of the model and limitation of GPU
memory, and we leave them for future work.


                                                   9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS AND D ISCLOSURE OF F UNDING
We would like to thank Zhao Xue, Shuai Zhao, Sha Yuan for their help in data collection, Weidong
Guo, Fengyu Rao, Zhaoyang Zeng, Mingkang Tang, Zhuoyi Yang for their useful discussion, Hanxiao
Qu for maintaining the machines and the computational resources supported by BAAI.
This research was supported by Natural Science Foundation of China for Distinguished Young
Scholars 61825602.

E THICS S TATEMENT
The primary goal of CogVideo is to advance research on video generation methods. Its ability of
text-to-video generation has the potential for easing the effort of short video and digital art creation.
While in the meantime, we are also aware of its possible ethical impact on society. it might be used
for malicious purposes such as reinforcing social stereotypes, violating privacy, generating deceptive
or harmful content, etc. In the following part, we discuss these issues and present possible solutions
accordingly. Being aware of these ethical impacts, we set a license for CogVideo, which demands the
users not to use CogVideo (or derivatives of the model) for any deeds that may violate laws or be
harmful to the society.
Problem 1: Reinforcing social stereotypes. As mentioned in DALL-E2 (Ramesh et al., 2022)
and Imagen (Saharia et al., 2022), visual generation models may inherit biases from their training
data and reinforce social stereotypes. For example, if there are more male engineers than female
engineers in the dataset, the pretrained model is inclined to generate males given input of “engineer”.
This problem can be alleviated to some extent by both pre-processing and post-processing. For
pre-processing, we can fuzzy search keywords related to fairness (such as gender, race, and age)
during data collection, and adjust their proportion. For post-processing, although there are some
researches on model post-processing for fairness, the methods for large pretrained model in the
general domain is still an open problem. A simple solution is Word Replacement proposed in Ding
et al. (2021), based on the observation that the biases in the generated images/videos often come
along with fuzzy user input. To be concrete, we can train an additional name entity recognition model
to find the words about humans, then directly add accurate descriptions (such as “white”, “black”,
“Asian” or “male”, female”) before those words. The descriptions are sampled according to the real
proportion in the world.
Problem 2: Violating privacy. Researchers have found that some private information contained
in the dataset could be extracted from pretrained language models (Carlini et al., 2021). The same
problem exists in multi-modal pretrained models. As the datasets are mainly collected from the
websites, private information may be included such as the user’s image/video paired with their name.
During data collection, we try to filter out data sources with such private information, though there
inevitably remains a small number of videos of public figures.
Problem 3: Generating deceptive or harmful content. Although the generated videos still have
a certain gap with real videos according to our human evaluation, we are conscious that pretrained
models may generate realistic videos in the near future. Without adequate guardrails, such models
could be used to intentionally misinform subjects and potentially empower information operations, or
generate explicit content such as sexual and violent videos. During data collection, we manually filter
out sources with inappropriate data including pornographic and violent content. We further filter out
toxic texts using stop-word list and NSFW videos using models5 . During the process we found that,
in the original dataset, only 0.2% videos have NSFW value higher than 0.95 and only 0.5% captions
contain stop words, while all of them are false positives according to manual inspection. During
training, we choose to use CogView2 as our initialization, whose dataset doesn’t contain sexual or
violent images. When developing API, we set restrictions to prevent users from inputting harmful
text descriptions. Additional classifiers will be trained along with pretraining to discriminate the
fakes generated by a specific model.
Last but not least, CogVideo is committed to promoting academic research and will never be put into
commercial use. And we choose not to release datasets in order to further ensure copyright issues.
    5
      The model to filter out NSFW videos: https://github.com/GantMan/nsfw_model. We use the
first frame to represent a video


                                                  10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT

We have paid great exertion to ensure reproducibility.

        • Open-source. We create an anonymous repository https://anonymous.4open.
          science/r/CogVideo-anonymous-4148, containing codes for pretraining and in-
          ference. As pretraining requires huge computational costs (pretraining CogVideo takes
          20 days on 104 A100 GPUs), we also release checkpoints to the public to further ensure
          reproducibility.
        • Details of models and training procedure: introduced in § 4. Also, all the details of the
          model (e.g. structures and settings) can be found in the released code.
        • Dataset. A brief introduction can be found in § 4. Here we provide more details about the
          data and the way to reproduce CogVideo. Our data is crawled from public video websites,
          where each video is paired with a caption (either in English or Chinese). We filter out videos
          longer than 60 sec, as it may cause too weak relevance between the video and captions. The
          data covers multiple domains including natural scenery (42%), daily activity (36%), sports
          (5%), animals (7%), others (10%) (food, building, city, abstract art, etc.), and are mainly real
          videos (rather than artificial videos such as cartoon). The content and quality of crawled data
          are very similar to WebVid-10M6 , a recently released general domain text-video dataset,
          thus one can refer to WebVid-10M for reproducing.

R EFERENCES
Tom B Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
  Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. Language models are
  few-shot learners. arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.14165, 2020.
Nicholas Carlini, Florian Tramer, Eric Wallace, Matthew Jagielski, Ariel Herbert-Voss, Katherine
  Lee, Adam Roberts, Tom Brown, Dawn Song, Ulfar Erlingsson, et al. Extracting training data
  from large language models. In 30th USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security 21), pp.
  2633–2650, 2021.
Joao Carreira and Andrew Zisserman. Quo vadis, action recognition? a new model and the kinetics
  dataset. In proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp.
  6299–6308, 2017.
Joao Carreira, Eric Noland, Andras Banki-Horvath, Chloe Hillier, and Andrew Zisserman. A short
  note about kinetics-600. arXiv preprint arXiv:1808.01340, 2018.
Aidan Clark, Jeff Donahue, and Karen Simonyan. Adversarial video generation on complex datasets.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.06571, 2019.
Ming Ding, Zhuoyi Yang, Wenyi Hong, Wendi Zheng, Chang Zhou, Da Yin, Junyang Lin, Xu Zou,
 Zhou Shao, Hongxia Yang, et al. Cogview: Mastering text-to-image generation via transformers.
 Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34, 2021.
Ming Ding, Wendi Zheng, Wenyi Hong, and Jie Tang. Cogview2: Faster and better text-to-image
 generation via hierarchical transformers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.14217, 2022.
Patrick Esser, Robin Rombach, and Björn Ommer. Taming transformers for high-resolution image
  synthesis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2012.09841, 2020.
Chelsea Finn, Ian Goodfellow, and Sergey Levine. Unsupervised learning for physical interaction
  through video prediction. Advances in neural information processing systems, 29, 2016.
Songwei Ge, Thomas Hayes, Harry Yang, Xi Yin, Guan Pang, David Jacobs, Jia-Bin Huang, and
  Devi Parikh. Long video generation with time-agnostic vqgan and time-sensitive transformer.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.03638, 2022.
   6
       https://m-bain.github.io/webvid-dataset/


                                                    11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Ian J Goodfellow, Jean Pouget-Abadie, Mehdi Mirza, Bing Xu, David Warde-Farley, Sherjil
  Ozair, Aaron Courville, and Yoshua Bengio. Generative adversarial networks. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1406.2661, 2014.
Jonathan Ho, Tim Salimans, Alexey Gritsenko, William Chan, Mohammad Norouzi, and David J
  Fleet. Video diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.03458, 2022.
Andrej Karpathy, George Toderici, Sanketh Shetty, Thomas Leung, Rahul Sukthankar, and Li Fei-Fei.
  Large-scale video classification with convolutional neural networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE
  conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 1725–1732, 2014.
Ji Lin, Chuang Gan, and Song Han. Tsm: Temporal shift module for efficient video understanding.
   In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 7083–7093,
   2019.
Ze Liu, Yutong Lin, Yue Cao, Han Hu, Yixuan Wei, Zheng Zhang, Stephen Lin, and Baining Guo.
  Swin transformer: Hierarchical vision transformer using shifted windows. In Proceedings of the
  IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 10012–10022, 2021.
Pauline Luc, Aidan Clark, Sander Dieleman, Diego de Las Casas, Yotam Doron, Albin Cassirer, and
  Karen Simonyan. Transformation-based adversarial video prediction on large-scale data. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2003.04035, 2020.
Antoine Miech, Dimitri Zhukov, Jean-Baptiste Alayrac, Makarand Tapaswi, Ivan Laptev, and Josef
  Sivic. Howto100m: Learning a text-video embedding by watching hundred million narrated
 video clips. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, pp.
  2630–2640, 2019.
Charlie Nash, João Carreira, Jacob Walker, Iain Barr, Andrew Jaegle, Mateusz Malinowski, and
  Peter Battaglia. Transframer: Arbitrary frame prediction with generative models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2203.09494, 2022.
Ruslan Rakhimov, Denis Volkhonskiy, Alexey Artemov, Denis Zorin, and Evgeny Burnaev. Latent
  video transformer. arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.10704, 2020.
Aditya Ramesh, Mikhail Pavlov, Gabriel Goh, Scott Gray, Chelsea Voss, Alec Radford, Mark Chen,
  and Ilya Sutskever. Zero-shot text-to-image generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2102.12092, 2021.
Aditya Ramesh, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alex Nichol, Casey Chu, and Mark Chen. Hierarchical text-
  conditional image generation with clip latents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.06125, 2022.
Chitwan Saharia, William Chan, Saurabh Saxena, Lala Li, Jay Whang, Emily Denton, Seyed
  Kamyar Seyed Ghasemipour, Burcu Karagol Ayan, S Sara Mahdavi, Rapha Gontijo Lopes, et al.
  Photorealistic text-to-image diffusion models with deep language understanding. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2205.11487, 2022.
Masaki Saito, Eiichi Matsumoto, and Shunta Saito. Temporal generative adversarial nets with
 singular value clipping. In Proceedings of the IEEE international conference on computer vision,
 pp. 2830–2839, 2017.
Masaki Saito, Shunta Saito, Masanori Koyama, and Sosuke Kobayashi. Train sparsely, generate
 densely: Memory-efficient unsupervised training of high-resolution temporal gan. International
 Journal of Computer Vision, 128(10):2586–2606, 2020.
Tim Salimans, Ian Goodfellow, Wojciech Zaremba, Vicki Cheung, Alec Radford, and Xi Chen.
  Improved techniques for training gans. In Proceedings of the 30th International Conference on
  Neural Information Processing Systems, pp. 2234–2242, 2016.
Khurram Soomro, Amir Roshan Zamir, and Mubarak Shah. Ucf101: A dataset of 101 human actions
  classes from videos in the wild. arXiv preprint arXiv:1212.0402, 2012.
Ilya Sutskever, James Martens, and Geoffrey Hinton. Generating text with recurrent neural networks.
   In ICML’11, pp. 1017–1024, 2011.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Yu Tian, Jian Ren, Menglei Chai, Kyle Olszewski, Xi Peng, Dimitris N Metaxas, and Sergey Tulyakov.
  A good image generator is what you need for high-resolution video synthesis. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2104.15069, 2021.
Du Tran, Lubomir Bourdev, Rob Fergus, Lorenzo Torresani, and Manohar Paluri. Learning spa-
  tiotemporal features with 3d convolutional networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE international
  conference on computer vision, pp. 4489–4497, 2015.
Sergey Tulyakov, Ming-Yu Liu, Xiaodong Yang, and Jan Kautz. Mocogan: Decomposing motion
  and content for video generation. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and
  pattern recognition, pp. 1526–1535, 2018.
Thomas Unterthiner, Sjoerd van Steenkiste, Karol Kurach, Raphael Marinier, Marcin Michalski, and
  Sylvain Gelly. Towards accurate generative models of video: A new metric & challenges. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1812.01717, 2018.
Aaron van den Oord, Oriol Vinyals, and Koray Kavukcuoglu. Neural discrete representation learning.
  In Proceedings of the 31st International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems,
  pp. 6309–6318, 2017.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez, Lukasz
  Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. arXiv preprint arXiv:1706.03762, 2017.
Carl Vondrick, Hamed Pirsiavash, and Antonio Torralba. Generating videos with scene dynamics.
  Advances in neural information processing systems, 29, 2016.
Xin Wang, Jiawei Wu, Junkun Chen, Lei Li, Yuan-Fang Wang, and William Yang Wang. Vatex: A
  large-scale, high-quality multilingual dataset for video-and-language research. In Proceedings of
  the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 4581–4591, 2019.
Yunbo Wang, Mingsheng Long, Jianmin Wang, Zhifeng Gao, and Philip S Yu. Predrnn: Recurrent
  neural networks for predictive learning using spatiotemporal lstms. Advances in neural information
  processing systems, 30, 2017.
Dirk Weissenborn, Oscar Täckström, and Jakob Uszkoreit. Scaling autoregressive video models.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.02634, 2019.
Chenfei Wu, Lun Huang, Qianxi Zhang, Binyang Li, Lei Ji, Fan Yang, Guillermo Sapiro, and
  Nan Duan. Godiva: Generating open-domain videos from natural descriptions. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2104.14806, 2021a.
Chenfei Wu, Jian Liang, Lei Ji, Fan Yang, Yuejian Fang, Daxin Jiang, and Nan Duan. N\" uwa:
  Visual synthesis pre-training for neural visual world creation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2111.12417,
  2021b.
Wilson Yan, Yunzhi Zhang, Pieter Abbeel, and Aravind Srinivas. Videogpt: Video generation using
 vq-vae and transformers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.10157, 2021.
Sihyun Yu, Jihoon Tack, Sangwoo Mo, Hyunsu Kim, Junho Kim, Jung-Woo Ha, and Jinwoo Shin.
  Generating videos with dynamics-aware implicit generative adversarial networks. The International
  Conference on Learning Representations, 2022.
Aohan Zeng, Xiao Liu, Zhengxiao Du, Zihan Wang, Hanyu Lai, Ming Ding, Zhuoyi Yang, Yifan
 Xu, Wendi Zheng, Xiao Xia, et al. Glm-130b: An open bilingual pre-trained model. International
 Conference on Learning Representations, 2023.


A PPENDIX

A    S HIFTED W INDOW ATTENTION IN AUTO - REGRESSIVE G ENERATION
To further alleviate the large time and memory overhead in the temporal channel during training and
inference, we refer to Swin Attention Liu et al. (2021). The original Swin attention is only applied to


                                                  13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


non-autoregressive scenarios, we extend it to the autoregressive and temporal scenarios by applying
an auto-regressive attention mask in the shifted windows.
An interesting finding is that, the Swin attention provides a chance for parallel generation in
faraway regions of different frames, which further accelerates the auto-regressive generation. The
dependence of the generation of a specific token relies on

       • Auto-regressive mask. A token can only attend to previous frames or tokens before itself in
         the current frame.
       • Shifted window. Only tokens within the distance of window size in both width and height
         dimensions can be directly attended to.


                                        t=i              t=i+1             t=i+2


Figure 7: In 3D autoregressive swin attention (window size 2 × 2 as an example), the token in the red
box can only attend to (either directly or indirectly) the yellow or green tokens. The gray tokens in
the i-th frame and the token in the red box can be generated in parallel.


As shown in Figure 7, we can start generating parts of the tokens in the following frames before
finishing the generation of all the previous frames — they can work in parallel. Suppose X,Y is the
height and width of each frame, and Ax , Ay are the height and width of the shifted window. For two
tokens at (t1 , x1 , y1 ) and (t2 , x2 , y2 ), t1 < t2 , the latter cannot attend to the former either directly or
indirectly if
                           (x1 − x2 )Y + (y1 − y2 ) ≥ (t2 − t1 + 1)(Ax Y + Ay ),                               (3)

which means that the i-th token in the t-th frame can be generated
with the (i−Ax Y −Ay )-th token in the (t+1)-th frame in parallel.
In this way, we can generate b AxXY
                                 Y +Ay c tokens in parallel at most,
thus greatly enhancing parallelism and accelerating inference com-
pared to auto-regressive with standard attention which can only
generate one token at a time.
To verify the acceleration effect provided by parallel generation,
we generate 6 frames (32×32 tokens each frame) with varying
shifted window sizes, and measure the time cost w/wo parallel
generation. The effect of Swin attention equals to full attention
                                                                             Figure 8: Acceleration results
when setting window size to 32. As shown in Figure 8, (1) Ap-
                                                                             of parallel generation in auto-
plying swin attention to auto-regressive generation accelerates
                                                                             regressive generation with Swin
inference. (2) Using parallel generation can further speed up in-
                                                                             attention.
ference without affecting generated videos, and achieves around
2× acceleration when window size ≤ 8.

B     ATTENTION A NALYSIS
To explore the attention mechanism of dual-channel attention, we visualize (1) the attention distribu-
tion in the temporal channel and (2) the mixture factor α controlling the ratio between the spatial and
temporal channel in equation 1.
Figure 9 visualizes the distribution among frames and texts in sequential generation (Stage 1) with
heat maps, where only 24 of 48 attention heads in 6 layers are shown for display purposes. The
attention patterns can be broadly classified into the following categories:


                                                       14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


       • Most of the attention is on the text. E.g. the attention heads in violet .

       • Most of the attention is on a certain frame. E.g. the attention heads in pink focus mainly
         on the previous frame; the attention heads in blue focus mainly on the first frame besides
         the text; the attention heads in yellow focus mostly on the frame itself.

       • Attention is spread over several frames. E.g. the attention heads in green .


   Layer 4


   Layer 12


   Layer 20


   Layer 28


   Layer 36


   Layer 44



Figure 9: The attention distribution among frames and texts in sequential generation (Stage 1). Only
24 of 48 attention heads in 6 layers are selected for display purposes. Each attention head is visualized
with a heat map of size 5×6, where lighter color represents a larger value. The 5×5 block on the left
indicates the sum of attention scores (after softmax) between each pair of frames, and the rightmost
column indicates the sum of the attention
                                      P        score of each frame to text. That is to say, the grid in
row i column j (j ≤ 5) represents x∈Fi ,y∈Fj attnx,y , and the grid in row i column 6 represents
P
   x∈Fi ,y∈T attnx,y , where Fi , T denotes the set of tokens in the i-th frame and text respectively, and
attnx,y denotes the attention score of token x to y.

Some attention heads exhibit a single pattern, while others may exhibit a mixture of them. Attention
heads in the same layer tend to show similar patterns. In lower layers (e.g. layer 4, 12) the heads
tend to allocate attention according to position, while in higher layers more attention is allocated to
text (e.g. layer 44) or spread over multiple frames. One possible explanation is that there are more
high-level features in higher layers such as video semantics, by which more frames and texts can
interact with each other to make high-level feature analyses.
It is worth noting that many heads in the temporal channel do not allocate much attention to the frame
itself, especially in higher layers, while attending to itself is important for inference. This shows that
the CogVideo performs a certain degree of decoupling in the analysis of temporal and spatial features.
While the spatial channel is in charge of feature analysis within the frame, the temporal channel can
allocate more resources to explore relationships among different frames. We further illustrate this
perspective with Figure 10, which shows that features calculated by CogView2 in the spatial channel
are heavily relied on.


                                                   15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


        0.7
        0.6
        0.5
alpha
        0.4
        0.3
        0.2
        0.1
        0.0
                 0   2   4   6   8   10   12   14   16   18   20   22   24   26   28   30   32   34   36   38   40   42   44   46
                                                                   Layer
Figure 10: The mixture factor α controlling the ratio between the spatial and temporal channel in
equation 1 in dual-channel attention. Only α in half of the layers are shown for display reasons. As α
is a vector of dimension 3072, we show the mean and variance among all of its dimensions in this
figure.


C             D ETAILS ABOUT H UMAN E VALUATION

In this section, we introduce more details about human evaluation for measuring generation quality.
The conduction of our human evaluation generally follows previous works including Ramesh et al.
(2021); Ding et al. (2021)
We randomly extract 30 classes from UCF101 for video generation, using corresponding video
samples in the dataset as ground truth items in the evaluation. Based on captions of selected classes,
we generate video samples from models including TGANv2, VideoGPT, and our model, CogVideo.
To further illustrate the effectiveness of hierarchical multi-frame-rate generation, we also include
a 1-stage version of the CogVideo model which only uses the Stage 1 model and extends samples
by circularly reinserting the last frame into the model. For TGANv2, we use the official source
code to train an unconditional generation model under the same setting as that in Saito et al. (2020).
For VideoGPT, we use the official unconditional pretrained model to generate samples. To assign
unconditionally generated samples into corresponding categories, we choose TSMLin et al. (2019) as
the action recognition model for post-classification. We only keep the samples whose likelihood of a
certain class is at least 80%. A randomly selected subset of samples is displayed in Figure 11.
For each sample of the video mentioned above, we ask evaluators to give scores between 1 and 5 ( 5
indicates the best while 1 indicates the worst) from three aspects including frame texture, motion
realism, and semantic relevance. Then the evaluators are required to give a general score of quality
for each sample between 1 and 10, where a higher score indicates better quality. After video samples
from each caption are evaluated, the evaluators are asked to select the best one from them. We show
snapshots of the evaluation website in Figure 12.
Throughout the process of human evaluation, we invited nearly 100 anonymous evaluators, while 90
of them completed the whole evaluation and were counted in the final results. None of the questions
in the evaluation have any time limit. We offer each evaluator 75 RMB as a reward for the evaluation.
Results of the human evaluation, including the average score and standard deviation for each group,
have already been introduced in Figure 4 in the main body. As ground truth samples take an absolute
predominance in the best selection question, we have removed the part of ground truth samples in the
selection pie plot for clearer model comparison.


D             G ENERATED V IDEO S AMPLES

Thanks to the recursive interpolation model in Stage 2, CogVideo is able to generate relatively
high-frame-rate videos, as shown in Figure 13. We provide further examples generated by CogVideo
in Figure 14. The generated videos in mp4 format can be found in supplementary material, with the
filename "CogVideo_samples.mp4". The length and the frame rate of provided videos are 4 seconds
and 8 fps, respectively.


                                                                   16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                           Skiing  ჶᵪ                                 Biking, Ḹᛔᤈ᫣


 CogVideo


 CogVideo
 (1 Stage)


VideoGPT


 TGANv2


Groundtruth


Figure 11: A subset of human evaluation samples. The captions are randomly selected from UCF-101.
The original samples are clips of 16 frames, which are downsampled to 4 frames uniformly for display
purposes.


                         Figure 12: Snapshots of the evaluation website.


                                                17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 13: A 4-second video sample generated by CogVideo, which is firstly sequentially generated
at 1 fps and then recursively interpolated for 3 iterations.


E    S UPPLEMENTAL H UMAN E VALUATION A ND Q UALITATIVE C OMPARISON
In order to demonstrate CogVideo’s performance more thoroughly, we additionally conduct human
evaluation to compare it with Video Diffusion Model (VDM)(Ho et al., 2022) and NUWA(Wu et al.,
2021b). Considering both of them didn’t release codes or checkpoints (which is the reason for not
including them in our original human evaluation), we evaluate on the 28 text prompts shown on the
webpage of VDM and 6 prompts on the webpage of NUWA. We invite 21 anonymous evaluators to
rate on 3 aspects with score 1-5 (5 indicates the best): overall quality, frame texture and content, and
motion realism. The results are shown in Figure 15, indicating CogVideo gets better scores on all
three metrics.


        (a) CogVideo vs Video Diffusion Model                      (b) CogVideo vs NUWA

Figure 15: Supplemental human evaluation. (left) CogVideo vs VDM; (right) CogVideo vs NUWA.


We further provide the qualitative comparison with NUWA(Figure 16) and Video Diffusion
Model(Figure 17). From the samples we can see that, CogVideo can generate more realistic and
detailed objects, e.g. “ducks in a pond”(VDM), “running on the sea”(NUWA), “a man is folding
a piece of yellow paper”(NUWA). CogVideo can also generate videos with better motion realism
and semantic alignment. For example, 1) in “pouring coffee into coffee cup”(VDM), the liquid level
keeps raising in CogVideo’s sample, while the liquid level sometimes drops in VDM’s sample. 2) in
“sunset at sea”(VDM), CogVideo shows the whole process of sunset.


                                                  18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


F    O UT OF D ISTRIBUTION S AMPLES
While our training data only consists of real videos (rather than animations) and a small amount
of abstract video (e.g. animation of abstract texture), CogVideo is capable of generating out-of-
distribution (OOD) videos.

      • Videos not existing in the real world, such as animals acting like human beings.
      • Stylized videos such as watercolor painting and Chinese traditional drawing, while our
        dataset does not include any stylized videos.

Samples are shown in Figure 18. The out-of-distribution generation capability of CogVideo is
two-folds:

      • Frame-level: generate reasonable images not exisiting in the dataset. CogVideo losslessly
        inherits the OOD frame-level generation capability from CogView2 since it preserves all
        CogView2’ parameters, showing the superiority of dual channel attention.
      • Video-level: given OOD frames, CogVideo is able to generate reasonable actions. For
        example, when giving an image of a cat with red hat playing the guitar, CogVideo can
        transfer the human hands to cat’s paws, and make it pluck the guitar strings.

We have to admit that, though, the success rate of extreme out-of-distribution generation is not very
high, due to several reasons: 1) Generalization is too hard for extreme out-of-distribution cases,
e.g. birds playing guitar. It’s difficult to relate birds’ wings to human arms. 2) The generalization
capability is bounded by the image generation model, and sometimes even the first frame is in poor
quality.

G    L IMITATIONS
Although CogVideo demonstrates state-of-the-art performance in text-to-video generation, it still
has certain limitations and sometimes produces failure cases. The major limitations are summarized
below. We further attach each of them with possible solutions. It is worth noting that, because
CogVideo is based on autoregressive stochastic sampling, these text prompts can mostly yield good
cases with multiple times of sampling.

      1. The quality heavily relies on the first frame, thus CogVideo inherits limitations from
         autoregressive text-to-image generative model, including:
          A) Unreasonable shape, which may exist throughout the video.
          B) Text-content mismatching, especially when the text is complex. E.g. missing compo-
             nent, component mismatch, incorrect attributes binding.
          C) If there are flaws in the first frame, sometimes CogVideo is not robust enough to
             self-recover, or even amplifies the flaws.
         Increasing data and training for both the based image model (CogView2) and CogVideo may
         alleviate these problems. Leveraging pretrained text model can boost text understanding.
      2. Slight temporal inconsistency (unnatural changes). Possible solutions include joint modeling
         multiple frames in super-resolution and increasing training time.
      3. Slight blurry induced by VQ-VAE’s lossy compression. Our 480 × 480 pixel results are
         decoded from 60 × 60 tokens with VQ-VAE, thus may contain slight blur. One possible
         solution is to further train a super-resolution or deblur model on the pixel level.


                                                 19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 14: Further samples generated by CogVideo. The actual text inputs are in Chinese. Each
sample is a 4-second clip of 32 frames, and here we sample 9 frames uniformly for display purposes.


                                                20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 16: Qualitative comparison with NUWA(Wu et al., 2021b). Samples of NUWA are obtained
from the paper’s appendix. Samples of CogVideo generated by Stage 1 model, with frame rate of 1
fps.


                                               21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 17: Qualitative comparison with Video Diffusion Model(Ho et al., 2022). Samples of
Video Diffusion Model are obtained from their official website https://video-diffusion.
github.io. Samples of CogVideo generated by Stage 1 model, with frame rate of 1 fps.



                                               22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                Figure 18: Out of distribution samples generated by CogVideo.


                                               23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                    Figure 19: Some failure cases generated by CogVideo.


                                               24
