Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


N O - REGRET L EARNING IN R EPEATED F IRST-P RICE
AUCTIONS WITH B UDGET C ONSTRAINTS
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                              A BSTRACT
         Recently the online advertising market has exhibited a gradual shift from second-
         price auctions to first-price auctions. Although there has been a line of works
         concerning online bidding strategies in first-price auctions, it still remains open
         how to handle budget constraints in the problem. In the present paper, we initiate
         the study for a buyer with a budget to learn her online bidding strategies in repeated
         first-price auctions. We propose an RL-based bidding algorithm against the optimal
         non-anticipating
             √              strategy under stationary competition. Our algorithm obtains
         O(
          e T )-regret if the bids are all revealed at the end of each round, where O(·) e is a
         variant of the big-O that hides logarithmic factors. With the restriction that the buyer
                                                                                              7
         only sees the winning bid after each round, our modified algorithm obtains O(T  e 12   )-
         regret by techniques developed from survival analysis. Our analysis extends to
         the more general scenario where the buyer can have any bounded instantaneous
         utility function with regrets of the same order. Simulation experiments show that
         the constant factor inside the regret bound is rather small.


1    I NTRODUCTION
There has been extensive growth in the online advertising market in recent years. It was estimated that
the volume of online advertising worldwide would reach 500 billion dollars in 2022 (Statista, 2021).
In such a market, advertising platforms use auctions to allocate ad opportunities. Typically, each
advertiser has a limited amount of capital for an advertisement campaign. Therefore, consecutive
rounds of competition are interconnected by budgets of participating advertisers. Furthermore, each
advertiser has very limited knowledge of 1) her valuation of certain keywords and 2) the competitors
she is facing. There are many works being devoted to studying algorithms for learning strategies for
optimally spending the budget in repeated second-price auctions (see Section 1.1).
In practice, on the other hand, we have witnessed numerous switches from second-price auctions
to first-price auctions in the online advertising market. A recent remarkable example is Google
AdSenses’ integrated move at the end of 2021 (LLC, 2021). Earlier examples also include AppNexus,
Index Exchange, and OpenX (Sluis, 2017). This industry-wide shift is due to various factors including
a fairer transactional process and increased transparency. Therefore, the shift to first-price auctions
brings about major importance to the following open question which is barely considered in previous
works:

    How should budget-constrained advertisers learn to compete in repeated first-price auctions?

This paper thus initiates the study of learning to bid with budget constraints in repeated first-price
auctions. It has been noted that the application of first-price auctions with budgets is not limited
to online advertising mentioned above. Traditional competitive environments like mussel trade in
Netherlands (van Schaik et al., 2001), modern price competition, and procurement auctions (e.g. U.S.
Treasury Securities auction (Chari and Weber, 1992)) are examples as well.

Challenges and contributions The challenges in this setting are two-fold.
The first challenge relates to the specific information structure of first-price auctions. In practice, it is
often the case that only the highest bid is revealed to all participants (Esponda, 2008). This is known
as censored-feedback or an informational version of winner’s curse in literature (Capen et al., 1971).


                                                     1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


This affects the information structure of learning since the buyer learns less information when she
wins. This makes the problem challenging compared to standard contextual bandits (c.f. Section 1.1).
The second challenge is more fundamental. It is known that the strategy in first-price auctions is
notoriously complex to analyze, even in the static case (Lebrun, 1996). To get an intuitive feeling
of this difficulty in our problem compared to repeated second-price auctions. Let us consider the
offline case where the opponents’ bids are all known. Given the budget, the problem for second-price
auctions can be reduced to a pure knapsack problem, where the budget is regarded as weight capacity
and prices as weights. This structure enables mature techniques including duality theory to be applied
to study the benchmark strategy. Pitifully in first-price auctions, since the payment depends on the
buyer’s own bid, the previous approach/benchmark is not directly usable. We provide a concrete
example to further illustrate such difficulties.
Example 1.1. Consider a case where the buyer’s value v follows a uniform distribution on [0.4, 1]
and the highest bid m of her opponents’ follows a uniform distribution on [0, 0.5]. The time horizon
is T and the buyer’s budget B = 0.5T . The first-best benchmark (an anticipating1 strategy that
knows her values and her opponents’ bids) can be viewed as a knapsack problem, which is
       "          T
                                         #               T
                X                                       X
   E      max       (vt − bt )1{bt ≥mt }   subject to       1{bt ≥mt } bt ≤ B ∀(vt )Tt=1 ; (mt )Tt=1 ,
v∼F T     b1 ,...,bT
                       t=1                                       t=1
m∼GT

where vt is her value and mt is her opponents’ highest bid at time t. The buyer wants to determine
each bt to maximize the revenue. In hindsight, we need to pay as close to mt as possible. Using
the theory of knapsack, the utility is T · E[1{v≥m} (v − m)]+ = 0.45T . On the contrary, the
optimal non-anticipating bidding strategy in a first-price auction is to bid v2 and the utility is
T · E[1{ v2 ≥m} v2 ] = 0.26T . There is already an Ω(T ) separation between the first-best benchmark
and the ideal case with full information.

This example shows that simple characterization of the optimum in Balseiro and Gur (2019) is not
applicable to our problem. Furthermore, it remains unclear what methodology can be applied in
first-price auctions with budgets. The state-of-the-art adaptive pacing strategy downgrades to truthful
bidding as the budget increases, so in first-price auctions, it may result in near-zero reward and thus
cannot have any theoretical guarantee (see (Balseiro and Gur, 2019, §2.4) for further discussions).
The present paper takes the first step to combat the challenges mentioned above with a dynamic
programming approach. Correspondingly, our contribution is also two-fold:

        • We provide an RL-based√ learning algorithm. Through the characterization of the optimal
          strategy, we obtain O( T )-regret guarantee for the algorithm in the full-feedback case2 .
                              e
        • In the censored-feedback setting, by techniques developed from survival analysis, we modify
                                                     7
          our algorithm and obtain a regret of O(T
                                                e 12   ).

1.1    R ELATED W ORK

Repeated second-price auctions with budgets There is a flourishing source of literature on
bidding strategies in repeated auctions with budgets. Through the lens of online learning, Balseiro
and Gur (2019) identify asymptotically optimal online bidding strategies known as pacing (a.k.a.
bid-shading in literature) in repeated second-price auctions with budgets. Inspired by the pacing
strategy, Flajolet and Jaillet (2017) develop no-regret non-anticipating algorithms for learning with
contextual information in repeated second-price auctions. Another line of works that uses similar
techniques in the present paper includes Amin et al. (2012); Tran-Thanh et al. (2014); Gummadi
et al. (2012). Gummadi et al. (2012) and Amin et al. (2012) study bidding strategies in repeated
second-price auctions with budget constraints, but the former does not involve any learning and
the latter does not provide any regret analysis (their estimator is biased). Tran-Thanh et al. (2014)
derive regret bounds for the same scenario but the optimization objective is the number of items won
instead of value or surplus. Baltaoglu et al. (2017) also use dynamic programming to tackle repeated
   1
    An algorithm is anticipating if bid selection depends on future observations, see Flajolet and Jaillet (2017).
   2
    This is especially practical in public-sector auctions (Chari and Weber, 1992) as regulations mandate all
bids to be revealed.


                                                        2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


second-price auctions with budgets. However, they assume per-round budget constraints and their
dynamic programming algorithm is for allocating bids among multiple items. Again, we emphasize
that no prior work has been done in repeated first-price auctions with budgets since the structure of
the problem (compared to second-price variants) is fundamentally different (recall Example 1.1).

Repeated first-price auctions without budgets Two notable works concerning repeated first-price
auctions are Han et al. (2020b) and Han et al. (2020a). Han√et al. (2020b) introduce a new problem
called monotone group contextual bandits and obtain an O( T ln2 T )-regret algorithm for repeated
first-price auctions without budget constraints under stationary settings. This bound is improved to
      1
O(T 3 +ϵ ) by Achddou et al. (2021) with additional assumptions on distributions. Han et al. (2020a)
concentrate
    √        on an adversarial setting and develop a mini-max optimal online bidding algorithm with
O( T ln T ) regret against all Lipschitz bidding strategies. Badanidiyuru et al. (2021) consider the
problem in a contextual setting. A crucial difference is that in the present paper, budgets are involved
thus the algorithms from previous works are not directly suitable for our needs.

Bandit with knapsack From the bandit side, Badanidiyuru et al. (2013) develop bandit algorithms
under resource constraints. They show that their algorithm can be used in dynamic procurement,
dynamic posted pricing with limited supply, etc. However, since the bidder observes her value
before bidding in our problem, results by Badanidiyuru et al. (2013) cannot be directly applied
to our setting. Our setting also relates to contextual bandit problems with resource constraints
(Badanidiyuru et al., 2014; Agrawal and Devanur, 2016; Agrawal et al., 2016). Nevertheless,
applying this contextual bandit approach requires discretizing the action space, which needs Lipschitz
continuity of distributions. Our approach does not rely on any continuity assumption. Further, the
                                   e 32 )) is worse than ours. It also does not fit into our information
performance guarantee (typically O(T
structure when the feedback is censored.

2    P RELIMINARIES
Auction mechanism We consider a repeated first-price auction with budgets. Specifically, we
suppose that the buyer has a limited budget B to spend in a time horizon of T ≤ +∞ (can be unknown
to her) rounds. At the beginning of each round t = 1, 2, . . . , T , the bidder privately observes a value
vt for a fresh copy of item and bids bt according to her past observations ht and value vt . Denote the
strategy she employs as π : (vt , Bt , ht ) → bt , which maps her current budget Bt , value vt and past
history ht to a bid. Let mt be the maximum bid of the other bidders. Since the auction is a first price
auction, if bt is larger than mt , then the buyer wins the auction, is charged bt , and obtains a utility of
vt − bt ; otherwise, she loses and the utility is 0. Therefore, the instantaneous utility of the buyer is
                                        rt = (vt − bt )1{bt ≥mt } .

The exact information structure of history the buyer observes is dictated by how the mechanism
reveals mt . In full generality, we assume that the feedback is censored, i.e. only the highest bid is
revealed at the end of each round and the winner does not observe mt exactly. This is considered
to be an informational version of winner’s curse (Capen et al., 1971) and is of practical interest
(Esponda, 2008). For the purpose of modeling, we suppose that ties are broken in favor of the buyer
but this choice is arbitrary and by no means a limitation of our approach.
Next, we state the assumptions on mt and vt . Without loss of generality, we assume that bt , mt , vt
are normalized to be in [0, 1]. In the present paper, we consider a stochastic setting where mt and vt
are drawn from some distributions F, G unknown to the buyer, respectively, and independent from
the past. We will also refer to the cumulative distribution functions of F, G with the same notations.
No further assumptions will be made on F, G. Now, the expected instantaneous utility of the buyer at
time t with strategy π is
                               Rπ (vt , bt ) =    E [rt ] = (vt − bt )F (bt ).
                                                 mt ∼F

To argue for the reasonability of this assumption, note that although other buyers may also involve
learning behavior, it is typical that in a real advertising market, there are a large number of buyers
(Kahng et al., 2004). The specific buyer only faces a different small portion of them and is completely
oblivious of whom she is facing in each round. Therefore, the buyer’s sole objective is to maximize


                                                         3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


her utility (instead of fooling other buyers) and by the law of large numbers, the price mt and value
vt the buyer observes are independent and identically distributed at least for a period of time3 .

Buyer’s target and regret The buyer aims at maximizing her long-term accumulated utility subject
to budget constraints. Recall that the instantaneous utility of the buyer is rt = (vt − bt )1{bt ≥mt } .
The payment is ct = bt 1{bt ≥mt } and the budget will then decrease accordingly as the payment incurs.
She can continue to bid as long as the budget has not run out but must stop at
                                 (             (            t
                                                                      )     )
                                                          X
                       ∗
                      τ = min T + 1, min t ∈ N :              cτ = B + 1 .
                                                                    τ =1

The buyer’s problem now becomes determining how much to bid in each round to maximize her
accumulated utility. In line with works Gummadi et al. (2012); Golrezaei et al. (2019); Deng and
Zhang (2021), the buyer adopts a discount factor λ ∈ (0, 1). She takes discounts since she does
not know T or τ ∗ — Discount factors can be interpreted to be the estimate of the probability that
the repeated auction will last for at least t rounds (Devanur et al., 2014; Drutsa, 2018). It means
that the process will terminate at each round with probability 1 − λ (Uehara et al., 2021). On the
economic side, in important real-world markets like online advertising platforms, buyers are impatient
for opportunities since companies of different sizes have different capabilities. Discount factors
model how impatient4 the buyer is in (Drutsa, 2017; Vanunts and Drutsa, 2019). Now the buyer’s
optimization problem is to determine a non-anticipating strategy π for the following:
                      " T         #                  T
                       X                            X
                             t−1
       max       E         λ rt        subject to       1{bt ≥mt } bt ≤ B ∀(vt )Tt=1 ; (mt )Tt=1 ,
         π      v∼F T
                          t=1                                 t=1
                m∼GT

where bt = π(vt , Bt , ht ). Here, v := (v1 , . . . , vT ) denotes the sequence of private values the buyer
observes, and m := (m1 , . . . , mT ) is the sequence of the highest bids of the other bidders. V π (B, t)
denotes the expected accumulated utility using strategy π with budget B and starting from time t.
Let π ∗ denote the optimal bidding strategy with the knowledge of the underlying distributions F
                                                                     ∗
and G. The corresponding expected accumulated utility is V π (B, t). (We sometimes use V (·, ·) to
             ∗
represent V π (·, ·) for convenience in the rest of the paper.)
We now come to define the regret. First, write the per-episode revenue suboptimality for each round t
as                                                ∗
                             SubOptt (πt ) = V π (Bt , t) − V πt (Bt , t),
where πt is the strategy used in round t. Our evaluation metric is then the sum of suboptimality for
t = 1, . . . , T , namely                        " T               #
                                                   X
                                Regret(T ) = E        SubOptt (πt ) ,                             (1)
                                                         t=1
where the expectation is taken over the trajectories of the achievement of v and the realization of
others’ bids inexplicitly.
The definition of regret comes from traditional reinforcement learning (RL) literature of infinite-
horizon discounted model (Kaelbling et al., 1996). The definition is also inspired by the recent
advances in Yang et al. (2021); He et al. (2021); Liu and Su (2020); Zhou et al. (2021). Zhou et al.
(2021) call it cumulative error. It reflects the suboptimality for πt to learn the optimal valuation of
attending the auction.
In the most common scenario, such as Balseiro and Gur (2019), the budget constraint is linear to time
horizon T , i.e. B
                 T ∼ Θ(1). Therefore, a bidder has an expectation that she will win for O(T ) rounds.
   3
      This assumption has support from experimental evidence (Pin and Key, 2011). It can also be theoretically
justified using mean field asymptotics. Please also see Han et al. (2020b) for another justification.
    4
      As an additional explanation, in budget-constrained first-price auctions, the bidder always bids below or
equal to her value. So she is very sensitive to the market price. However, by not winning the auction at a certain
price, the bidder creates a future opportunity to win an equivalent auction at a lower price. The use of a bid
discount factor adds flexibility to tune this behavior. As the bidder has a preference for present utility over future
utility, the discount factor moderates the extent of underbidding that she finds to be optimal, which makes the
model more general.


                                                          4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


With a sub-optimal policy, it is easy to suffer O(T ) regret which is intolerable for bidders. It leads to
the challenge to achieve a sublinear regret in first-price auctions and we design algorithms to answer
the question.

3         B IDDING A LGORITHM AND A NALYSIS
In this section, we present our bidding algorithm and the high-level ideas in the analysis of regret.
We first consider the case where the feedback is not censored, i.e. the buyer is aware of mt no matter
whether she wins or not. Then we extend our algorithm to the case where the feedback is censored
with techniques developed from survival analysis.

3.1       F ULL F EEDBACK

When F and G are known, the buyer’s problem can be viewed as offline. The technical challenge lies
in the observation that even when the distributions are known, the buyer’s problem cannot be directly
analyzed as a knapsack problem. To tackle this challenge, we use a dynamic programming approach
to solve the problem. In particular, the optimal strategy π ∗ satisfies the following Bellman equation:
          b∗ (Bτ , v) ∈ arg max[(v − b) + λV (Bτ − b, τ + 1)]F (b) + λV (Bτ , τ + 1)(1 − F (b)),
                            b
          V (Bτ , τ ) = E[(v − b∗ ) + λV (Bτ − b∗ , τ + 1)]F (b∗ ) + λV (Bτ , τ + 1)(1 − F (b∗ )),
                        v

for all τ ∈ N and 0 ≤ Bτ ≤ B. Note that for any Bτ < 0, V (Bτ , τ ) = −∞. By choosing
appropriate initialization conditions, we can solve the equation recursively and obtain the optimal
bidding strategy together with the function V (·, ·). The above recursion also characterizes the optimal
solution, which will be used in the analysis later.
When the buyer does not have the information of F and G, she can learn the distributions from past
observations. Therefore, it is natural to maintain estimations F̂ and Ĝ of the true distributions. Our
algorithm for the full-feedback case is now depicted in Algorithm 1. To ease technical loads, we first
assume the knowledge of G and only estimate F in Algorithm 1. Later, we will add the estimation of
G and its analysis is presented in Theorem 3.2.

Algorithm 1 Algorithm for the full-feedback case
 1: Input: Initial budget B and constant C1                      ▷ C1 is an arbitrary positive constant
 2: Initialize the estimation F̂ of F to a uniform distribution over [0, 1] and B1 ← B
 3: for t = 1, 2, . . . do
 4:     Observe the value vt in round t
 5:     Let t0 be the smallest integer that satisfies λt0 −t 1−λ
                                                              1
                                                                 <C
                                                                  √1
                                                                     t
 6:     Set VF̂ (Bt0 , t0 ) = 0 for any Bt0                       ▷ VF̂ is algorithm’s estimation of V
 7:     for τ = t0 , t0 − 1, . . . , t do
 8:          Qv,F̂ (Bτ , τ, b) ← [(v − b) + λVF̂ (Bτ − b, τ + 1)]F̂ (b) + λVF̂ (Bτ , τ + 1)(1 − F̂ (b))
 9:             Solve the optimization problem b̂∗τ ← arg maxb Qv,F̂ (Bτ , τ, b)
10:             VF̂ (Bτ , τ ) ← Ev∼G [Qv,F̂ (Bτ , τ, b̂∗τ )]
11:         end for
12:         Place a bid b̂t ← arg maxb Qv,F̂ (Bt , t, b)
                                                                                                 Pt
13:    Observe mt , ct and rt from this round of auction and update F̂ (x) = 1t                     i=1 1{mi ≤x} .
14:    Bt+1 ← Bt − ct . If Bt+1 ≤ 0 then halt.
15: end for

Similar to prior work (Amin et al., 2012), Algorithm 1 performs exploration and exploitation
simultaneously. The buyer initializes the estimation of F to a uniform distribution (Line 2). At
round t, the buyer observes her valuation. Then, she uses her estimation of F to solve the dynamic
programming problem recursively5 to obtain an estimation of the optimal bid (Line 7~Line 11). To

                                                                    T 4.5                             1
      5
   For the non-trivial case B ≤ T , this can be solved in O        (1−λ)6
                                                                                time with only O(T − 2 ) loss (see, e.g.
Chow and Tsitsiklis, 1989).


                                                           5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


provide a base case for recursion, note that for sufficiently large t0 ≫ t, VF̂ (·, t0 )’s impact to VF̂ (·, t)
is negligible due to the discount λt0 −t . Therefore, the buyer can approximate VF̂ (·, t0 ) with zero
for t0 (Line 5). Finally, the auction proceeds with mt , rt , ct revealed and the buyer updates her
information accordingly (Line 13~Line 14).

Analysis of regret To analyze the algorithm, we first assume that Algorithm 1 knows the distribution
G exactly and establishes the regret. Then we add the contribution of the estimation of F .
Theorem
  √       3.1. Under the circumstance that F is unknown, the worst-case regret of Algorithm 1 is
O(
e T ), where the regret is computed according to Equation (1). Explicitly, if we take C1 = 1,
                                           √                          √
                                    q
                                                  1+λ           4
                    Regret(T ) ≤ 4 ln( 2T )                +            T + 1.
                                                (1 − λ)3      1−λ

To show an example of the application of the result, let us take the budget B to scale linearly with
T as in Balseiro and Gur (2019); Flajolet and Jaillet (2017). Specifically, assume that T < +∞
and√there exists a constant β such that the budget B = βT , then we establish that the regret is
e T ) in this special case. Indeed, under this condition, we can simply set t0 = T + 1 and
O(
VF̂ (BT +1 , T + 1) = 0 for any BT
                                  +1 in Algorithm 1. Therefore, C1 = 0 and the worst-case regret is
                q √
                              1+λ
                                    √
bounded by 4 ln( 2T ) (1−λ)3          T + 1.

Next, we deal with the case where G is also initially unknown. Based on Algorithm 1, we additionally
maintain an estimation Ĝ of G based on past observations of valuations. Ĝ is initialized to be a
uniform distribution and will be used to solve the dynamic programming problem (see Line 7 of
Algorithm 2). Using similar techniques as before (with more work), we obtain the following theorem.
Theorem 3.2. Under the circumstance that F, G are both unknown, it holds that the√worst-case regret
of Algorithm 1 using empirical distribution functions to estimate F and G is O(e T ). Explicitly, if
we take C1 = 1,
                                                                     √

                                      p          6(1 + λ)      4
                      Regret(T ) ≤       ln(2T )         3
                                                           +           T + 1.
                                                 (1 − λ)     1−λ

3.2      C ENSORED F EEDBACK

In this subsection, we deal with the case that the buyer can only see the winner’s bid after each round.
In other words, the feedback is left-censored. Concretely, the buyer’s observation is
                                               ot = max{bt , mt }.
When she wins, the exact value of mt is not revealed. The buyer only knows that mt is smaller
than her bid in the current round. To estimate the distribution of mt , there is a classical statistics
(KM estimator) developed by Kaplan and Meier (1958) for the estimation of F in this scenario.
However, the KM estimator assumes the sequence (mt )Tt=1 is deterministic, which does not fit our
needs. Although Suzukawa (2004)’s extension allows random censorship, it requires independence
between bt and mt , which is not realistic since we use the estimated distribution to place bids.
To tackle this problem, we first introduce an estimator proposed by Zeng (2004) denoted by F̂n to
take place of the previous empirical distribution used in Algorithm 1.

Estimation procedure We now present the procedure for estimating F under censored feedback.
It suffices to estimate the distribution function of 1 − mt which is right-censored by 1 − bt . Let
yt = min{1 − mt , 1 − bt }, rt = 1{mt ≥bt } . The observations can now be described as (yt , rt , ht )Tt=1 .
Roughly speaking, to decouple the dependency between mt , bt , we use the fact that bt and mt
are independent conditioning on ht . Intuitively, the history ht provides information for getting
enough effective samples for mt . Next, we establish models to estimate the hazard rate functions6 of
1 − mt , 1 − bt using ht . With the hazard rate functions, we use the maximum likelihood method
with a kernel to compute the final estimation F̂t and obtain Equation (3).
   6                                                                                           f (x)
       The hazard rate function of a random variable X with p.d.f. f and c.d.f. F is HX (x) = 1−F  (x)
                                                                                                       .


                                                         6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023



                                                                                          2
Details follow. We initialize with a sequence (bandwidth) (at )Tt=1 such that logta2at → 0, ta2t →
                                                                                    t
∞, ta4t → 0 as t → +∞ and a symmetric kernel function K(·, ·) ∈ C 2 (R2 ) with bounded gradient.
Now, at each time t, we compute two vectors βt , γt which maximize each of the following likelihood
functions (these can be regarded as loss functions of the estimation that we aim to optimize)
                                                                                             
           t                                                t
         X    rτ  ⊤             X       ⊤                X    1 −  rτ  ⊤
                                                                                      X     ⊤
 f (β) =           β hτ − log         eβ hτ  , g(γ) =                  γ hτ − log        eγ hτ  .
               t                                                  t
         τ =1                      yi ≥yτ                 τ =1                                yi ≥yτ
                                                                                                   (2)
We arbitrarily pad h1 , . . . , ht with zeros to make their length the same (we will show that this is
without loss of generality in a moment). Compute Zt = (βt⊤ ht , γt⊤ ht )⊤ . The survival function
of 1 − mt , or equivalently the cumulative distribution function of mt , is estimated based on Zeng
(2004)’s estimator
                                 t   t
                                                  K((Zi − Zj )/an )1{yj ≤x} rj

                             1 XY
                 F̂t (x) =               1 − Pn                                     .              (3)
                              t i=1 j=1          m=1 K((Zi − Zm )/an )1{yj ≤ym }


Now, we are ready to apply the estimator to design the algorithm for the censored-feedback case. Note
that the new estimator’s convergence rate is slower than that for the full-feedback case. Therefore,
compared to Algorithm 1, Algorithm 2 is now a multi-phase algorithm. The algorithm only updates
the estimation of F̂ at the end of each phase (see Figure 1 for an illustration). The other elements of
each phase in Algorithm 2 are similar to Algorithm 1.

Algorithm 2 Algorithm for the censored-feedback case
 1: Input: Initial budget B and constant C1                             ▷ C1 is an arbitrary positive constant
 2: Initialize the estimation F̂ of F and the estimation Ĝ of G to uniform distributions over [0, 1]
 3: B1 ← B
 4: for Phase i = 1, 2, . . . do            ▷ Phase i (i > 1) lasts for 2i rounds. Phase 1 lasts for 2 rounds
 5:     for each t in the time interval of round i do
 6:          Observe the value P     vt in round t
                                        t
 7:          Update Ĝ(x) = 1t i=1 1{vi ≤x} .
 8:          Let t0 be the smallest integer that satisfies λt0 −t 1−λ 1
                                                                          <C  √1
                                                                                t
 9:          Set VF̂ ,Ĝ (Bt0 , t0 ) = 0 for any Bt0                  ▷ VF̂ ,Ĝ is algorithm’s estimation of V
10:          for τ = t0 , t0 − 1, . . . , t do ▷ This loop can be moved to the end of each phase to reduce
    the invocation time from T to ln T
11:              QF̂ ,Ĝ (Bτ , τ, b) ← [(v − b) + λVF̂ ,Ĝ (Bτ − b, τ + 1)]F̂ (b) + λVF̂ ,Ĝ (Bτ , τ + 1)(1 −
      F̂ (b))
12:              Solve the optimization problem b̂∗τ ← arg maxb QF̂ ,Ĝ (Bτ , τ, b)
13:            VF̂ ,Ĝ (Bτ , τ ) ← Ev∼G [QF̂ ,Ĝ (Bτ , τ, b̂∗τ )]
14:        end for
15:        Place a bid b̂t ← arg maxb QF̂ ,Ĝ (Bt , t, b)
16:        Observe ot , ct and rt from this round of auction
17:        Bt+1 ← Bt − ct . If Bt+1 ≤ 0 then halt.
18:    end for
19:    Update F̂ using the estimator specified in Equation (3) with data observed before this phase
20: end for


Analysis of regret To analyze the performance of Algorithm 2, we will prove a series of lemmas
on the estimation error of Equation (3). We concentrate on the performance of the new estimator
since this is the major difference between Algorithm 1 and Algorithm 2. In particular, our proof relies
on the following convergence result.
Lemma 3.3 (Zeng). Let F̂n be the estimation of F after using n observations. We have
                  √
                    n(F̂n (1 − x) − F (1 − x)) =⇒ B(x) in ℓ∞ ([0, 1]),
where B(x) is a Gaussian process.


                                                      7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                              Estimate F using Equation (3)
                                                       Estimate F using Equation (3)
                                                                                  ···
           Phase 1                        Phase k − 1         Phase k
           Length 2                       Length 2k−2       Length 2k−1
                                       Estimate F using Equation (3)

Figure 1: Schematic representation of the phases in Algorithm 2. Algorithm 2 updates its estimates
of F at the end of each phase.


Before we proceed to apply the lemma, we verify a series of prerequisites mentioned in Zeng (2004)
to make sure it holds. First, we make sure that conditioning on ht , the random variables 1 − mt
and 1 − bt are independent. Indeed, bt is completely decided by ht and mt is independent of ht .
Second, we note that the maximizer shown in Equation (2) is essentially doing Cox’s proportional
hazards regression analysis. To establish consistency of the estimator, we show that at least one of
me t := 1 − mt and 1 − bt follows Cox’s proportional model. That is to say, there exists β and a
                                                     e t or 1 − bt conditioning on ht exactly follows
function f (y) such that the hazard rate function of m
                                                           ⊤
                                      H(y | ht ) = f (y)eβ ht .                                    (4)
                                                                    F ′ (1−y)
Equation (4) holds for m
                       e t . In fact, taking β = 0 and f (y) =     1−F (1−y) suffices. Since we take
β = 0, consistency establishes regardless of the way we pad ht .
Next, consider some phase at time 2n ≤ t ≤ 2n+1 − 1. The estimation F̂n is computed using the
first 2n observed data points. Applying similar techniques for the rate of convergence of empirical
process (Norvaiša and Paulauskas, 1991), we obtain the following lemma on the performance of F̂ in
Algorithm 2.
Lemma 3.4. Under the update process in Algorithm 2, for any 2n ≤ t ≤ 2n+1 − 1, we have the
following bounds for the estimation F̂n :
          √                                                                                      1
|Pr(sup | 2n (F̂n (1 − b) − F (1 − b))| ≥ r) − Pr(sup |B(1 − b)| ≥ r)| ≤ M (1+r)−3 ln2 (t)·t− 6 ,
      b                                               b
where M is a constant depending only on F and Algorithm 2.

Finally, we now bound the difference between F̂n and F with the help of Lemma 3.4.
Lemma 3.5. Recall that we use the first 2n data points to estimate F̂ . Under the update procedure
                                                                             5
of Algorithm 2, for any 2n ≤ t ≤ 2n+1 − 1, with probability at least 1 − T − 12 /(2 ln T )
                                              √                  1   5   5
                        sup |F̂ (x) − F (x)| ≤ 2C5 (4M ln3 T ) 3 t− 9 T 36 ,
                          x
where C5 is an absolute constant.

With Lemma 3.5 in hand, we now have
Theorem 3.6. Under the circumstance that F, G are both unknown and the feedback is censored, the
                                         7
worst-case regret of Algorithm 2 is O(T
                                    e 12   ). Explicitly, if we take C1 = 1,
                 √                                 !                                           !
                                                                                                 √
                                                               r
               9 2(1 + λ)              3     1         7          1        17   2(1 + λ)    4
Regret(T ) ≤                 C5 (4M  ln  T ) 3 + 1   T 12 +         ln (4T 12 )          +         T.
                 2(1 − λ)3                                        2             (1 − λ)3   1−λ
Remark 3.7. The setting in Han et al. (2020b) is a special case of ours, where there are no budget
                                              1
constraints and λ = 0 (thus removing the 1−λ     factor in our results). The buyer’s aim is to maximize
(v − b)F (b) each round. This is equivalent to VF̂ = 0 in our setting with no need to estimate G,
                   √                                                7
yielding regret O(
                 e T ) in the full-feedback case and regret O(Te 12   ) in the censored-feedback case.
Remark 3.8. The regret-bound looks unusual at a first glance. The reason is that the convergence
rate of the estimator is lower than that in the commonly used “Hoeffding-type” or “Bernstein-type”
inequalities. However, due to the information structure, they are not suitable to be used in our
environment to our best knowledge.


                                                  8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


4       L OWER B OUND

Here, we discuss the lower bound for the regret under such settings. This will shed light on the
optimality gap of the proposed policies.

Full Feedback We have proposed a general solution framework that works for any β where the
budget constraint is B = βT and any discount rate λ ∈ [0, 1). Note that the general lower bound
is no less than the lower bound for a specific case. Consider the case when β = 1 and λ = 0. Our
problem reduces to the case where the buyer essentially does not face budget constraints and is
extremely myopic. Under this circumstance,
                                       √ the problem is a multi-armed bandit problem. Auer et al.
(2002) shows that it suffers from a Θ( T )-regret lower bound. This means that our algorithm is
optimal up to logarithmic terms.
                                 √
Censored Feedback The O(      e T ) lower bound also applies here. However, the upper bound and
the lower bound have not matched yet. We leave this as an intriguing open problem as there is a lack
of relevant literature to show regret lower bounds under the censored-feedback case. However, we
want to provide some evidence that our upper bound is sufficiently good. For example, parallel to
our work, Gaitonde et al. (2022) extend the pacing techniques to a class of auction forms including
                                       e 34 )-regret bounds against the best linear policy under the
first-price auctions. They obtain an O(T
value-maximization objective. Under a censored-feedback information structure with contextual
                                                        d−1/3
valuations, Cesa-Bianchi et al. (2017) show an O(T   e d+2/3 )-regret upper bound without budget
constraints where d is the dimension of the context. And a similar information and payment structure
                                  e 54 ) regret bound (Castiglioni et al., 2020).
in Bayesian persuation yield an O(T


5       D ISCUSSION AND C ONCLUSION

In this paper, we develop a learning algorithm to adaptively bid in repeated first-price   √ auctions
with budgets. On the theoretical side, our algorithm, together with its analysis of O(  e T )-regret
                                       7
in the full-feedback case and O(Te 12    )-regret in the censored-feedback case, takes the first step in
understanding the problem. On the practical side, our algorithm is simple and readily applicable to
the digital world that has shifted to first-price auctions7 .
Questions raise themselves for future explorations. We observe here that in the limiting case λ → 1,
the optimal bidding strategy in Algorithm 2 is similar to a pacing strategy, which relates to the
open question8 raised in Balseiro and Gur (2019). In the limiting case of λ → 1, the optimal bid
                                vt
of Algorithm 2 is of the form 1+x  t
                                     , where xt is a pacing multiplier that depends only on Bt and F
and can be computed without solving the dynamic programming problem. This observation can be
viewed as a corollary of (Theorem 3.1 Gummadi et al., 2012). This connection between Algorithm 2
and pacing suggests further investigations. Other immediate open questions include closing the gap
between upper and lower bounds for the censored feedback case.


R EFERENCES
Juliette Achddou, Olivier Cappé, and Aurélien Garivier. Fast rate learning in stochastic first price
  bidding. In Asian Conference on Machine Learning, pages 1754–1769. PMLR, 2021.

Shipra Agrawal and Nikhil Devanur. Linear contextual bandits with knapsacks. Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 29, 2016.

Shipra Agrawal, Nikhil R. Devanur, and Lihong Li. An efficient algorithm for contextual bandits
  with knapsacks, and an extension to concave objectives. In Conference on Learning Theory, pages
  4–18. PMLR, 2016.
    7
    For simulation experiments, please refer to Appendix D.
    8
    “A question of theoretical and practical interest is how to extend the adaptive pacing approach that is
suggested in this paper to nontruthful mechanisms such as first-price auctions.”


                                                    9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Kareem Amin, Michael Kearns, Peter Key, and Anton Schwaighofer. Budget optimization for
  sponsored search: Censored learning in MDPs. arXiv preprint arXiv:1210.4847, 2012.
Peter Auer, Nicolo Cesa-Bianchi, Yoav Freund, and Robert E Schapire. The nonstochastic multiarmed
  bandit problem. SIAM journal on computing, 32(1):48–77, 2002.
Ashwinkumar Badanidiyuru, Robert Kleinberg, and Aleksandrs Slivkins. Bandits with knapsacks. In
  2013 IEEE 54th Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science, pages 207–216. IEEE,
  2013.
Ashwinkumar Badanidiyuru, John Langford, and Aleksandrs Slivkins. Resourceful contextual bandits.
  In Conference on Learning Theory, pages 1109–1134. PMLR, 2014.
Ashwinkumar Badanidiyuru, Zhe Feng, and Guru Guruganesh. Learning to bid in contextual first
  price auctions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2109.03173, 2021.
Santiago R. Balseiro and Yonatan Gur. Learning in repeated auctions with budgets: Regret minimiza-
  tion and equilibrium. Management Science, 65(9):3952–3968, 2019.
M. Sevi Baltaoglu, Lang Tong, and Qing Zhao. Online learning of optimal bidding strategy in
 repeated multi-commodity auctions. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 30,
 2017.
Edward C. Capen, Robert V. Clapp, and William M. Campbell. Competitive bidding in high-risk
  situations. Journal of Petroleum Technology, 23(06):641–653, 1971.
Matteo Castiglioni, Andrea Celli, Alberto Marchesi, and Nicola Gatti. Online bayesian persuasion.
 Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:16188–16198, 2020.
Nicolò Cesa-Bianchi, Pierre Gaillard, Claudio Gentile, and Sébastien Gerchinovitz. Algorithmic
  chaining and the role of partial feedback in online nonparametric learning. In Conference on
  Learning Theory, pages 465–481. PMLR, 2017.
V. Chari and Robert Weber. How the us treasury should auction its debt. Quarterly Review, 16(4),
  1992.
Chef-Seng Chow and John N Tsitsiklis. The complexity of dynamic programming. Journal of
  complexity, 5(4):466–488, 1989.
Yuan Deng and Hanrui Zhang. Prior-independent dynamic auctions for a value-maximizing buyer.
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34, 2021.
Nikhil R Devanur, Yuval Peres, and Balasubramanian Sivan. Perfect bayesian equilibria in repeated
  sales. In Proceedings of the twenty-sixth annual ACM-SIAM symposium on Discrete algorithms,
  pages 983–1002. SIAM, 2014.
Alexey Drutsa. Horizon-independent optimal pricing in repeated auctions with truthful and strategic
  buyers. In Proceedings of the 26th International Conference on World Wide Web, pages 33–42,
  2017.
Alexey Drutsa. Weakly consistent optimal pricing algorithms in repeated posted-price auctions with
  strategic buyer. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pages 1319–1328. PMLR,
  2018.
Ignacio Esponda. Information feedback in first price auctions. The RAND Journal of Economics, 39
  (2):491–508, 2008.
Arthur Flajolet and Patrick Jaillet. Real-time bidding with side information. In I. Guyon, U. Von
  Luxburg, S. Bengio, H. Wallach, R. Fergus, S. Vishwanathan, and R. Garnett, editors, Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 30, 2017.
Jason Gaitonde, Yingkai Li, Bar Light, Brendan Lucier, and Aleksandrs Slivkins. Budget Pac-
  ing in Repeated Auctions: Regret and Efficiency without Convergence. arXiv e-prints, art.
  arXiv:2205.08674, May 2022.


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Negin Golrezaei, Adel Javanmard, and Vahab Mirrokni. Dynamic incentive-aware learning: Robust
  pricing in contextual auctions. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 32, 2019.
Ramakrishna Gummadi, Peter Key, and Alexandre Proutiere. Repeated auctions under budget
  constraints: Optimal bidding strategies and equilibria. In the Eighth Ad Auction Workshop,
  volume 4, 2012.
Yanjun Han, Zhengyuan Zhou, Aaron Flores, Erik Ordentlich, and Tsachy Weissman. Learning to
  bid optimally and efficiently in adversarial first-price auctions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2007.04568,
  2020a.
Yanjun Han, Zhengyuan Zhou, and Tsachy Weissman. Optimal no-regret learning in repeated
  first-price auctions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.09795, 2020b.
Jiafan He, Dongruo Zhou, and Quanquan Gu. Nearly minimax optimal reinforcement learning for
   discounted MDPs. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:22288–22300, 2021.
Leslie Pack Kaelbling, Michael L Littman, and Andrew W Moore. Reinforcement learning: A survey.
  Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research, 4:237–285, 1996.
B Kahng, I Yang, H Jeong, and A-L Barabási. Emergence of power-law behaviors in online auctions.
  In The Application of Econophysics, pages 204–209. Springer, 2004.
Edward L. Kaplan and Paul Meier. Nonparametric estimation from incomplete observations. Journal
  of the American Statistical Association, 53(282):457–481, 1958.
Bernard Lebrun. Existence of an equilibrium in first price auctions. Economic Theory, 7(3):421–443,
  1996.
Shuang Liu and Hao Su. Regret bounds for discounted MDPs. arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.05138,
  2020.
Google LLC. Faqs about adsense moving to a first-price auction - google adsense help. https:
 //support.google.com/adsense/answer/10858748?hl=en, 2021. Accessed:
  2022-05-06.
R. Norvaiša and V. Paulauskas. Rate of convergence in the central limit theorem for empirical
  processes. Journal of Theoretical Probability, 4(3):511–534, 1991.
Furcy Pin and Peter Key. Stochastic variability in sponsored search auctions: observations and
  models. In Proceedings of the 12th ACM conference on Electronic commerce, pages 61–70, 2011.
Sarah Sluis. Big changes coming to auctions, as exchanges roll the dice on first-price. https:
  //www.adexchanger.com/platforms/big-changes-coming-auctions-exc
  hanges-roll-dice-first-price/, 2017.
Statista. Digital advertising spending worldwide from 2019 to 2024 (in billion u.s. dollars). https:
  //www.statista.com/statistics/237974/online-advertising-spendin
  g-worldwide/, 2021. Accessed: 2022-05-05.
Akio Suzukawa. Unbiased estimation of functionals under random censorship. Journal of the Japan
  Statistical Society, 34(2):153–172, 2004.
Long Tran-Thanh, Lampros Stavrogiannis, Victor Naroditskiy, Valentin Robu, Nicholas R Jennings,
  and Peter Key. Efficient regret bounds for online bid optimisation in budget-limited sponsored
  search auctions. In 30th Conference on Uncertainty in AI, 2014.
Masatoshi Uehara, Xuezhou Zhang, and Wen Sun. Representation learning for online and offline rl
 in low-rank mdps. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.04652, 2021.
Frans D. J. van Schaik, Jack P. C. Kleijnen, et al. Sealed-bid auctions: case study. Center for
  Economic Research, 2001.
Arsenii Vanunts and Alexey Drutsa. Optimal pricing in repeated posted-price auctions with different
  patience of the seller and the buyer. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 32, 2019.


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Kunhe Yang, Lin Yang, and Simon Du. Q-learning with logarithmic regret. In International
 Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pages 1576–1584. PMLR, 2021.
Donglin Zeng. Estimating marginal survival function by adjusting for dependent censoring using
  many covariates. The Annals of Statistics, 32(4):1533–1555, 2004.
Dongruo Zhou, Jiafan He, and Quanquan Gu. Provably efficient reinforcement learning for discounted
  MDPs with feature mapping. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pages 12793–
 12802. PMLR, 2021.


                                               12
