Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


C AUSALLY C ONSTRAINED DATA S YNTHESIS F OR P RI -
VATE DATA R ELEASE

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                             A BSTRACT
         Data privacy is critical in many decision-making contexts, such as healthcare and
         finance. A common mechanism is to create differentially private synthetic data
         using generative models. Such data generation reflects certain statistical properties
         of the original data, but often has an unacceptable privacy vs. utility trade-off. Since
         natural data inherently exhibits causal structure, we propose incorporating causal
         information into the training process to favorably navigate the aforementioned
         trade-off. Under certain assumptions for linear gaussian models and a broader
         class of models, we theoretically prove that causally informed generative models
         provide better differential privacy guarantees than their non-causal counterparts.
         We evaluate our proposal using variational autoencoders, and demonstrate that the
         trade-off is mitigated through better utility for comparable privacy.

1    I NTRODUCTION
Automating AI-based solutions and making evidence-based decisions both require data analyses.
However, in many situations, the data is sensitive and cannot be published directly. Synthetic data
generation, which captures certain statistical properties of the original data, is useful in resolving
these issues. However, naive data synthesis may not work: when improperly constructed, the
synthetic data can leak information about its sensitive counterpart (from which it was constructed).
Several membership inference (MI) and attribute inference attacks demonstrated for generative
models (Mukherjee et al., 2019; Zhang et al., 2020b) eliminate any privacy advantage provided by
releasing synthetic data. Therefore, effective privacy-preserving synthetic data generation methods
are needed.
The de-facto mechanism used for providing privacy in synthetic data release is that of differential
privacy (DP) (Dwork et al., 2006) which is known to degrade utility proportional to the amount of
privacy provided. This is further exacerbated in tabular data because of the correlations between
different records, and among different attributes within a record. In such settings, the amount of noise
required to provide meaningful privacy guarantees often destroys utility. Apart from assumptions
made on the independence of records and attributes, prior works make numerous assumptions about
the nature of usage of synthetic data and downstream tasks to customize DP application (Xiao et al.,
2010; Hardt et al., 2010; Cormode et al., 2019; Dwork et al., 2009).
To this end, we propose a mechanism to create synthetic data that is agnostic of the downstream task.
Similar to Jordan et al. (Jordon et al., 2018), our solution involves training a generative model to
provide formal DP guarantees. A key distinction arises as we encode knowledge about the causal
structure of the data into the generation process to provide better utility. Our approach leverages
the fact that naturally occurring data exhibits causal structure. In particular, to induce favorable
privacy vs. utility trade-offs, our main contribution involves encoding the causal graph (CG) into the
training of the generative model to synthesize data. Considering the case of linear gaussian models,
we formally prove that generative models trained with additional knowledge of the causal structure
of the specific dataset are more private than their non-causal counterparts. We extend this proof for a
more broader class of generative models as well.
To validate the theoretical results on real-world data, we present a novel practical solution utilizing
variational autoencoders (VAEs) (Kingma & Welling, 2013). These models combine the advantage
of both deep learning and probabilistic modeling, making them scale to large datasets, flexible to fit
complex data in a probabilistic manner, and can be used for data generation (Ma et al., 2019; 2020a).
Thus, in designing our solution, we train causally informed and differentially private VAEs. The


                                                    1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


CG can be obtained from a domain expert, or learnt directly from observed data (Zheng et al., 2018;
Morales-Alvarez et al., 2021) or by using DP CG discovery algorithm (Wang et al., 2020a). The
problem of learning the CG itself is important but orthogonal to the goals of this paper.
We evaluate our approach to understand its efficacy both towards improving the utility of downstream
tasks, and robustness to an MI attack (Stadler et al., 2020). Further, we aim to understand the effect
of true, partial and incorrect CG on the privacy vs. utility trade-off. We experimentally evaluate our
solution on a synthetic dataset where the true CG is known. We evaluate on real world applications:
a medical dataset (Tu et al., 2019), a student response dataset from a real-world online education
platform (Wang et al., 2020b), and perform ablation studies using the Lung Cancer dataset (Lauritzen
& Spiegelhalter, 1988).
Through our evaluation, we show that models that are causally informed are more stable (Kutin &
Niyogi, 2012) than associational (either non-causal, or with the incorrect causal structure) models
trained using the same dataset. In the absence of DP noise, causal models enhance the baseline utility1
by 2.42 percentage points (PPs) on average while non-causal models degrade it by 3.49 PPs. With
respect to privacy evaluation, prior works solely rely on the value of the privacy budget ε. We take
this one step further and empirically evaluate resilience to MI. Our experimental results demonstrate
the positive impact of causal information in inhibiting the MI adversary’s advantage on average.
Better still, we demonstrate that DP models that incorporate both complete or even partial causal
information are more resilient to MI adversaries than those with purely differential privacy with the
exact same ε-DP guarantees.
In summary, the contributions of our work include:
1. A deeper understanding of the advantages of causality through a theoretical result that highlights
   the privacy amplification induced by being causally informed (§ 3), and insight as to how this can
   be instantiated (§ 4.1).
2. Empirical results demonstrating that causally constrained (and DP) models are more utilitarian in
   downstream classification tasks (§ 5.1) and are robust (on average) to MI attacks (§ 5.2).

2       P ROBLEM S TATEMENT & N OTATION
Problem Statement: Formally, we define a dataset D to be the set {x1 , · · · xn } of n records xi ∈ X
(the universe of records); each record x = (x1 , · · · , xk ) has k attributes (a.k.a variables X1 , · · · , Xk ).
We aim to design a procedure which takes as input a private (or sensitive) dataset Dp and outputs
a synthetic dataset Ds . The output should have formal privacy guarantees and maintain statistical
properties from the input for downstream tasks. Formally speaking, we wish to design fθ : Z → X ,
where θ are the parameters of the method, and Z is some underlying latent representation for inputs
in X . In our work, we wish for fθ to provide the guarantee of differential privacy.
Differential Privacy (Dwork et al., 2006): Let ε ∈ R+ be the privacy budget, and H be a
randomized mechanism that takes a dataset as input. H is said to provide ε-differential privacy (DP)
if, for all datasets D1 and D2 that differ on a single record, and all subsets S of the outcomes of
running H: P[H(D1 ) ∈ S] ≤ eε · P[H(D2 ) ∈ S], where the probability is over the randomness of
H.
Sensitivity: Let d ∈ Z+ , D be a collection of datasets, and define H : D → Rd . The `1 sensitivity
of H, denoted ∆H, is defined by ∆H = maxkH(D1 ) − H(D2 )k1 , where the maximum is over all
pairs of datasets D1 and D2 in D differing in at most one record.
We rely on generative models to enable private data release. If they are trained to provide DP,
then any further post-processing (i.e., using them to obtain a synthetic dataset) is also DP by post-
processing (Dwork et al., 2014). In this work, we use variational autoencoders (VAEs) as our
generative models.
Variational Autoencoders (VAEs) (Kingma & Welling, 2013): Data generation, pθ (x|z), is realized
by a deep neural network (DNN) parameterized by θ, known as the decoder. To approximate the
posterior of the latent variable pθ (z|x), VAEs use another DNN (the encoder) with x as input to
produce an approximation of the posterior qφ (z|x). VAEs are trained by maximizing an evidence
lower bound (ELBO), which is equivalent to minimizing the KL divergence between qφ (z|x) and
    1
        Utility obtained from models trained on the original dataset (without the use of any generative model).


                                                          2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


pθ (z|x) (Jordan et al., 1999; Zhang et al., 2018). Solutions using VAEs for data generation would
concatenate all variables as X, train the model, and generate data through sampling from the prior
p(Z). To train the model, we wish to minimize the KL divergence between the true posterior p(z|x)
and the approximated posterior qφ (z|x), by maximizing the ELBO:
                        ELBO = Eqφ (z|x)) [log pθ (x|z)] − KL[qφ ((z|x)||p(z)]

Causally Consistent Models: Formally, the underlying data generating process (DGP) is character-
ized by a causal graph that describes the conditional independence relationships between different
variables. In this work, we use the term causally consistent models to refer to those models that factor-
ize in the causal direction. For example, the graph X1 → X2 implies that the factorization following
the causal direction is p(X1 , X2 ) = p(X1 ) · p(X2 |X1 ). Due to the modularity property (Woodward,
2005), the mechanism to generate X2 from X1 is independent from the marginal distribution of X1 .
This only holds in causal factorization but not in anti-causal factorization.
3    P RIVACY A MPLIFICATION T HROUGH C AUSALITY
Here, we present our main result. Stated simply: under infinite training data, causally consistent (or
simply causal) models are more private than their non-causal (or associational) counterparts. We
also characterize the conditions needed for this claim to be true under finite training data. For ease of
exposition, we first consider the setting of linear gaussian structural causal models (SCMs) where
each node (i.e., variable) is generated as a linear function of its parents in the causal graph (CG).
Causal and Associational models. Let M = hX, f,  i be a linear gaussian SCM corresponding to
a CG G = (X, EG ). X is the set of variables {x1 , · · · , xk }, EG are the edges in the CG connecting
them, f represents the linear generating function for each variable xi ∈ X, and   are the error terms.
We assume all variables are standardized to be zero mean and unit variance. We use upper-case
variables to capture sets, bold-faced to capture vectors, and subscripts capture appropriate indexing.
In a linear gaussian SCM, each node is generated as a linear function of its parents (assuming no
interaction between them).
                                          xi = P ai βi +  i                                         (1)
where P ai is a matrix of parent variables of xi (of size n × ki , where n is the number of data points
and ki ≤ k denotes the number of parents of xi ), and similarly βi is the estimated coefficient vector
(of size ki × 1). The error terms  i are mutually independent as well as independent of all other
variables. We can also write it as Xβi,ext +  i where X is the n × k matrix with all variables as
columns and βi,ext is an extended vector such that its value is fixed to 0 for all non-parents of xi .
A causal generative model has additional knowledge of the CG. Since mechanisms of the SCM are
stable and independent (Peters et al., 2017), fitting the causal generative model can be broken down
into a set of separately fit linear regression models. For any variable xi , parameters βi are learnt (as
β̂i ) by minimizing the least squares error, `(x̂i , xi ) = j∈[n] (x̂ji − xji )2 , where x̂i is given by,
                                                           P

                                              x̂i = P ai β̂i                                          (2)

An associational generative model does not have knowledge of the true CG. In general, it can be a
generative model such as a VAE. However, for learning linear functional relationships, it makes sense
to instead learn a set of linear regression equations, which is based on an alternative acyclic structure
(e.g., an incorrect graph). For each xi , let Hi be the feature matrix used to predict xi . We obtain,
                                              x̂i = Hi γi                                             (3)
where Hi is the data for all features that generate the value of xi in the model, analogous to P ai .
For each xi , γi is the learnt parameter vector of the associational model.
We show that sensitivity of β = {β1 , · · · , βk } is lower than or equal to γ = {γ1 , · · · , γk }. To do
so, we first prove a result about comparing sensitivity of linear regression when features are chosen
by the true data-generating process (DGP) or not. Our result on linear regression can be found in
Appendix A (see Lemma 1). Note that since our goal is to compare between models, we follow a
different set of assumptions than standard DP on linear regression. Rather than assuming that the
inputs are bounded, we assume that the error terms in the DGP are bounded, thus providing a bound
on the values of parameters that are optimal for any point.


                                                    3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


3.1       M AIN THEOREM
Theorem 1. Consider a linear gaussian SCM M = hX, f,  i with standardized variables (zero
mean, unit variance). Let the true generative equations be expressed as,
                                           ∀xi ∈ X : xi = P ai βi +  i                                (4)
where (a) P ai is the data matrix denoting all parents of xi in the CG corresponding to M, (b) βi are
the true generative parameters, and (c)  i is an independent, symmetric error vector that is bounded
such that the maximum deviation from βi that minimizes |xji − βi P aji | for the j th data point is δmax .
Let a mechanism take as input n data points and output the parameters of the fitted linear generative
functions. Then,
1. As n → ∞, the sensitivity of the mechanism based on causal information is lower than that
   without it.
2. For finite n, whenever the empirical correlation of a variable’s parents with error is much less
   than the empirical correlation of the features used by the associational model with error (i.e.,
   P aTi  i << HiT  i 2 ), the sensitivity of the mechanism based on causal information is the lowest.

Proof idea.3 Since a SCM consists of independent mechanisms, it is sufficient to prove the result for
regression parameters of any one mechanism. Given a fitted linear regression for one of the nodes in
the CG, its sensitivity is determined by stability: how much a new training point can alter the learnt
parameters; the new point is also constrained to be generated by the linear SCM equation, so the
optimal learnt parameters for the new point is the the true SCM parameters (within a δmax bound).
In the infinite data regime, for a causal model, the fitted parameters are exactly the true SCM
parameters since it uses exactly the parents as features. Whereas the associational model uses a
different set (with possibly correlated features) and therefore the learnt parameters for each feature
are different than the SCM parameters. So a new point generated from the true SCM parameters can
introduce a significant change in learnt parameters for associational models (note that new input is
not bounded), while for causal models the effect is bounded by δmax .
For finite data, we additionally need that the associational model deviates substantially from the
causal features (i.e., the contribution of non-causal features to the model is substantial); otherwise a
causal model may not have significant improvement on the sensitivity than the associational model.
The above proof also generalizes to case where all variables of SCM are not observed. We need the
following assumption.
Assumption 1. For each node xi ∈ X for the SCM M, any unobserved parents P aunobs       i     are
independent of all other observed parents of xi , P aobs
                                                     i .

                        P aj,obs
                           i     ⊥ P ak,unobs
                                 ⊥    i       ∀j, k        where P aobs
                                                                    i   ∪ P aunobs
                                                                             i     = P ai             (5)

Corollary 1. Under Assumption 1, Theorem 1 is satisfied even if some variables of the SCM are
unobserved.

By assuming strong convexity of the loss function, we are able to generalize our result beyond linear
gaussian SCMs; the detailed proof is in Appendix B. The key insight again stems from the higher
stability of causal models (in both the infinite and finite data regimes) resulting in lower sensitivity.
Why does causality provide any privacy benefit? In the case of causal models, we know the proper
factorization of the joint probability distribution. These factorized conditional probabilities remain
stable even under new data that corresponds to a different joint distribution (Peters et al., 2017).
Hence any learnt model using the factorization will be more stable. Due to this higher stability, its
(worst-case) loss on unseen points (or points generated by the true DGP) is lower. In the associational
case, the model does not have any such constraint, and thus may learn relationships that are not stable.
4       O UR A PPROACH AND I MPLEMENTATION
Our theoretical analysis shows the privacy benefit of training a causally informed generative model
for the linear gaussian case. In practice, the generation of synthetic datasets requires flexibility for
    2
        T is used to denote the transpose of the matrix.
    3
        The detailed proof is in Appendix A.


                                                           4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


downstream tasks and computational efficiency in large-scale applications. Therefore, we propose
our approach of building causally informed generative models using VAEs and implement this
approach for evaluating on real-world datasets; salient features of each dataset is presented in Table 2.
Experiments were performed on a server with 8 NVIDIA GeForce RTX GPUs, 48 vCPU cores, and
252 GB of memory. All our code was implemented in python.
4.1     C AUSAL D EEP G ENERATIVE M ODELS
Let us consider that the original dataset contains variables X1 and X2 and the causal relationship
follows Figure 9(b) (in Appendix C.1). For example, X1 can be a medical treatment, X2 can be
a medical test, and Z is the patient health status which is not observed. Instead of using a VAE
to generate the data, we design a generative model as shown in Figure 9(c), where the solid line
shows the model p(X1 , X2 , Z) = p(Z) · pθ1 (X1 |Z) · pθ2 (X2 |X1 , Z), and the dashed line shows the
inference network qφ (Z|X1 , X2 ). In this way, the model is consistent with the underlying CG.
The modeling principle is similar to that of prior work, CAMA (Zhang et al., 2020a). However,
CAMA only focuses on prediction and ignores all variables outside the Markov Blanket of the
target. In our application, we aim for data generation and need to consider the full causal graph, and
generalizes CAMA.
Remark 1: In this work, we assume that the causal relationship is given. In practice, this can be
obtained from domain expert or using a careful chosen causal discovery algorithm (Glymour et al.,
2019); the latter can be learnt in a differentially-private manner (Wang et al., 2020a). Additionally,
recent advances enable simultaneously learning the CG and optimizing the parameters of a generative
model informed by it (Morales-Alvarez et al., 2021). We stress that the contribution of our work is
understanding the influence of causal information on the privacy associated with generative models,
and not on mechanisms to learn the required causal information.
Remark 2: The theory we propose in Appendices A and B show that the privacy amplification
induced by causal information is agnostic of the particular choice of generative model. We utilize
VAEs as the work of Morales-Alvarez et al. (2021) provides a platform for simultaneously performing
(P1) causal discovery and (P2) causal inference. Recent work provides both the aforementioned
properties in the context of generative adversarial networks (GANs) (Geffner et al., 2022) and
flow-based models (Kyono et al., 2021), and validating their efficacy is a subject of future research.
4.2     P RIVACY B UDGET (ε)
For training our DP models, we utilize opacus v0.10.0 library4 that supports the DP-SGD
training approach proposed by Abadi et al. (2016) of clipping the gradients and adding noise while
training. We ensure that the training parameters for training both causal and non-causal models are
fixed. These are described in Appendix C. For all our experiments, we perform a grid search to
obtain the optimal clipping norm and noise multiplier. Once training is done, we calculate the privacy
budget after training using the Renyi DP accountant provided as part of the opacus package. The
value of ε for both causal and non-causal models is the same (refer Table 2).
4.3     M EMBERSHIP I NFERENCE (MI) ATTACK
Prior solutions for private generative models often use the value of ε as the sole measure for
privacy (Jordon et al., 2018; Zhang et al., 2020b). In addition to ε, we use an MI attack specific
to generative models to empirically evaluate if the models we train leak information (Stadler et al.,
2020). In this attack, the adversary has access to (a) synthetic data sampled from a generative model
trained with a particular record in the training data, and (b) synthetic data sampled from a generative
model trained without the same record in the training data. The objective of the adversary is to use
this synthetic data (from both cases) and learn a classifier to determine if a particular record was used
during training.
4.4     U TILITY M ETRICS
Utility is preserved if the synthetic data performs comparably to the original sensitive data for any
given task using any classifier. To measure the utility change, we perform the following experiment:
if a dataset has k attributes, we utilize k − 1 attributes to predict the k th attribute. We randomly
choose 20 different attributes to be predicted. Furthermore, we train 5 different classifiers for this task,
   4
       https://github.com/pytorch/opacus


                                                     5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Dataset (Baseline Utility Range)   DP                   Non Causal                                      Causal

                                        kernel   svc     logistic      rf     knn      kernel   svc     logistic    rf     knn

                                   X     6.83    7.11       6.82       6.54   5.36      -4.04   -0.22      -3.49    6.09    5.87
        EEDI (86-92%)
                                   ×     1.14    3.86        2.6       5.27   2.41      -6.83   -2.74      -6.13   -0.03   -1.96

                                   X     9.56    6.34       2.48       5.86    2.03     -1.84   4.03       -1.27   2.22    -4.64
      Pain1000 (88-95%)
                                   ×     5.42    5.5        1.31       6.22   -0.924    -1.73   1.56       -3.16   2.11    -6.92

                                   X     4.09    6.89        6.8       2.27   5.22       1.7    2.11       4.58     0.62   -0.82
      Pain5000 (92-98%)
                                   ×     3.53    5.93       5.68       0.48   4.07      -0.64   0.07       -0.24   -4.62   -5.13


Table 1: Downstream Utility Change: We report the utility change induced by synthetic data on downstream
classification tasks in comparison to the original data i.e., (original data utility - synthetic data utility). Negative
values indicate the percentage point improvement, while positive values indicate degradation. The performance
range of the classifiers we consider is reported in parentheses next to each dataset. Observe that (a) DP training
induces performance degradation in both causal and non-causal settings, and (b) performance degradation in the
causal setting is lower than that of the non-causal setting.


and compare the predictive capabilities of these classifiers when trained on (a) the original sensitive
dataset, and (b) the synthetically generated private dataset. The 5 classifiers are: (a) linear SVC (or
kernel), (b) svc, (c) logistic regression, (d) rf (or random forest), (e) knn. Additionally,
we draw pairplots using the features from the original and the synthetic dataset to compare their
similarity visually. These pairplots are obtained by choosing 10 random attributes (out of the k
available attributes). Refer Appendix E for more details.
5      E VALUATION
Since the accounting mechanism returns the same value of ε, our evaluation is designed to understand:
• If (DP) causally informed models negatively influence accuracy?
• If causally informed models leak more information than their non-causal counterparts?
From our evaluation, we observe that:
• In the absence of DP, causal models enhance the baseline utility computed using the original dataset
  by 2.42 percentage points (PPs) on average while non-causal models degrade it by 3.49 PPs (§ 5.1).
• The influence of causality (with DP) on MI resilience is nuanced. The general trend we observe is
  that, as the accuracy of causal information increases, so does the model’s resilience to MI (§ 5.2).
5.1      U TILITY E VALUATION
Table 1 shows the change in utility on different downstream tasks using the generated synthetic data
when trained with and without causality as well as DP. The negative values in the table indicate an
improvement in utility5 . We only present the range of absolute utility values when trained using the
original data in the table and provide individual utility for each classifier in Appendix E.
We observe an average performance degradation of 3.49 percentage points (PPs) across all non-causal
models trained without DP, and an average increase of 2.42 PPs in their causal counterparts. However,
it is well understood that DP training induces a privacy vs. utility trade-off, and consequently
the utility suffers (compare rows with DP and without DP). However, when causal information is
incorporated into the generative model, we observe that the utility degradation is less severe (compare
pairs of cells with and without causal information). These results suggest that causal information
encoded into the generative process improves the privacy vs. utility trade-off i.e., for the same ε-DP
guarantees, the utility for causal models is better than their non-causal counterparts.
In Figure 1, we plot the utility (measured by the average accuracy across the 5 downstream prediction
tasks) for both causal and associational models, for varied values of ε. Observe that for a fixed ε, the
causal models always have better utility than their associational counterparts. Note that our work is
the first to combine DP and causality. When compared with prior work, DP-PGM McKenna et al.
(2019) (which uses only DP), we observe that our approach (Causal in Figure 1) generates synthetic
data that is more utilitarian than DP-PGM.


   5
     All trials were reported 5 times with different random seeds. The numbers reported in the table are an
average of these trials.


                                                                   6
       Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                   1.00                                                                         1.00
                   0.95                                                                         0.95
Average Accuracy


                                                                             Average Accuracy
                   0.90                                                                         0.90
                   0.85                                                                         0.85
                   0.80                                                                         0.80
                   0.75                                        Causal                           0.75                       Causal
                   0.70                                        Non Causal                       0.70                       Non Causal
                                                               DP-PGM                                                      DP-PGM
                   0.65                                                                         0.65
                          2.0   2.5    3.0   3.5   4.0   4.5     5.0   5.5                             1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4


                                      (a) Pain1000                                                        (b) Pain5000                         (a) EEDI (Condensed)       (b) EEDI (Morales-Alvarez
                                                                                                                                                                          et al. (2021))
       Figure 1: Utility vs. Privacy: Causal models always
       outperform their associational counterparts, for the                                                                                  Figure 2: More Causal Information: EEDI
       same ε.                                                                                                                               Morales-Alvarez et al. (2021) is resilient to MI attacks
                                                                                                                                             with accurate causal information.
       Note that we evaluated the quality of synthetic data generated using a generative model trained using
       the approach proposed by Morales-Alvarez et al. Morales-Alvarez et al. (2021), and the results are
       not significantly different from those presented in Table 1 (which we omit for brevity).
       5.2                        E VALUATING MI R ESILIENCE
       Understanding the influence of causal information on MI requires nuanced discussion. Thus far, our
       discussion has focused on how perfect causal information can be used to theoretically minimize ε.
       However, causal information is often incomplete/partial, or incorrect. Our evaluation answers:
       1. What is the effect of complete, partial and incorrect causal information on MI attack accuracy?
       2. What is the effect on MI attack accuracy when a causally informed VAE is trained both with and
          without DP?
      We summarize our key results below:
       1. Knowledge of a complete CG and training with DP consistently reduces the adversary’s advantage
          across different feature extractors and classifiers i.e., provides better privacy (Figure 3).
       2. We observe that incorrect causal information has disparate impacts on resilience to MI. While
          introducing spurious correlations improves MI efficacy, removing causal information reduces MI
          efficacy but also degrades utility (§ 5.2.2).
       3. Even partial causal information reduces the advantage of the adversary when the model is trained
          without DP and in most cases, with DP as well. As the accuracy of causal information increases,
          so does the model’s resilience to MI attacks (§ 5.2.3).
       Evaluation Methodology. We train 2 generative models: one that encodes information from a CG
       and one that does not. We train each of them with and without DP, and thus have 4 models in total.
       For all our datasets, we evaluate these models against the MI adversary (§ 4.3), and compute the
       attack accuracy when a method (DP/causal consistency) is not used in comparison to when it is used.
       Note that as part of the MI attack, we are unable to utilize the Correlation and Ensemble
       feature extractors for the EEDI dataset due to computational constraints in our server.
       5.2.1                            W ITH C OMPLETE CG
      We conduct a toy experiment with synthetic data where the complete (true) CG is known apriori. The
      data is generated based on the CG defined in Appendix D. The results are presented in Figure 3. Here,
      advantage degradation is the change in MI success between a scenario when DP is not used, and when
      DP is used for training (positive values are better). Observe that in both the causal and non-causal
      model, training with DP provides an advantage against the MI adversary, though to varying degrees.
      However, the important observation is that causal models provide greater resilience on average in
      comparison to the non-causal model.
       5.2.2                            A BLATION S TUDY: I NCORRECT CG
       Many real-world datasets do not come with their associated CGs. CGs obtained from domain experts,
       or those learnt through algorithmic means are potentially erroneous. We wish to understand how
       these errors assist MI adversaries. To this end, we utilize the causally informed generative modelling
       framework of Morales-Alvarez et al. (2021) to synthesize data for 3 different models for the Lung
       Cancer dataset: (a) armed with the true CG (baseline), (b) with an edge added, and (c) with an edge
       removed. Observe that the last 2 scenarios are introduced to induce error in the CG. The results of
       average MI success (obtained by averaging the efficacy of the MI attack (Stadler et al., 2020) using 4
       classifiers) is presented in Figure 4 (lower is better). By adding edges, we introduce more spurious


                                                                                                                                         7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                       knn           random forest                                svc         svc_kernel
                        1.00                                                             1.00
                        0.75                                                             0.75
Advantage Degradation


                                                                 Advantage Degradation
                        0.50                                                             0.50
                        0.25                                                             0.25
                        0.00                                                             0.00
                        0.25                                                             0.25
                        0.50                                                             0.50
                        0.75                                                             0.75
                        1.00                                                             1.00
                               Corr     Ens   Hist       Naive                                   Corr   Ens      Hist      Naive

                                 (b) Causal                                                     (c) Non Causal

Figure 3: True CG: Both causal and non-causal mod-                                                                                     Figure 4: Incorrect CGs: For the Lung Cancer
els trained with DP reduce the adversary’s advantage.                                                                                  dataset, adding edges (introducing spurious relation-
Causal models provide more advantage degradation                                                                                       ships) enables the MI adversary, but removing edges
on average.                                                                                                                            (disabling causal relationships) hurts it.


                                                                                                                                                  (a) EEDI              (b) Pain5000
                                      (a) EEDI                                                      (b) Pain5000

Figure 5: Partial Causal Information & No DP: We                                                                                          Figure 6: Partial Causal Information & DP: We
plot the (average) MI success the adversary uses a non-                                                                                   plot the MI success when the adversary uses a non-
causal model and switches to its causal counterpart. Ob-                                                                                  causal model and switches to its causal counterpart.
serve that even in the absence of DP, causal information                                                                                  Observe that in the presence of DP & causal infor-
by itself provides resilience against our MI adversary.                                                                                   mation, the adversary is less effective.

correlations which the MI adversary exploits, but by removing (causal) edges, we remove signal that
the MI adversary can use. While removing edges may seem tempting from a privacy perspective,
the average (across 8 trials) downstream utility of the data generated from the corresponding model
suffers. The utility of the data generated from the true CG is 82.94% which reduces to 81.8% when
edge is added and futher to 79.67% when an edge is removed. Our results show that while knowing a
true CG is always useful both for privacy and utility, having access to an approximate CG may also
provide privacy benefits at the cost of utility.
Disclaimer: There are two ways a model may use incorrect causal structure: missing a true parent of
a node, or adding an incorrect parent. Corollary 1 already covers the first: with missing parents in the
causal model, the result of lower sensitivity for causal models holds as long as Assumption 1 is true.
So overall, missing parents is a weaker violation and we may still obtain the same benefits. But if a
model adds an incorrect parent, then its sensitivity will definitely increase.
 5.2.3                                W ITH PARTIAL CG
For the real world EEDI and Pain datasets, we follow two approaches: (a) we utilize information
from domain experts to partially construct a condensed CG (where several variables are clubbed into
a single node of the condensed CG), and (b) we learn a CG from data and simultaneously train a VAE
that is informed by it (Morales-Alvarez et al., 2021)–resulting in a larger, yet partial CG. Note that
due to space constraints, we only report results for 2 out of the 3 datasets we evaluate. The trends
from Pain1000 are similar to that of Pain5000 and are in Appendix F.
Effect of only Causality. Figure 5 shows the MI adversary’s advantage when the model incorporates
causal information in the absence of DP. Observe that across both datasets, causal models result in
more resilient models i.e., lower attack accuracy. While this effect is moderate in the EEDI dataset6
(Figure 5a) (where the Histogram features enable a more effective attack in the causal model),
this effect is more pronounced in the Pain5000 dataset (Figure 5b). This suggests that standalone
   6
     Unlike the other datasets we consider, the EEDI dataset is sparse. The Histogram attack relies on
counting the number of entries for a particular feature to aid in disambiguation, while the Naive attack relies
on condensing the entire dataset to summary statistics (such as mean, median, mode); we conjecture that sparsity
helps the adversary in this case.


                                                                                                                                   8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


causal information provides some privacy guarantees. We conjecture that the MI adversary uses the
spurious correlation among the attributes to perform the attack. Even partial causal information is
able to eliminate spurious correlation present in the dataset. Hence, a causally informed VAE is also
able to reduce the MI adversary’s advantage.
Effect of Causality with DP. Figure 6 shows the results for models trained using partial causal
information with DP. Similar to the earlier results (of causal information and no DP), models trained
with DP and causal information are more resilient to MI attacks. These results validate that causality
amplifies privacy provided by DP training. We iterate that from results in Figure 1 we show that for
the same ε-DP guarantees, models learnt using causal information provide higher utility, thereby
providing a promising direction to balance the privacy vs. utility trade-off.
The results thus far rely on domain experts to partially construct a condensed CG. To see if additional
causal information provides more resilience, we repeat the experiments with the EEDI dataset using
the generative model proposed by Morales-Alvarez et al. (2021) that learns a CG from data. We
utilize the same training configuration as in the earlier case, resulting in a model learnt with ε ≈ 13.,
which learns a CG with 57 nodes (compared to the 3 node CG used thus far). From Figure 2, observe
that as we provide more accurate causal information to the causal model, its effects on privacy are
exacerbated by the presence of DP noise specifically for the attack using Naive features. The attack
using Histogram features in unaffected even with DP providing empirical evidence to recent work
that questions the sufficiency of DP training against MI attacks (Humphries et al., 2020).
5.3   D ISCUSSION
1. Better understanding of MI. Yeom et al. (2018) exploit the relationship between MI and overfit-
   ting, and propose DP training as a defense through a loose bound. However, recent work suggests
   that DP training by itself is insufficient (Humphries et al., 2020), and often implemented incorrectly
   leading to faulty conclusions (Tschantz et al., 2017). Our results also partially corroborate this
   observation but further exploration is needed to understand the cause of MI in different settings.
2. Loose privacy budget. The values of ε used in our experiment are large. This is a result of the
   batch size and training duration of the VAEs we use as DP training is expensive. If computation
   resource is not a constraint then we should be able to get smaller epsilon values. There is extensive
   discussion by Bhowmick et al. (2018) and Nasr et al. (2021) which discusses different threat
   models where larger values of ε are tolerable.
3. Non-convex loss functions. VAEs are deep learning models trained to minimize ELBO which
   is highly non-convex. Research shows that deep learning framework demonstrate for example
   locally convex properties (Lucas et al., 2021; Littwin & Wolf, 2020) which explains our results.
4. Overheads: The work of Morales-Alvarez et al. (2021) discusses an approach to simultaneously
   learn the CG and train the generative model with said structure. In practice, we observed that
   causal discovery using this method adds limited overhead (∼ 100 epochs of additional training).
6 R ELATED WORK
Private Data Generation: The primary issue associated with private synthetic data generation
involves dealing with data scale and dimensionality. Solutions involve using Bayesian networks to
add calibrated noise to the latent representations (Zhang et al., 2017; Jälkö et al., 2019), or smarter
mechanisms to determine correlations (Zhang et al., 2020b). Utilizing synthetic data generated by
GANs has been extensively studied, but only few solutions provide formal guarantees of privacy (Jor-
don et al., 2018; Wu et al., 2019; Harder et al., 2020; Torkzadehmahani et al., 2019; Ma et al., 2020b;
Tantipongpipat et al., 2019; Xin et al., 2020; Long et al., 2019; Liu et al., 2019). Across the spectrum,
very limited techniques are evaluated against MI adversaries (Mukherjee et al., 2019).
Membership Inference: Most MI work focuses on the discriminative setting (Shokri et al., 2017).
More recently, several works propose MI attacks against generative models (Chen et al., 2020;
Hilprecht et al., 2019) but offer a limited explanation as to why they are possible. Tople et al. (2020)
show the benefits of causal learning to alleviate membership privacy attacks but only limited to
classification models and not for generative models.
7 C ONCLUSIONS
Our work proposes a mechanism for private data release using VAEs trained with differential privacy.
Theoretically, we highlight how causal information encoded into the training procedure can potentially
amplify the privacy guarantee provided by differential privacy, without degrading utility. Empirically,
we show how causal information enables advantageous privacy vs. utility trade-offs.


                                                   9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


R EFERENCES
Martin Abadi, Andy Chu, Ian Goodfellow, H Brendan McMahan, Ilya Mironov, Kunal Talwar, and
 Li Zhang. Deep learning with differential privacy. In Proceedings of the 2016 ACM SIGSAC
 conference on computer and communications security, pp. 308–318, 2016.
Abhishek Bhowmick, John Duchi, Julien Freudiger, Gaurav Kapoor, and Ryan Rogers. Protec-
  tion against reconstruction and its applications in private federated learning. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1812.00984, 2018.
Kamalika Chaudhuri, Claire Monteleoni, and Anand D Sarwate. Differentially private empirical risk
  minimization. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 12(3), 2011.
Dingfan Chen, Ning Yu, Yang Zhang, and Mario Fritz. Gan-leaks: A taxonomy of membership
  inference attacks against generative models. In Proceedings of the 2020 ACM SIGSAC Conference
  on Computer and Communications Security, pp. 343–362, 2020.
Graham Cormode, Tejas Kulkarni, and Divesh Srivastava. Answering range queries under local
  differential privacy. Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment, 12(10):1126–1138, 2019.
Cynthia Dwork, Frank McSherry, Kobbi Nissim, and Adam Smith. Calibrating noise to sensitivity in
  private data analysis. In Theory of cryptography conference, pp. 265–284. Springer, 2006.
Cynthia Dwork, Moni Naor, Omer Reingold, Guy N Rothblum, and Salil Vadhan. On the complexity
  of differentially private data release: efficient algorithms and hardness results. In Proceedings of
  the forty-first annual ACM symposium on Theory of computing, pp. 381–390, 2009.
Cynthia Dwork, Aaron Roth, et al. The algorithmic foundations of differential privacy. Foundations
  and Trends in Theoretical Computer Science, 9(3-4):211–407, 2014.
Tomas Geffner, Javier Antoran, Adam Foster, Wenbo Gong, Chao Ma, Emre Kiciman, Amit Sharma,
  Angus Lamb, Martin Kukla, Nick Pawlowski, et al. Deep end-to-end causal inference. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2202.02195, 2022.
Clark Glymour, Kun Zhang, and Peter Spirtes. Review of causal discovery methods based on
  graphical models. Frontiers in genetics, 10:524, 2019.
Frederik Harder, Kamil Adamczewski, and Mijung Park. Differentially private mean embeddings
  with random features (dp-merf) for simple & practical synthetic data generation. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2002.11603, 2020.
Moritz Hardt, Katrina Ligett, and Frank McSherry. A simple and practical algorithm for differentially
 private data release. arXiv preprint arXiv:1012.4763, 2010.
Benjamin Hilprecht, Martin Härterich, and Daniel Bernau. Monte carlo and reconstruction member-
  ship inference attacks against generative models. Proceedings on Privacy Enhancing Technologies,
  2019(4):232–249, 2019.
Thomas Humphries, Matthew Rafuse, Lindsey Tulloch, Simon Oya, Ian Goldberg, Urs Hengartner,
  and Florian Kerschbaum. Differentially private learning does not bound membership inference.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.12112, 2020.
Andrew Ilyas, Shibani Santurkar, Dimitris Tsipras, Logan Engstrom, Brandon Tran, and Aleksander
  Madry. Adversarial examples are not bugs, they are features. Advances in neural information
  processing systems, 32, 2019.
Joonas Jälkö, Eemil Lagerspetz, Jari Haukka, Sasu Tarkoma, Samuel Kaski, and Antti Honkela.
  Privacy-preserving data sharing via probabilistic modelling. arXiv preprint arXiv:1912.04439,
  2019.
Michael I Jordan, Zoubin Ghahramani, Tommi S Jaakkola, and Lawrence K Saul. An introduction to
 variational methods for graphical models. Machine learning, 37(2):183–233, 1999.
James Jordon, Jinsung Yoon, and Mihaela van der Schaar. Pate-gan: Generating synthetic data with
  differential privacy guarantees. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2018.


                                                 10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Diederik P Kingma and Max Welling.            Auto-encoding variational bayes.        arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1312.6114, 2013.
Samuel Kutin and Partha Niyogi. Almost-everywhere algorithmic stability and generalization error.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:1301.0579, 2012.
Trent Kyono, Yao Zhang, Alexis Bellot, and Mihaela van der Schaar. Miracle: Causally-aware
  imputation via learning missing data mechanisms. Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 34, 2021.
Steffen L Lauritzen and David J Spiegelhalter. Local computations with probabilities on graphical
  structures and their application to expert systems. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series
  B (Methodological), 50(2):157–194, 1988.
Etai Littwin and Lior Wolf. On the convex behavior of deep neural networks in relation to the layers’
  width. arXiv preprint arXiv:2001.04878, 2020.
Yi Liu, Jialiang Peng, JQ James, and Yi Wu. Ppgan: Privacy-preserving generative adversarial
  network. In 2019 IEEE 25th International Conference on Parallel and Distributed Systems
  (ICPADS), pp. 985–989. IEEE, 2019.
Yunhui Long, Suxin Lin, Zhuolin Yang, Carl A Gunter, and Bo Li. Scalable differentially private
  generative student model via pate. arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.09338, 2019.
James R Lucas, Juhan Bae, Michael R Zhang, Stanislav Fort, Richard Zemel, and Roger B Grosse.
  On monotonic linear interpolation of neural network parameters. In International Conference on
  Machine Learning, pp. 7168–7179. PMLR, 2021.
Chao Ma, Sebastian Tschiatschek, Konstantina Palla, Jose Miguel Hernandez-Lobato, Sebastian
  Nowozin, and Cheng Zhang. Eddi: Efficient dynamic discovery of high-value information with
  partial vae. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 4234–4243, 2019.
Chao Ma, Sebastian Tschiatschek, José Miguel Hernández-Lobato, Richard Turner, and Cheng
  Zhang. Vaem: a deep generative model for heterogeneous mixed type data. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2006.11941, 2020a.
Chuan Ma, Jun Li, Ming Ding, Bo Liu, Kang Wei, Jian Weng, and H Vincent Poor. Rdp-gan: Ar\’enyi-
  differential privacy based generative adversarial network. arXiv preprint arXiv:2007.02056, 2020b.
Ryan McKenna, Daniel Sheldon, and Gerome Miklau. Graphical-model based estimation and
  inference for differential privacy. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 4435–
  4444. PMLR, 2019.
Pablo Morales-Alvarez, Angus Lamb, Simon Woodhead, Simon Peyton Jones, Miltos Allamanis,
  and Cheng Zhang. Vicause: Simultaneous missing value imputation and causal discovery. Tech-
  nical Report MSR-TR-2021-14, ICML 2021 workshop on the Neglected Assumptions in Causal
  Inference, July 2021.
Sumit Mukherjee, Yixi Xu, Anusua Trivedi, and Juan Lavista Ferres. privgan: Protecting gans from
  membership inference attacks at low cost. In PETS, 2019.
Milad Nasr, Shuang Song, Abhradeep Thakurta, Nicolas Papernot, and Nicholas Carlini. Adver-
 sary instantiation: Lower bounds for differentially private machine learning. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2101.04535, 2021.
Jonas Peters, Dominik Janzing, and Bernhard Schölkopf. Elements of causal inference: foundations
  and learning algorithms. The MIT Press, 2017.
Shai Shalev-Shwartz and Shai Ben-David. Understanding machine learning: From theory to
  algorithms. Cambridge university press, 2014.
Reza Shokri, Marco Stronati, Congzheng Song, and Vitaly Shmatikov. Membership inference attacks
  against machine learning models. In 2017 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (SP), pp.
  3–18. IEEE, 2017.


                                                 11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Theresa Stadler, Bristena Oprisanu, and Carmela Troncoso. Synthetic data – a privacy mirage, 2020.
Uthaipon Tantipongpipat, Chris Waites, Digvijay Boob, Amaresh Ankit Siva, and Rachel Cum-
  mings. Differentially private mixed-type data generation for unsupervised learning. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1912.03250, 2019.
Shruti Tople, Amit Sharma, and Aditya Nori. Alleviating privacy attacks via causal learning. In
  International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 9537–9547. PMLR, 2020.
Reihaneh Torkzadehmahani, Peter Kairouz, and Benedict Paten. Dp-cgan: Differentially private
  synthetic data and label generation. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision
  and Pattern Recognition Workshops, pp. 0–0, 2019.
Michael Carl Tschantz, Shayak Sen, and Anupam Datta. Differential privacy as a causal property.
 arXiv preprint arXiv:1710.05899, 2017.
Ruibo Tu, Kun Zhang, Bo Christer Bertilson, Hedvig Kjellström, and Cheng Zhang. Neuropathic pain
  diagnosis simulator for causal discovery algorithm evaluation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.01732,
  2019.
Lun Wang, Qi Pang, and Dawn Song. Towards practical differentially private causal graph discovery.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.08598, 2020a.
Zichao Wang, Angus Lamb, Evgeny Saveliev, Pashmina Cameron, Yordan Zaykov, José Miguel
  Hernández-Lobato, Richard E Turner, Richard G Baraniuk, Craig Barton, Simon Peyton Jones, et al.
  Diagnostic questions: The neurips 2020 education challenge. arXiv preprint arXiv:2007.12061,
  2020b.
James Woodward. Making things happen: A theory of causal explanation. Oxford university press,
  2005.
Bingzhe Wu, Shiwan Zhao, Chaochao Chen, Haoyang Xu, Li Wang, Xiaolu Zhang, Guangyu Sun,
  and Jun Zhou. Generalization in generative adversarial networks: A novel perspective from privacy
  protection. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pp. 307–317, 2019.
Yonghui Xiao, Li Xiong, and Chun Yuan. Differentially private data release through multidimensional
  partitioning. In Workshop on Secure Data Management, pp. 150–168. Springer, 2010.
Bangzhou Xin, Wei Yang, Yangyang Geng, Sheng Chen, Shaowei Wang, and Liusheng Huang.
  Private fl-gan: Differential privacy synthetic data generation based on federated learning. In
  ICASSP 2020-2020 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing
  (ICASSP), pp. 2927–2931. IEEE, 2020.
Samuel Yeom, Irene Giacomelli, Matt Fredrikson, and Somesh Jha. Privacy risk in machine learning:
  Analyzing the connection to overfitting. In 2018 IEEE 31st Computer Security Foundations
  Symposium (CSF), pp. 268–282. IEEE, 2018.
Cheng Zhang, Judith Bütepage, Hedvig Kjellström, and Stephan Mandt. Advances in variational
  inference. IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence, 41(8):2008–2026,
  2018.
Cheng Zhang, Kun Zhang, and Yingzhen Li. A causal view on robustness of neural networks. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2005.01095, 2020a.
Jun Zhang, Graham Cormode, Cecilia M Procopiuc, Divesh Srivastava, and Xiaokui Xiao.
  PrivBAYES: Private data release via bayesian networks. ACM Transactions on Database Systems
  (TODS), 42(4):25, 2017. https://dl.acm.org/doi/pdf/10.1145/3134428.
Zhikun Zhang, Tianhao Wang, Ninghui Li, Jean Honorio, Michael Backes, Shibo He, Jiming Chen,
  and Yang Zhang. Privsyn: Differentially private data synthesis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2012.15128,
  2020b.
Xun Zheng, Bryon Aragam, Pradeep Ravikumar, and Eric P Xing. Dags with no tears: Continuous
  optimization for structure learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1803.01422, 2018.


                                                12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A     D ETAILED P ROOF : B ENEFITS OF C AUSAL L EARNING IN L INEAR
      G AUSSIAN SCM
A.1    BACKGROUND
Let M = hX, f,  i be a linear gaussian structural causal model corresponding to a causal graph
G = (X, EG ), where (a) X is the set of variables, G is the causal graph connecting them through
edges EG , (b) f represents the set of linear generating functions for each variable xi ∈ X, and (c)
are the error terms. We assume that all variables are standardized to be zero mean and unit variance.
In a linear gaussian SCM, each node is generated as a linear function of its parents (we assume
without any interaction terms). The error terms   are mutually independent and independent of all
variables.                       X j j
                           xi ←      βi P ai +  i ; xi = P ai βi +  i                        (6)
                                        j


where P aji is a vector referring to the values of j th parent of node xi , P ai refers to a matrix of data
values with parents of xi as columns (total ki columns, where ki is the number of parents of xi ) and
n rows as data-points, and βi refers to the true coefficient vector (or structural causal parameter).
Alternatively, we can write it as Xβi,ext +  i where X is the matrix with all variables as columns
and βi,ext is an extended vector such that its value is fixed to 0 for all non-parents of xi .
A causal generative model has additional knowledge of the graph structure. Since mechanisms
of SCM are stable and independent (Peters et al., 2017), fitting the causal generative model can be
broken down into a set of separately fit linear regression models. For any variable xi , parameters βi =
                                                                                                    ˆ
βi1 , βi2 ...βiki are learnt (as β̂i ) by minimizing the least squares error, `(xi , x̂i ) = j∈[n] (xji − xji )2 ,
                                                                                            P

where x̂i is given by                           X j j
                                          x̂i =    β̂i P ai ; x̂i = P ai β̂i                                 (7)
                                              j

An associational generative model does not know the true causal graph, so it may learn an alternative
generative acyclic structure, which is also reducible to a set of independently fitted linear regressions.
For each xi , let Hi be the matrix denoting the features used to predict xi (columns are features, rows
are data-points). We obtain               X j j
                                    x̂i =      γi Hi ; x̂i = Hi γi                                     (8)
                                                  j

where Hij and Hi is the individual j th parent data vector and all parents’ data matrix respectively,
analogous to P aji and P ai . γi is the learnt parameter vector of the associational model, for each i
A.2    G OAL
Our goal is to show that sensitivity of β̂ = {β1 , · · · , βk } is lower than or equal to γ = {γ1 , · · · , γk }.
To do so, we first prove a result about sensitivity of linear regression, which is used to estimate the
parameters of the generative model. Note that since our goal is to compare between models, we
follow a different set of assumptions than standard differential privacy on linear regression. Rather
than assuming that the inputs are bounded, we assume that the error terms in the DGP are bounded,
thus providing a bound on the parameter values that are optimal for any point.
Our proof utilizes the following strategy. First, we define 2 worlds: world 1 where where a model is
learnt with causal information, and world 2 where a model is learnt without this causal information.
Next, we measure the sensitivity of the parameters learnt in both worlds and demonstrate that the
sensitivity is lower in world 1 than world 2. This suggests that if DP is used in both worlds, the
privacy budget in world 1 will be lower than that of world 2.
A.3    P RIMER
Lemma 1. Consider dataset (X j , y j )nj=1 where the labels are generated by the following equation:
y = βXc +  7 where Xc ⊆ X refers to variables having a non-zero coefficient in the true data-
   7
     This equation holds for the data generating distribution; a dataset is sampled from this distribution. More
generally, this is the data-generating equation of the SCM that defines the distribution.


                                                       13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


generating process (DGP) of y, Xc corresponds to the data matrix associated with variables in Xc ,
and   is independent error that is bounded and symmetric.   is bounded such that the maximum
deviation from β that minimizes |y j − βXcj | for any j th data-point is δmax . Consider two linear
regression models fit to this dataset, one that has knowledge of the true DGP and includes Xc as
features, and one that does not and includes a different subset Xa ⊆ X as features. Assume all
variables are standardized (zero mean, unit variance).
1. As n → ∞, the sensitivity of linear regression model fitted over Xc is lower than or equal to the
   sensitivity of the linear regression model fitted over Xa .
2. For finite n, whenever the empirical correlation of Xc with error is much less than other features
   Xa with error, Xc   << Xa  , the sensitivity of the mechanism based on causal information is
   lower than that of the mechanism without it.

Proof. WARM-UP: T WO VARIABLE REGRESSION
As a warm-up exercise, consider a 2-variable regression where X = {x1 , x2 }. x1 is a part of the true
DGP for y (i.e., causes y), while x2 is not part of the DGP for y but is related to y (it may be a part of
Markov Blanket of y, or simply be correlated with y). As stated in the Lemma, the corresponding
data-generating equation is
                                              y = βx1 +                                                (9)

(Causal) Xc Model. The model will use the following for predicting y,
                                            ŷ = β̂1 x1                                              (10)
leading to the following learnt parameter,
                                 P         P                  P
                                    x1 y     x1 (βx1 +  )       x1
                          β̂1 = P 2 =          P 2        =β+ P 2                                    (11)
                                    x1             x1           x1
To calculate sensitivity, we assume the existence of an adversary that wishes to add one more point to
the training process such that the estimated parameters are farthest from what is currently achieved
(capturing the definition of sensitivity).
Sensitivity. Let us consider a new data-point added to the training set by an adversary, to maximize
                              0
difference between βˆ1 and βˆ1 (the estimated parameter obtained after adding the adversarial data-
point). Any new input chosen by the adversary will be generated based on Eqn 9.
Note that the definition of DP is for any 2 databases from a universe of databases; Eqn 9 captures
this universe. Since the adversary operates in the same world, any point they sample has to also obey
the same equation. Their overall distribution can be different, e.g., Pr(y|x1 , x2 ) can be different, but
Pr(y|x1 ) has to remain the same.
Since the error is bounded, the adversary tries to generate a point such that new estimated β̂1 is
farthest from above. That is, the adversary may choose a point such that the parameter obtained after
minimizing the squared loss using that point is β ± δmax minimizes the squared loss on the point.
Further, the adversary can choose a point with large enough x01 such that estimate onPthe entire dataset
                                                                                x0   0 + x
matches β ± δmax . This can be done by choosing a point (x01 , y 0 ) such that | x10 2 +P x12 | = δmax .
                                                                                    1      1
                                                                                       P
⇒ Thus, for the parameter corresponding to variable x1 , the sensitivity is |δmax | + | Pxx12 3 |. For the
                                                                                            1
parameter corresponding to the variable x2 ,the sensitivity is zero (since there is no parameter).
(Associational) Xa Model. In contrast, the full regression model will use the following parameters.
Since x2 is not independent of y after conditioning on x1 , the model may include x2 since it may
result in predictive accuracy gain for y.
                                           ŷ = γ1 x1 + γ2 x2                                 (12)
leading to the following learnt parameters,
                                      P 2P             P      P
                                          x2 x1 y − x1 x2 x2 y
                                γˆ1 =     P 2P 2         P
                                              x1 x2 − ( x1 x2 ) 2
                                      P 2P             P      P                               (13)
                                          x1 x2 y − x1 x2 x1 y
                                γˆ2 =     P 2P 2         P
                                              x1 x2 − ( x1 x2 ) 2

                                                   14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Sensitivity. Compared to the Xc model, the second parameter (γ̂2 ) will have non-zero sensitivity
(while that for causal model is zero). So we focus on showing that the first parameter γ̂1 will also
have a higher sensitivity. Observe that the first parameter can be rewritten as
         P 2P                    P         P                        P 2P         P        P
            x2 x1 (βx1 +  ) − x1 x2 x2 (βx1 +  )                       x2 x1   − x1 x2 x2
  γˆ1 =             P 2P 2          P                        =β+ P 2P 2            P
                        x1 x2 − ( x1 x2 )2                                x1 x2 − ( x1 x2 )2
                                                                                                (14)

Now the adversary can select a (x001 , x002 , y 00 ) such that x002 = 0. Here x2 ’s coefficient becomes
irrelevant and the parameter that minimizes error on any new adversarial point is β ± δmax .
Thus, the sensitivity of the first parameter is
                                          P 2P         P     P
                                             x2 x1   − x1 x2 x2
                   |γˆ1 − β ± δmax | = | P 2 P 2         P          | + |δmax |
                                                x1 x2 − ( x1 x2 ) 2

Note that this sensitivity can be achieved by choosing x001 , y 00 (and therefore  00 ) for a new adversarial
point such that its value is much higher than other points and thus the estimated coefficient tends to
β + δmax .
We now prove the main claims.
                                  P
1. Infinite Data. As nP   → ∞,      x1   = 0 because x1 and   are independent, by property of the
generative process. But x2   6= 0 because it is correlated with y. Thus, for infinite data, sensitivity
of Xc model (|δmax |) is lower than another Xa model.
                                   P          P
2. Finite Data. For finite data, if x2   >>      x1  , then sensitivity of Xc model is lower than or
equal to the Xa model.
P ROVING THE GENERAL CASE
Using the closed form solution for linear regression, we can write,

                                           β̂ = (Z T Z)−1 Z T y                                         (15)

where Z is a matrix denoting the model’s features’ values and y is a column vector denoting the
values in a dataset for the variable y. For the causal model, Z = Xc , the true variables from the DGP.
Expanding y based on the DGP equation,

              β̂ = (XcT Xc )−1 XcT y = (XcT Xc )−1 (XcT Xc )β + (XcT Xc )−1 (XcT  )
                                                                                                        (16)
              β̂ = β + (XcT Xc )−1 (XcT  )

In contrast, for the associational model, we obtain

                           γ̂ = (H T H)−1 H T y
                                                                                                        (17)
                             = (H T H)−1 (H T Xc )β + (H T H)−1 (H T  )

where H represents Xa .
The set of features H used by the Xa model may not be equal to the true DGP variables, Xc . Thus,
the above can be rewritten in terms of the true parameter, β, as follows,

                  γ̂ = (H T H)−1 H T (Xc β) + (H T H)−1 (H T  )
                    = (H T H)−1 H T (Hβi,extended + Sβ 0 ) + (H T H)−1 (H T  )                          (18)
                    = βi,extended + (H T H)−1 H T Sβ 0 + (H T H)−1 (H T  )

where βi,extended and β 0 are simply re-parameterizations of the true β; they are zero for all variables
x∈ / Xc . βi,extended is an extension of β for variables in H, and β 0 is an additional vector which
is used only if H does not include all true DGP variables Xc . S is the matrix denoting data for all
x ∈ Xc that are not in H


                                                     15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


P ROOF OF M AIN C LAIM
Infinite data case. Error is independent of the DGP variables, i.e., XcT   = 0 as the number of
samples n → ∞. Thus, β̂ = β and any new training point provided by the adversary will also be
generated using the same true β (within an bound of ±δmax ). Thus, β̂ = β ± δmax will also be
optimal for this new point and the estimated value will change within δmax .
For the Xa model, however, note that γ̂ 6= β unless H = Xc . We provide a construction for
adversary’s input such that estimated γ̂ will change more than or equal to δmax after adding that
input. For all variables xk ∈ Xa that are correlated (not in Xc ), an adversary chooses value of xk = 0
and generates y using β such that the correlation between y and xk is broken. Further, for the Xc
features and y, the adversary is constrained to choose an input such that γXc = β ± δmax is optimal
on the input, irrespective of the value of other γ dimensions (since xk = 0). That is, after addition
of new point, the least squares optimization will ignore xk and move γ̂Xc closer to β for the Xc
features. The total sensitivity is |β̂Xc − β| + |δmax | for the parameters corresponding to Xc . For
all other parameters, the Xc model outputs value of zero (and hence sensitivity of zero), which is
trivially lower than or equal to the Xa ’s model’s parameter sensitivity for those parameters.
Finite data case. In the finite data case, given a fitted β̂ the sensitivity that a new adversarial point
can lead to is |β ± δmax − β̂| = |(XcT Xc )−1 (XcT  )| + |δmax | (from Eqn 16). For large-enough n,
XcT   should be close to zero due to independence. Sensitivity of coefficients for all non-parents is
zero. For the Xa model, the coefficients can be written as,
                        γ̂ = βi,extended + (H T H)−1 H T Sβ 0 + (H T H)−1 (H T  )                    (19)

As we can see, for the variables ∈ / Xc , γ̂ depends on the data and therefore will have a non-zero
sensitivity to a new data-point, greater than the Xc model.
We next consider sensitivity of parameters corresponding to variables in Xc . As with the infinite
data case, to generate a new input, the adversary can set the value of variables such that the non-Xc
features in h ∈ H become 0. Then optimal γ̂Xc for the new point will be β ± δmax (which is
equivalent to βextended ± δmax ), and sensitivity will be the last two terms from Eqn 19 plus δmax
(which can be achieved by sufficiently high values of Xc variables for the adversarial point). Thus,
sensitivity is |β ± δmax − γ̂Xc | = |(H T H)−1 H T Sβ 0 + (H T H)−1 (H T  )| + |δmax |. Since β 0
and S correspond to the true β and Xc respectively, , the sensitivity of Xa model will be higher than
Xc model’s sensitivity for the same parameter whenever H T   >> XcT  .

We now use this lemma to prove our main theorem.
A.4      M AIN T HEOREM
Theorem 1. Consider a linear gaussian SCM M = hX, f,  i with standardized variables (zero
mean, unit variance). Let the true generative equations be expressed as,
                                          ∀xi ∈ X : xi = P ai βi +  i                                 (4)
where (a) P ai is the data matrix denoting all parents of xi in the CG corresponding to M, (b) βi are
the true generative parameters, and (c)  i is an independent, symmetric error vector that is bounded
such that the maximum deviation from βi that minimizes |xji − βi P aji | for the j th data point is δmax .
Let a mechanism take as input n data points and output the parameters of the fitted linear generative
functions. Then,
1. As n → ∞, the sensitivity of the mechanism based on causal information is lower than that
   without it.
2. For finite n, whenever the empirical correlation of a variable’s parents with error is much less
   than the empirical correlation of the features used by the associational model with error (i.e.,
   P aTi  i << HiT  i 8 ), the sensitivity of the mechanism based on causal information is the lowest.

Proof. WARM-UP: Three node SCM. As a warm-up, consider a 3-node SCM where X =
{x1 , x2 , x3 }. x1 causes x3 , while x2 does not have a causal relationship with x3 but is related
   8
       T is used to denote the transpose of the matrix.


                                                          16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


to x3 (it may be a part of Markov Blanket of x3 , or simply be correlated with x3 . The corresponding
data-generating equations are,
                                                      x 1 =  1
                                          x2 = f2 (x1 , x3 ,  2 )                                    (20)
                                             x 3 = β 3 x 1 +  3
where f2 can be any linear function (x2 optionally is caused by x1 ). If x2 depends on x3 , it will
be a child of x3 ; if x2 depends on x1 , it will be correlated with x3 ; if x2 depends on both x1 and
x3 , it will be both a child and correlated with x3 . Let us consider the estimation equation for any
xi . The proof logic follows the same way for other estimating equations, since they correspond to
independent mechanisms.
Causal Model. The causal model will use the following model for predicting x3 ,
                                               xˆ3 = βˆ3 x1                                          (21)

Associational Model. In contrast, the associational generative model will use the following parame-
ters. Since x2 is not independent of x3 after conditioning on x1 , the model may include x2 since it
may result in predictive accuracy gain for x3 .
                                          xˆ3 = γ31 x1 + γ32 x2                                      (22)

Using Lemma 1, we see that causal model corresponds to the true DGP, whereas associational model
does not. Thus, sensitivity of causal model is lower than or equal to associational model, under the
same conditions (where Xc is replaced by causal parents P a = {x1 } and Xa by H = {x1 , x2 }) .
We can analogously use Lemma 1 for the general case with all variables.

The above proof also generalizes to case where all variables of SCM are not observed. We need the
following assumption.
Assumption 1. For each node xi ∈ X for the SCM M, any unobserved parents P aunobs
                                                                            i     are
independent of all other observed parents of xi , P aobs
                                                     i   .

                    P aj,obs
                       i     ⊥ P ak,unobs
                             ⊥    i       ∀j, k    where P aobs
                                                            i   ∪ P aunobs
                                                                     i     = P ai                     (5)

If all parents of a node xi are observed, the above assumption is true trivially. If all parents are not
observed (e.g., xi shares an unobserved common cause with another variable), then this assumption
ensures that the estimated error from linear regression is independent of the true parents.
Corollary 2. Under Assumption 1, Theorem 1 is satisfied even if some variables of the SCM are
unobserved.

Proof. Under Assumption 1, the empirical error is still independent of the causal parents. Under the
simple case, if x3 has an unobserved parent, it may share an unobserved parent with x2 and thus
the  3 term can be expanded as,  3 = β3unobs xunobs +  03 where  03 is the true SCM error with an
unobserved variable. However, due to Assumption 1, xunobs ⊥   ⊥ x1 ; hence x1 ⊥
                                                                              ⊥  3 . Hence the logic
of above proof holds and the rest of the proof follows identically to Theorem 1.

REMARK: Counter-Examples Where Causal Information May Not Help Sensitivity. Note that
the above proof would not work if the additional features used by the associational model are
independent or weakly correlated with the variable to be generated (and thus we cannot claim      P that
HiT  i >> P aTi  i ). In the 3-node SCM, P for example, if x2 is weakly correlated       with x3 ; x2  3
will also be close to zero, as would be x1  3 , for large n. So the sensitivity of γ̂31 may be comparable
to β̂31 (though parameter γ̂32 may still have non-zero sensitivity compared to the causal model’s
                                                                                                P zero
sensitivity). Specifically,
                P             if relationship between x2 and x3 is weak enough such that          x2  3 is
comparable to x1  3 , then it is not guaranteed that causal information will help.
To provide a contrived example where a model with causal information will have worsePsensitivity
                                                                                         P than
without, consider the following counter-example. Suppose a finite dataset such that x22 x1  3 −


                                                   17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                                                 1
   x1 x2 x2  3 = 0. Then γˆ3 1 = β3 and will have minimal (δmax ) sensitivity, while βˆ3 6= β3
P        P
and thus its sensitivity is > δmax . In addition, we can construct relationship of x2 and x3 such that
sensitivity of γ32 is also zero. Specifically, x2 may be the child of x3 and be fully determined by x3 ;
x2 = β2 x3 ⇒ x3 = β12 x2 , leading to γ̂32 = β12 . Then γ̂32 will also be optimal for any new adversarial
                                                                                                     2
point. Thus, comparing the causal versus associational model, the sensitivity of both γˆ3 2 and βˆ3 is
                                                            1
zero, but the sensitivity of γˆ3 1 is lower than that of βˆ3 .
Correctness of the Proof: Our proof does not simply depend on the number of features. As a
counterexample, consider a graph where a node x3 has two parents: x1 and x2 and is correlated with
x4 . A causal model will use both x1 and x2 while the associational model may use x4 . The logic in
the proof (independence of error w.r.t features) will show that causal model with more features is less
sensitive.
Clarification (& Comparison to Prior Work): We would like to clarify that the proof involving
linear mixture of gaussians is meant to serve as intuition to understand what the benefit of causal
side-information has towards the stability of the learnt parameters. Prior work (Chaudhuri et al.,
2011) also studies the learning of linear models using DP and performs a similar style of analysis.
However, we remark that (a) their work does not focus on using any causal information, and (b)
measuring sensitivity through parameter stability is a fairly general technique used (and does not
imply that output perturbation is the only mechanism to be used to achieve DP in such a setting). We
would also like to stress that (a) we use a different proof technique that is motivated by the causal
graph structure, and (b) their work is for discriminative models while ours is for generative models.
B     P RIVACY B ENEFIT OF C AUSAL M ODELS IN N ON -L INEAR SETTINGS
Note: The notation in this section is slightly different from that used earlier.
B.1    N OTATION
A mechanism H takes in as input a dataset D and outputs a parameterized model fθ , where θ are
the parameters of the model. The model (and its parameters) belongs to a hypothesis space H. The
dataset comprises of samples, where each sample x = (x1 , · · · , xk ) comprise of k features. To learn
the model, we utilize the empirical risk mechanism (ERM), and a loss function L. The subscript of
the loss function denotes what the loss is calculated over. For example Lx denotes the loss being
calculated over sample Px. Similarly, LD denotes the average loss calculated over all samples in the
                     1                                                   ∗              ∗
dataset i.e., LD = |D|    x∈D Lx . Additionally, Lx (fθ ) = `(fθ (x), f (x)) where f is the oracle
(responsible for generating ground truth), and `(., .) can be any loss function (such as the cross
entropy loss or reconstruction loss for a generative model).
1. Data Generating Process (DGP): The DGP hf ∗ , ηi is obtained using the following procedure:
f ∗ = limn→∞ arg min LD (fθ ). Essentially f ? can be thought of as the infinite data limit of
the ERM learner and can be viewed as the ground truth. In a causal setting, the DGP for all
variables/features x is defined as f ∗ (x) = (f1∗ (P a(x1 )) + ηi , · · · , fn∗ (P a(xn )) + ηn ) where ηi are
mutually, independently chosen noise values and P a(xi ) are the parents of xi in the SCM.
2. Distinction between Causal and Associational Worlds: For each feature xi , we call P a(xi ) as
the causal features, and X \ {xi , P a(xi )} as the associational features for predicting xi . Corre-
spondingly, the model using only P a(xi ) for each feature xi is known as the causal model, and the
model using all features X (including associational features) is known as the associational model.
We denote the causal model learnt by ERM with loss L as fθc , and the associational model learnt
by ERM using the same loss L as fθa . Note that the hypothesis class for the models is different:
fθc ∈ HC and fθa ∈ HA , where HC ⊆ HA .
Like fθc , the true DGP function uses only the causal features. Assuming that the true function f ∗
belongs in the hypothesis class HC , we write, f ∗ = lim|D|→∞ arg minf ∈HC LD (f ).
3. Adversary. Given a dataset D and a model fθ , the role of an adversary is to create a neighboring
dataset D0 by adding a new point x0 . We assume that the adversary does so by choosing a point x0
where the loss of fθ is maximized. Thus, the difference of the empirical loss on D0 compared to D
will be high, which we expect to lead to high susceptibility to membership inference attacks.


                                                     18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


4. Loss-maximizing (LM) Adversary: Given a model fθ , dataset D, and a loss function L, an
LM adversary chooses a point x0 (to be added to D to obtain D0 ) as arg maxx Lx (fθ ). Note that
Lx (fθ ) = Lx (fθ (x))

    Main Result. Given a dataset D of size n, and a strongly convex and Lipschitz continuous
    loss function L, assume we train two models in a differentially private manner: a causal
    (generative) model fθc , and an associational (generative) model fθa , such that they minimize
    L on D. Assume that the class of hypotheses H is expressive enough such that the true causal
    function lies in H.
    1. Infinite sample case. As n → ∞, the privacy budget of the causal model is lower than that
       of the associational model i.e., εc ≤ εa .
    2. Finite sample case. For finite n, assuming certain conditions on the associational models
       learnt and n, the privacy budget of the causal model is lower than that of the associational
       model i.e., εc ≤ εa .

B.2      P ROOF O UTLINE
The main steps of our proof are as follows:
1. We instantiate two worlds: one with a causal model, and one without one (i.e., with an associational
   model).
2. We show that the maximum loss of a causal model is lower than or equal to maximum loss of the
   corresponding associational model.
3. Using strong convexity and Lipschitz continuity of the loss function, we show how the difference
   in loss corresponds to the sensitivity of the learning function.
4. Finally, the privacy budget ε is a monotonic function of the sensitivity.
We prove step 2 separately for n → ∞ (Appendix B.1) and finite n (Appendix B.2) below. Then we
prove step 3 in Appendix B.3. Step 4 follows from differential privacy literature (Dwork et al., 2014).
B.3      P ROOF W HEN n → ∞ ( FOR S TEP 2 FROM O UTLINE )
As |D| = n → ∞, the proof arises from knowledge that the causal model becomes the same as the
true DGP f ∗ .
Preliminary 1. Given any variable xt , the causal model learns a function based only on its parents,
P a(xt ). The adversary for causal model chooses points from the DGP hf ∗ , ηi9 s.t.,
                          x0 = arg max Lx (fθc (x)) s.t. ∀i xi = fi∗ (P a(xi )) + ηi                  (23)
                                       x

where fθc = arg minf ∈HC LD (f ). Assuming that HC is expressive enough such that f ∗ ∈ HC , as
n = |D| → ∞, we can write
                                   lim fθc = lim arg max LD (f ) = f ∗
                                 |D|→∞           |D|→∞        f ∈HC

Therefore, the causal model is equivalent to the true DGP’s function. For any target xi to be predicted,
maximum error on any point is ηi for the `1 loss, and a function of ηi for other losses. Intuitively, the
adversary is constrained to choose points at a maximum ηi distance away from the causal model.
But for associational models, we have,
                          x00 = arg max Lx (fθa (x)) s.t. ∀i xi = fi∗ (P a(xi )) + ηi                 (24)
                                       x

As n = |D| → ∞, fθa 6= f ∗ . Thus, the adversary is less constrained and can generate points for a
target xi that are generated from a different function than the associational model. For any point, the
difference in the associational model’s prediction and the true value is |fθa (x)) − f ∗ (P a(xi ))| + ηi ,
which is equivalent to the loss under `1 . For a general loss function, the loss is a function of
|fθa (x) − f ∗ (P a(xi ))| + ηi . Therefore, we obtain,
              ∀i ηi ≤ |fθa (x) − f ∗ (P a(xi ))| + ηi ⇒ max Lx (fθc (x)) ≤ max Lx (fθa (x))           (25)
                                                               x                      x

for all losses that are increasing functions of the difference between the predicted and actual value.
   9
       One should think of the DGP = hf ∗ , ηi as the oracle that generates labels.


                                                         19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


B.4      P ROOF W HEN F INITE n ( FOR S TEP 2 FROM O UTLINE )
When n is finite, the proof argument remains the same but we need an additional assumption on the
associational model fθa learnt from D. From learning theory (Shalev-Shwartz & Ben-David, 2014),
we know that the loss of fθc will converge to that of f ∗ , while loss of fθa will converge to loss of
fθ∞
  a
    6= f ∗ . Thus, with high probability, fθc will have a lower loss w.r.t. f ∗ than fθa and a similar
argument follows as for the infinite-data case. However, since this convergence is probabilistic and
depends on the size of n, it is possible to obtain a fθc that has a higher loss w.r.t. f ∗ compared to fθa .
Therefore, rather than assuming convergence of fθc to f ∗ , we instead rely on the property that the
true DGP function f ∗ does not depend on the associational features xa . As a result, even if the loss
of the associational model is lower than the causal model on a particular point x = xc ∪ xa 10 , we
can change the value of xa to obtain a higher loss for the associational model (without changing the
loss of the causal model). This requires that the associational model have a non-trivial contribution
from the associational (non-causal) features, sufficient to change the loss. We state the following
assumption.
Assumption 2: If fθc is the causal model and fθa is the associational model, then we assume that the
associational model has non-trivial contribution from the associational features. Specifically, denote
xc as the causal features and xa as the associational features, such that x = xc ∪ xa . We define any
two new points: x0 = x0c ∪ xa and x00 = x00c ∪ x00a . Let us first assume a fixed value of xa . The LHS
(below) denotes the max difference in loss between fθc and fθa (i.e., change in loss between causal
and associational models over the same causal features). The RHS (below) denotes difference in loss
of fθa between xa and another value x∗a , keeping xc constant (i.e., effect due to the associational
features). Formally speaking


                   ∃xa max
                        0
                           {Lx0 (fθc (x0c ∪ xa )) − Lx0 (fθa (x0c ∪ xa ))}
                           xc
                                                                                                       (26)
                                ≤ min
                                   00
                                      max
                                       00
                                          Lx00 (fθa (x00c ∪ x00a )) − Lx00c ∪xa (fθa (x00c ∪ xa ))
                                    xc    xa


The inequality above can be interpreted as follows: if adversary 1 aims to find the x0c such that
difference in loss between associational and causal features is highest for a given xa , then there can
always be another adversary 2 who can obtain a bigger difference in loss by changing the associational
features (from the same xa to x00a ).
Intuition: Imagine that fθc is trained initially, and then associational features are introduced to train
fθa . fθa can obtain a lower loss than fθc by using the associational features xa . In doing so, it might
even change the model parameters related to xc . Assumption 1 says that change in xc ’s parameters is
small compared to the importance of the xa ’s parameters in fθa . For example, consider a f ∗ , fθc , fθa
to predict the value of xt such that xc = {x1 } and xa = {x2 }, and consider `1 loss.


                                 f ∗ = x1 ; fθc = 2x1 ; fθa = 1.9x1 + φ(x2 )


where xt = f ∗ (x) + η and η ∈ [−0.5, 0.5]. Note that without φ(x2 ), the loss of the associational
model is lower than the loss of causal model on any point. However, if xa = x2 ∈ R, then we can
always set |x2 | to an extreme value such that φ(x2 ) overturns the reduction in loss for the associational
model, without invoking Assumption 1. When xa is bounded (e.g., x2 ∈ {0, 1}), then Assumption 1
states that the change in loss possible due to changing φ(x2 ) is higher than the loss difference (which
is 0.1 for `1 loss). If H was the class of linear functions and we assume `1 loss with all features in the
same range (e.g., [0, 1]), then Assumption 1 implies that the coefficient of the associational features
in fθa is higher than the change in coefficient for the causal features from fθc to fθa .



  10
       Note that xa and xc each represent a set of features, and not a single feature.


                                                         20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


    Lemma 2. Assume an LM adversary and a strongly convex loss function L. Given a causal
    fθc and an associational model fθa trained on dataset D using ERM. The LM adversary
    selects two points: x0 and x00 . Then under Assumption 2, the worst-case loss obtained on the
    causal ERM model Lx0 (fθc ) is lower than the worst-case loss obtained on the associational
    ERM model Lx00 (fθa ) i.e.,
                                         Lx0 (fθc ) ≤ Lx00 (fθa )
    which can be re-written as
                                         max Lx (fθc ) ≤ max Lx (fθa )                                  (27)
                                             x                x


Proof: Before we discuss the proof, let us establish another preliminary.
Preliminary 2. Let us write fθa (x) = fθa (xc ∪ xa ) as a combination of terms due to xc and xa ,
where xc and xa are the causal features (parents) and non-causal features respectively i.e., xc ∪xa = x,
and xc ∩ xa = φ. Let x0 = x0c ∪ x0a be the point chosen by the causal adversary.
We will show that the associational adversary can always choose a point x00 = x0c ∪ x00a such that loss
of the adversary is higher. We write, for any value xa 11 ,
             L(fθa (x0c ∪ x00a )) = L(fθa (x0c ∪ x00a )) − L(fθa (x0c ∪ xa )) + L(fθa (x0c ∪ xa ))
                                 = (L(fθa (x0c ∪ x00a )) − L(fθa (x0c ∪ xa ))) + (L(fθa (x0c ∪ xa ))       (28)
                                 − L(fθc (x0c ∪ xa ))) + L(fθc (x0c ∪ xa ))

Rearranging terms, and since L(fθc (x0c ∪ x0a )) = L(fθc (x0c ∪ xa )) for any value of xa (causal model
does not depend on associational features),
             L(fθa (x0c ∪ x00a )) − L(fθc (x0c ∪ x0a )) = (L(fθa (x0c ∪ x00a )) − L(fθa (x0c ∪ xa )))
                                                          |                     {z                  }
                                                                              Term 1
                                                                                                           (29)
                                                       − (L(fθc (x0c ∪ xa )) − L(fθa (x0c ∪ xa )))
                                                         |                  {z                  }
                                                                             Term 2

Now the first term is ≥ 0 since the adversary can select x00a such that loss increases (or stays constant)
for fθa . Since the true function f ∗ does not depend on xa , changing xa does not change the true
function’s value but will change the value of the associational model (and adversary can choose it
such that loss on the new point is higher). The second term can either be positive or negative. If it is
negative, then we are done. Then the LHS > 0.
If the second term is positive, then we need to show that the first term is higher in magnitude than the
second term. From assumption 1, let it be satisfied for some x◦a . We know that L(fθc (x0c ∪ x0a )) =
L(fθc (x0c ∪ x◦a )) since the causal model ignores the associational features.
                 L(fθc (x0c ∪ x◦a )) − L(fθa (x0c ∪ x◦a )) ≤ max(L(fθc (xc ∪ x◦a )) − L(fθa (xc ∪ x◦a )))
                                                    xc
                           ∗                  ◦
   ≤ min max (L(fθa (xc ∪ xa ) − L(fθa (xc ∪ xa )) ≤ max (L(fθa (x0c ∪ x∗a ) − L(fθa (x0c ∪ x◦a ))
      xc  x∗
           a                                          x∗
                                                       a
                                                                                                           (30)
Now suppose adversary chooses a point such that x00a = xmax
                                                        a   where xmax
                                                                   a   is the arg max of the RHS
above. Then Equation 7 can be rewritten as
        L(fθa (x0c ∪ xmax
                      a   )) − L(fθc (x0c ∪ x0a )) = (L(fθa (x0c ∪ xmax
                                                                    a   )) − L(fθa (x0c ∪ x◦a )))
                                                     − (L(fθc (x0c ∪ x◦a )) − L(fθa (x0c ∪ x◦a )))         (31)
                                                     >0
where the last inequality is due to equation 8.
Thus, adversary can always select a different value of x = x0c ∪ xmax
                                                                  a   such that loss is higher than
the max loss in a causal model.
                 L(fθc (x0c ∪ x0a )) = max Lx (fθc ) ≤ L(fθa (x0c ∪ xmax
                                                                     a   )) ≤ max Lx (fθa )
                                         x                                             x
  11
       We omit the subscript for L for brevity. It can be implied from context.


                                                        21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


B.5   P ROOF OF S TEP 3 F ROM O UTLINE

   Theorem 2. Assume the existence of a dataset D of n samples. Further, assume a neighboring
   dataset is defined by adding a data point to D. Let fθc and fθa be the causal and associational
   models learnt using D, and fθc0 and fθa0 be the causal and associational models learnt using
   neighboring datasets D0 and D00 respectively. All models are obtained by ERM on a Lipschitz
   continuous (with parameter ρ), strongly convex (with parameter λ) loss function L. Then,
   the sensitivity of a causal learning function HC will be lower than that of its associational
   counterpart HA . Mathematically, assuming large enough n such that n > 2ρ      λ − 1,

                                 max0 ||θc − θc0 || ≤ max0 ||θa − θa0 ||                     (32)
                                 D,D                    D,D



Proof: The proof uses strongly convex and Lipschitz properties of the loss function. Before we
discuss the proof, let us introduce a requisite preliminary.
Preliminary 3. Assume the existence of a dataset D of size n. There are two generative models
learnt, fθa and fθc using this dataset. Similarly, assume there is a neighboring dataset D0 which is
obtained by adding one point x0 . Then the corresponding ERM models learnt using D0 are fθ0a and
fθ0c .
We now detail the steps of the proof.
Step 1. Assume L is strongly convex. Then by the optimality of ERM predictor on D and the
definition of strong convexity,

                     LD (fθ ) ≤ LD (αfθ + (1 − α)fθ0 )
                                                              λ                                  (33)
                      ≤ αLD (fθ ) + (1 − α)LD (fθ0 ) −          α(1 − α)||θ − θ0 ||2
                                                              2
Step 2. Rearranging terms, and as α → 1,

                                                               λ
                   (1 − α)LD (fθ ) ≤ (1 − α)LD (fθ0 ) −          α(1 − α)||θ − θ0 ||2
                                                               2                                 (34)
                                                    0 22
                                         ⇒ ||θ − θ || ≤ (LD (fθ0 ) − LD (fθ ))
                                                       λ
Step 3. Further, we can write (LD (fθ0 ) − LD (fθ )) in terms of loss on x0 .
                              n                 1
               LD0 (fθ ) =       LD (fθ ) +          Lx0 (fθ ) (since D0 = D ∪ x0 )
                           n+1                n+1
                              n                  1
                         ≤       LD (fθ0 ) +         Lx0 (fθ ) (from Equation 34)
                           n+1                n+1
                              n n+1                      n 1                  1
                         ≤               LD0 (fθ0 ) −           Lx0 (fθ0 ) +     Lx0 (fθ ) (since D = D0 − {x0 })
                           n+1 n                      n+1n                   n+1
                              1
⇒ LD0 (fθ ) − LD0 (fθ0 ) ≤       (Lx0 (fθ ) − Lx0 (fθ0 ))
                           n+1
                                                                                                  (35)

Step 4. Combining the above two equations, we obtain,
                          2                            2
            ||θ − θ0 ||2 ≤ (LD (fθ0 ) − LD (fθ )) ≤          (Lx0 (fθ ) − Lx0 (fθ0 ))            (36)
                          λ                         λ(n + 1)

Step 5. From Claim 1 above, we know that

                                   max Lx (fθc ) ≤ max Lx (fθa )
                                     x                    x
                                                                                                 (37)
                                    ⇒ Lx0 (fθc ) ≤ Lx00 (fθa )

                                                   22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


where x0 = arg maxx Lx (fθc ) and x00 is chosen such that x0 and x00 differ only in the associational
features. Thus, Lx0 (fθc0 ) = Lx00 (fθc0 ). Also because HC ⊆ HA , the training loss of the ERM model
for any D00 defined using D and x00 is higher for a causal model i.e.,

                                   Lx0 (fθc0 ) = Lx00 (fθc0 ) ≥ Lx00 (fθa0 )                      (38)

Therefore, we obtain,

            Lx0 (fθc ) − Lx0 (fθc0 ) = max Lx (fθc ) − Lx0 (fθc0 ) ≤ Lx00 (fθa ) − Lx00 (fθa0 )   (39)
                                           x

So we have now shown that the max loss difference on a point x0 for causal ERM models trained on
neighboring datasets is lower than the corresponding loss difference over x00 for the associational
models.
Step 6. Now we use the Lipschitz property, to claim,
                                  Lx00 (fθa ) − Lx00 (fθa0 ) ≤ ρ||θa − θa0 ||                     (40)

Step 7. Combining Equations 36 (substituting fθc ) and 40, and taking max on the RHS, we get,


                                                 2
                        max0 ||θc − θc0 ||2 ≤         max Lx0 (fθc ) − Lx0 (fθc0 )
                        D,D                  λ(n + 1) D,D0
                                                2
                                           ≤          max Lx0 (fθa ) − Lx0 (fθa0 )                (41)
                                             λ(n + 1) D,D0
                                                         2ρ
                                                    ≤           max ||θa − θa0 ||
                                                      λ(n + 1) D,D0

                                                          2ρ
                           ⇒ max0 ||θc − θc0 ||2 ≤              max ||θa − θa0 ||                 (42)
                               D,D                     λ(n + 1) D,D0

For n + 1 > 2ρ
            λ ,
                                   max0 ||θc − θc0 ||2 ≤ max0 ||θa − θa0 ||                       (43)
                                   D,D                      D,D

Now if maxD,D0 ||θc − θc0 || ≥ 1, then the result follows by taking the square root over LHS. If not,
we need a sufficiently large n such that n + 1 > λ max 2ρ0 ||θc −θ0 || , then we obtain,
                                                              D,D        c



                                     max0 ||θc − θc0 || ≤ max0 ||θa − θa0 ||                      (44)
                                     D,D                    D,D

Remark on Theorem 2. Theorem 2 depends on two key assumptions:
1. Assumption 1 that constrains associational model to have non-trivial contribution from associa-
   tional (non-causal) features.
2. A sufficiently large n as shown above.
When any of these assumptions is violated (e.g., a small-n training dataset or an associational model
that is negligibly dependent on the associational features), then it is possible that the causal ERM
model has higher ε than the associational model.

    Connections between Theory & Practice: The proof provided in Appendix A is meant
    to provide intuition as to the benefit of causal information in a simpler setting using linear
    gaussian mixtures, similar to what is done in other work (Ilyas et al., 2019). We provide a
    more general proof (across all classes of generative models), for a general privacy adversary
    in Appendix B, but under some constraining assumptions regarding the convexity of the loss
    function.



                                                       23
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


C     T RAINING D ETAILS
C.1    OVERALL S CHEME
We outline the work-flow overview (refer Figure 7): 1. The user provides a dataset for which they
want to create a synthetic copy; 2. We utilize techniques (e.g., Morales-Alvarez et al. (2021)) to learn
the structured causal model (SCM) associated with this dataset (or can assume the SCM is given);
3. We encode this structure into a generative model (e.g., Morales-Alvarez et al. (2021); Geffner
et al. (2022); Kyono et al. (2021)) and train it with DP-SGD; 4. The generative model is sampled to
obtain a synthetic data which is DP (by post-processing) and can be used for arbitrary downstream
tasks. We will also clarify that unlike some works which require some information about the nature
of usage of downstream data, ours does not.


                              SERVER
                                                                            DP-SGD



                                              Causal                 Generative
                                             Discovery                 Model

                                Dataset                   SCM                        Synthetic Data


                              CLIENT

                                                                                  Downstream Usage


                                           Figure 7: Overview of procedure.


                                       Z                                 X1                 Z
                                                 X1             Z

                                       X                                          X2
                                                         X2

                                 (a) VAE        (b) Causal Graph         (c) Causal DGM

                           Figure 9: Exemplar case comparing our solution to VAE.



C.2    M ODELS
Pain



                                                  X1                       Z



                                                                X2



Encoder: qφ (z, x1 |x2 ) = qφ1 (z|x1 , x2 ) · qφ2 (x1 |x2 )
Decoder: pθ (x2 , x1 , z) = pθ1 (x2 |x1 ) · pθ2 (x2 |z) · pθ3 (x1 |z)

EEDI


                                                                24
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                            X1                  Z



                                                      X2


Encoder: qφ (z, x1 |x2 ) = qφ1 (z|x2 )
Decoder: pθ (x2 , x1 , z) = p(z) · p(x1 ) · pθ1 (x2 |z) · pθ2 (x2 |x1 )
Note: All encoders and decoders used as part of our experiments comprised of simple feed-forward
architectures. In particular, these architectures have 3 layers. All embeddings generated are of size
10. We set the learning rate to be 0.001.
C.3    DATASETS


             Dataset                                                 # Records     k       ε
             EEDI Wang et al. (2020b)                                      2950    948   12.42
             Pain5000 Tu et al. (2019)                                     5000    222   5.62
             Pain1000 Tu et al. (2019)                                     1000    222   2.36
             Synthetic                                                     1000     22    3.9
             Lung Cancer Lauritzen & Spiegelhalter (1988)                 80,000    8      -

Table 2: Salient features of our experimental setup. More information about the datasets and parameters used
can be found in the Appendix C.4.


We evaluate on datasets from three real-world applications. The first one is the EEDI dataset Wang
et al. (2020b) which is one of the largest real-world education data collected from an online education
platform. It contains answers by students (of various educational backgrounds) for certain diagnostic
questions. The second one is the neuropathic pain (Pain) diagnosis dataset obtained from a causally
grounded simulator Tu et al. (2019). For this dataset, we consider two variants: one with 1000
data records (or Pain1000), and another with 5000 data records (or Pain5000). The third
dataset (Lung Cancer) contains information about lung diseases and visits to Asia Lauritzen &
Spiegelhalter (1988).
More salient features of each dataset is presented in Table 2. We choose these datasets as they
encompass diversity in their size (n), dimensionality (k), and have some prior information on causal
structures (refer Appendix D). We utilize this causal information in building a causally informed
generative models. The (partial) SCM is given utilizing domain knowledge of the EEDI12 and Pain
contexts.


   12
      A larger SCM for the EEDI dataset was learnt using the VICause methodology proposed by Morales-Alvarez
et al. (2021).


                                                      25
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


C.4   T RAINING PARAMETERS

                         Causality       Dataset        Batch Size   Epochs
                             ×            EEDI             200         1000
                             X            EEDI             200         1000
                             ×         Pain1000            100         100
                             X         Pain1000            100         100
                             ×         Pain5000            100         100
                             X         Pain5000            100         100
                             ×        Synthetic            100          50
                             X        Synthetic            100          50
                             X         Lung Cancer         100         100


                     Table 3: Training parameters for our experimental evaluation.


For the experiments related to the model proposed by Morales-Alvarez et al. (2021), we utilized the
same parameters as for EEDI (in Table 3) to obtain the same privacy expenditure (ε).

D     C AUSAL G RAPHS
SCM-1: SCM for the Pain dataset. X1 denotes the causes of a medical condition, and X2 denotes
the various conditions.


                                                   X2

                                         X1               Z

SCM-2: SCM used by the EEDI. X2 denotes the answers to questions and X1 is the student meta
data such as the year group and school.


                                                   X2

                                         X1               Z

VICause: We refer the reader to the work of Morales-Alvarez Morales-Alvarez et al. (2021), which
contains information about the causal graph used to obtain Figure 2.
Lung Cancer: The causal graph related to the Lung Cancer dataset can be found in https:
//www.bnlearn.com/bnrepository/discrete-small.html. The edge between tub
and ether was removed to simulate missing edges, and the edge between asia and smoke was
added to simulate new edges.


                                                   26
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


E      U TILITY E VALUATION
E.1     ACCURACY ON O RIGINAL DATA
The results are detailed in Table 4.


    Dataset                          Non Causal                                             Causal
               kernel        svc      logistic          rf        knn    kernel    svc      logistic         rf     knn
  EEDI           86.93       91.24       88.53         93.8      88.22    87.38    91.46        88.95       93.44   87.92
Pain1000         92.75       94.42       91.56         94.19     88.78    92.69    94.03        91.81       94.28    89.5
Pain5000         95.37       96.53       97.47         93.03     92.14    95.48    96.5         97.39       92.74   92.19

Table 4: Baseline Accuracy calculated on the original (and not synthetic) data. Results presented in Table 1 are
based on these values.


E.2     PAIRPLOTS
Observe that the pair-plots obtained from the models trained with causality and DP are comparable to
those obtained from models trained with causality and no DP; the utility of both these models should
be comparable.


              (a) Original                        (b) Causal + No DP                  (c) Causal + DP

                                        Figure 10: Pain5000 Dataset


F      R ESULTS ON P A I N 1000 DATASET
As in the figures in the main body of the paper, we plot the average success of the MI attack Stadler
et al. (2020). From Figures 11 and 12, observe that the trends are the same as what we observed
earlier: causality in conjunction with DP reduces the advantage of the adversary. DP and causality in
isolation also reduce the MI adversary’s advantage.


                                                         27
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                         (a) DP                                             (b) No DP

Figure 11: Impact of DP on MI resilience: Causality by itself is able to provide resilience to MI adversaries.
When combined with DP, the advantage is exacerbated.


                       (a) Causal                                         (b) Non-Causal

Figure 12: Impact of Causality on MI resilience: Observe that the combination of DP and causality produces
more resilience to MI attacks.


                                                     28
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


G    MI R ESULTS
PA denotes the ability of the classifier to correctly classify train samples. NA denotes the ability of
the classifier to correctly classify test samples. The Accuracy is a weighted combination of PA and
NA.

EEDI. Observe that when there is causal information, the difference between the DP and No DP
column is larger.

        Extractor     Attack Model         Accuracy                  NA                 PA
                                          DP   No DP          DP      No DP       DP         No DP
                          kernel         47.33     47.33      100       100        0           0
                           svc           47.33     47.33      100       100        0           0
          Naive
                      random forest      62.18     99.21     58.51     99.49     65.48       98.96
                           knn           54.79     96.48     55.19     98.85     54.43       94.36
                          kernel          100       100       100       100       100         100
                           svc            100       100       100       100       100         100
        Histogram
                      random forest       100       100       100       100       100         100
                           knn            100       100       100       100       100         100

                    Table 5: Model trained using EEDI and partial causal information.



        Extractor     Attack Model         Accuracy                  NA                 PA
                                          DP   No DP          DP      No DP       DP         No DP
                          kernel         49.85     81.23      100       100        0         62.58
                           svc           75.38     81.23     62.96      100      87.73       62.58
          Naive
                      random forest      98.15     96.92     98.77     97.53     97.55       96.32
                           knn           98.15     94.46     99.38     95.06     96.93       93.87
                          kernel          100       100       100       100       100         100
                           svc            100       100       100       100       100         100
        Histogram
                      random forest       100       100       100       100       100         100
                           knn            100       100       100       100       100         100

Table 6: Model trained using EEDI and causal information obtained from VICause Morales-Alvarez et al.
(2021).



        Extractor     Attack Model         Accuracy                  NA                 PA
                                          DP   No DP          DP      No DP       DP         No DP
                          kernel         47.33     47.33      100       100        0           0
                           svc           53.21     60.85     60.44     57.62     46.72       63.75
          Naive
                      random forest      99.76      100      99.74      100      99.77        100
                           knn           99.76     99.82     99.87     99.62     99.65        100
                          kernel         52.67     100         0        100      100          100
                           svc           47.33     95.7       100      95.39      0          95.97
        Histogram
                      random forest      59.39     100        100       100      22.9         100
                           knn           59.39     100        100       100      22.9         100

                      Table 7: Model trained using EEDI and no causal information.


                                                   29
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Pain 1000. Observe that when there is causal information, the difference between the DP and No
DP column is larger.

       Extractor      Attack Model         Accuracy                 NA                 PA
                                          DP   No DP         DP      No DP      DP          No DP
                           kernel        47.33    47.33      100       100       0            0
                            svc          47.33    47.33      100       100       0            0
         Naive
                       random forest      57.7    99.58     60.44     99.74    55.24        99.42
                            knn          55.94    96.76     60.44     96.16    51.9         95.4
                           kernel        48.3     57.82     78.36      100     21.29        19.91
                            svc          47.33    47.33      100       100       0            0
       Histogram
                       random forest     57.82    57.82      100       100     19.91        19.91
                            knn          59.7      59.7     81.82     81.82    39.82        39.82
                           kernel        99.7     98.24      100      99.62    99.42        97.01
                            svc          51.09    62.12     83.99     50.58    21.52         72.5
       Correlated
                       random forest     97.39     100      95.52      100     99.08         100
                            knn          41.52    60.61     42.64     60.95    40.51         60.3
                           kernel        61.76    61.7      20.49     72.23    98.85        51.78
                            svc          47.33    47.33      100       100       0            0
       Ensemble
                       random forest     97.94     100      96.93      100     98.85         100
                            knn          81.09    82.12      86.3     83.99    76.41        80.44

                 Table 8: Model trained using Pain1000 and partial causal information.



       Extractor      Attack Model         Accuracy                 NA                 PA
                                          DP   No DP         DP      No DP      DP          No DP
                           kernel        47.33    47.33      100      100        0            0
                            svc          47.33    47.33      100      100        0            0
         Naive
                       random forest     79.82     99.7     82.33     100      77.56        99.42
                            knn          80.85    85.76     82.71     88.6     79.17        83.2
                           kernel        96.36    96.79     96.41     90.14    96.32        83.77
                            svc          47.33    47.33      100       100       0            0
       Histogram
                       random forest      100      100       100       100      100          100
                            knn           100     94.91      100      94.88     100         94.94
                           kernel         100      100       100       100      100          100
                            svc          94.12     100      92.83      100     95.28         100
       Correlated
                       random forest       78      100        79       100      77.1         100
                            knn          53.82    73.88     74.9      72.73    34.87        74.91
                           kernel        98.55    98.3      98.46     99.49    96.82        97.24
                            svc          47.33    47.33      100       100       0            0
       Ensemble
                       random forest     94.85     100      93.98      100     95.63         100
                            knn           100     88.79      100      90.27     100         87.46

                    Table 9: Model trained using Pain1000 and no causal information.


                                                  30
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Pain 5000. Observe that when there is causal information, the difference between the DP and No
DP column is larger.

       Extractor      Attack Model         Accuracy                 NA                 PA
                                          DP   No DP         DP      No DP       DP         No DP
                          kernel        47.33     47.33      100       100       0            0
                           svc          47.33     47.33      100       100       0            0
         Naive
                      random forest     76.85     98.85     78.36      97.7    75.49        99.88
                           knn          76.79     96.12     78.36     93.98    75.37        98.04
                          kernel        47.33     60.24      100      38.16      0          80.09
                           svc          47.33     47.33      100       100       0            0
       Histogram
                      random forest     57.82     57.82      100       100     19.91        19.91
                           knn           58.7      59.7     81.82     81.82    39.82        38.82
                          kernel        92.61      100      94.88     100      90.56         100
                           svc          47.33     97.64      100      100        0          95.51
       Correlated
                      random forest      100       100       100      100       100          100
                           knn          36.48      100      45.07     100      28.77         100
                          kernel        47.33     62.18      100      46.73      0          76.06
                           svc          47.33     47.33      100       100       0            0
       Ensemble
                      random forest      100       100       100       100      100          100
                           knn          74.85      100      81.56      100     68.81         100

                 Table 10: Model trained using Pain5000 and partial causal information.



       Extractor      Attack Model         Accuracy                 NA                 PA
                                          DP   No DP         DP      No DP       DP         No DP
                          kernel        47.33     47.33      100       100       0            0
                           svc          64.61     47.33     60.18      100     68.58          0
         Naive
                      random forest     99.94      100      99.87      100      100          100
                           knn           100      99.82      100      99.62     100          100
                          kernel         100       100       100      100       100          100
                           svc          65.03     47.33     91.55     100       41.2          0
       Histogram
                      random forest      100       100       100      100       100          100
                           knn           100       100       100      100       100          100
                          kernel         100       100       100      100       100          100
                           svc           100       100       100      100       100          100
       Correlated
                      random forest     99.76      100      99.62     100      99.88         100
                           knn          53.09      100      80.41     100      28.54         100
                          kernel         100       100       100      100       100          100
                           svc          48.85     47.33      100      100        0            0
       Ensemble
                      random forest      100       100       100      100       100          100
                           knn           100       100       100      100       100          100

                  Table 11: Model trained using Pain5000 and no causal information.


                                                  31
