Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A C ONTROL -C ENTRIC B ENCHMARK FOR
V IDEO P REDICTION
 Stephen Tian, Chelsea Finn, & Jiajun Wu
 Stanford University



                                            A BSTRACT
         Video is a promising source of knowledge for embodied agents to learn models of
         the world’s dynamics. Large deep networks have become increasingly effective at
         modeling complex video data in a self-supervised manner, as evaluated by met-
         rics based on human perceptual similarity or pixel-wise comparison. However, it
         remains unclear whether current metrics are accurate indicators of performance
         on downstream tasks. We find empirically that for planning robotic manipulation,
         existing metrics can be unreliable at predicting execution success. To address this,
         we propose a benchmark for action-conditioned video prediction in the form of
         a control benchmark that evaluates a given model for simulated robotic manip-
         ulation through sampling-based planning. Our benchmark, Video Prediction for
         Visual Planning (VP2 ), includes simulated environments with 11 task categories
         and 310 task instance definitions, a full planning implementation, and training
         datasets containing scripted interaction trajectories for each task category. A cen-
         tral design goal of our benchmark is to expose a simple interface – a single forward
         prediction call – so it is straightforward to evaluate almost any action-conditioned
         video prediction model. We then leverage our benchmark to study the effects of
         scaling model size, quantity of training data, and model ensembling by analyzing
         five highly-performant video prediction models, finding that while scale can im-
         prove perceptual quality when modelling visually diverse settings, other attributes
         such as uncertainty awareness can also aid planning performance. Additional en-
         vironment and evaluation visualizations are at this link.

1   I NTRODUCTION
Dynamics models can empower embodied agents to solve a range of tasks by enabling downstream
policy learning or planning. Such models can be learned from many types of data, but video is one
modality that is task-agnostic, widely available, and enables learning from raw agent observations in
a self-supervised manner. Learning a dynamics model from video can be formulated as a video pre-
diction problem, where the goal is to infer the distribution of future video frames given one or more
initial frames as well as the actions taken by an agent in the scene. This problem is challenging, but
scaling up deep models has shown promise in domains including simulated games and driving (Oh
et al., 2015; Harvey et al., 2022), as well as robotic manipulation and locomotion (Denton & Fergus,
2018; Villegas et al., 2019; Yan et al., 2021; Babaeizadeh et al., 2021; Voleti et al., 2022).
As increasingly large and sophisticated video prediction models continue to be introduced, how can
researchers and practitioners determine which ones to use in particular situations? This question
remains largely unanswered. Currently, models are first trained on video datasets widely adopted
by the community (Ionescu et al., 2014; Geiger et al., 2013; Dasari et al., 2019) and then evaluated
on held-out test sets using a variety of perceptual metrics. Those include metrics developed for
image and video comparisons (Wang et al., 2004), as well as recently introduced deep perceptual
metrics (Zhang et al., 2018; Unterthiner et al., 2018). However, it is an open question whether
perceptual metrics are predictive of other qualities, such as planning abilities for an embodied agent.
In this work, we take a step towards answering this question for one specific situation: how can we
compare action-conditioned video prediction models in downstream robotic control? We propose
a benchmark for video prediction that is centered around robotic manipulation performance. Our
benchmark, which we call the Video Prediction for Visual Planning Benchmark (VP2 ), evaluates
predictive models on manipulation planning performance by standardizing all elements of a control


                                                  1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


setup except the video predictor. It includes simulated environments, specific start/goal task instance
specifications, training datasets of noisy expert video interaction data, and a fully configured model-
based control algorithm.
For control, our benchmark uses visual foresight (Finn & Levine, 2017; Ebert et al., 2018), a model-
predictive control method previously applied to robotic manipulation. Visual foresight performs
planning towards a specified goal by leveraging a video prediction model to simulate candidate
action sequences and then scoring them based on the similarity between their predicted futures and
the goal. After optimizing with respect to the score (Rubinstein, 1999; de Boer et al., 2005; Williams
et al., 2016), the best action sequence is executed for a single step, and replanning is performed at
each step. This is a natural choice for our benchmark for two reasons: first, it is goal-directed,
enabling a single model to be evaluated on many tasks, and second, it interfaces with models only
by calling forward prediction, which avoids prescribing any particular model class or architecture.
The main contribution of this work is a set of benchmark environments, training datasets, and control
algorithms to isolate and evaluate the effects of prediction models on simulated robotic manipula-
tion performance. Specifically, we include two simulated multi-task robotic manipulation settings
with a total of 310 task instance definitions, datasets containing 5000 noisy expert demonstration
trajectories for each of 11 tasks, and a modular and lightweight implementation of visual foresight.
Through our experiments, we find that mod-
els that score well on frequently used metrics
can suffer when used in the context of control,
as shown in Figure 1. Then, to explore how
we can develop better models for control, we                          Model A — Metrics ↑     Control Failure

leverage our benchmark to analyze other ques-
                                                     Starting state
tions such as the effects of model size, data
quantity, and modeling uncertainty. We empir-
ically test recent video prediction models, in-
cluding recurrent variational models as well as
a diffusion modeling approach. We will open                           Model B — Metrics ↓    Control Success!

source the code and environments in the bench-       Figure 1: Models that score well on perceptual metrics
mark in an easy-to-use interface, in hopes that it   may generate crisp but physically infeasible predictions
will help drive research in video prediction for     that lead to planning failures. Here, Model A predicts
                                                     that that the slide will move on its own.
downstream control applications.

2    R ELATED W ORK
Evaluating video prediction models. Numerous evaluation procedures have been proposed
for video prediction models. One widely adopted approach is to train models on standardized
datasets (Geiger et al., 2013; Ionescu et al., 2014; Srivastava et al., 2015; Cordts et al., 2016; Finn
et al., 2016; Dasari et al., 2019) and then compare predictions to ground truth samples across sev-
eral metrics on a held-out test set. These metrics include several image metrics adapted to the video
case, such as the widely used ℓ2 per-pixel Euclidean distance and Peak signal-to-noise ratio (PSNR).
Image metrics developed to correlate more specifically with human perceptual judgments include
structural similarity (SSIM) (Wang et al., 2004), as well as recent methods based on features learned
by deep neural networks like LPIPS (Zhang et al., 2018) and FID (Heusel et al., 2017). FVD (Un-
terthiner et al., 2018) extends FID to the video domain via a pre-trained 3D convolutional network.
While these metrics have been shown to correlate well with human perception, it is not clear whether
they are indicative of performance on control tasks. Geng et al. (2022) develop correspondence-wise
prediction losses, which use optical flow estimates to make losses robust to positional errors. These
losses may improve control performance and are an orthogonal direction to our benchmark.
Another class of evaluation methods judges a model’s ability to make predictions about the outcomes
of particular physical events, such as whether objects will collide or fall over (Sanborn et al., 2013;
Battaglia et al., 2013; Bear et al., 2021). This excludes potentially extraneous information from the
rest of the frame. Our benchmark similarly measures only task-relevant components of predicted
videos, but does so through the lens of overall control success rather than hand-specified questions.
Oh et al. (2015) evaluate action-conditioned video prediction models on Atari games by training a
Q-learning agent using predicted data. We evaluate learned models for planning rather than policy
learning, and extend our evaluation to robotic manipulation domains.


                                                     2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023



                          Perceptual          Control                               Perceptual          Control
 Model Loss          FVD LPIPS* SSIM Success                Model Loss        FVD LPIPS* SSIM Success
 FitVid MSE       30.7       3.4       87.8    65%          FitVid MSE        9.0     0.62       97.4    58%
        +LPIPS=1 18.0        2.8       89.3    67%                 +LPIPS=1 5.9       0.63       97.5    82%
        +LPIPS=10 24.3       4.1       84.6    35%                 +LPIPS=10 6.8      0.70       97.3    32%
 SVG′ MSE         51.7       5.1       82.7    80%          SVG′ MSE         10.6     0.97       95.3    70%
        +LPIPS=1 40.7        4.4       83.2    80%                 +LPIPS=1 7.2       0.89       95.5    73%
        +LPIPS=10 45.1       4.8       81.8    37%                 +LPIPS=10 24.2      1.1       94.0    10%

          (a) robosuite pushing tasks                               (b) RoboDesk: push red button

                          Perceptual          Control                               Perceptual          Control
 Model Loss          FVD LPIPS* SSIM Success                Model Loss        FVD LPIPS* SSIM Success
 FitVid MSE       20.5       1.25      94.4    50%          FitVid MSE       15.1      1.08      95.8    38%
        +LPIPS=1 9.8         1.26      93.3    75%                 +LPIPS=1 10.2       1.08      94.9    36%
        +LPIPS=10 7.3        1.30      92.8    83%                 +LPIPS=10 9.8       1.39      93.6    13%
 SVG′ MSE         18.3       1.68      91.3    47%          SVG′ MSE         22.5      1.88      90.6    58%
        +LPIPS=1 11.0        1.58      90.9    68%                 +LPIPS=1 4.9        2.06      89.7    10%
        +LPIPS=10 18.9       1.76      90.4    20%                 +LPIPS=10 22.6      2.48      88.2    10%

        (c) RoboDesk: upright block off table                           (d) RoboDesk: open slide
Table 1: Perceptual metrics and control performance for models trained using a MSE objective, as well as with
added perceptual losses. For each metric, the bolded number shows the best value for that task. *LPIPS scores
are scaled by 100 for convenient display. Full results can be found in Appendix G.

Benchmarks for model-based and offline RL. Many works in model-based reinforcement learning
evaluate on simulated RL benchmarks (Brockman et al., 2016; Tassa et al., 2018; Ha & Schmidhu-
ber, 2018; Rajeswaran et al., 2018; Yu et al., 2019; Ahn et al., 2019; Zhu et al., 2020; Kannan
et al., 2021), while real-world evaluation setups are often unstandardized. Offline RL and imita-
tion learning benchmarks (Zhu et al., 2020; Fu et al., 2020; Gulcehre et al., 2020; Lu et al., 2022)
provide training datasets along with environments. Our benchmark includes environments based on
the infrastructure of robosuite (Zhu et al., 2020) and RoboDesk (Kannan et al., 2021), but it
further includes task specifications in the form of goal images, cost functions for planning, as well
as implementations of planning algorithms. Additionally, offline RL benchmarks mostly analyze
model-free algorithms, while in this paper we focus on model-based methods. Because planning
using video prediction models is sensitive to details such as control frequency, planning horizon,
and cost function, our benchmark supplies all aspects other than the predictive model itself.

3    T HE MISMATCH BETWEEN PERCEPTUAL METRICS AND CONTROL
In this section, we present a case study that analyzes whether existing metrics for video predic-
tion are indicative of performance on downstream control tasks. We focus on two variational video
prediction models that have competitive prediction performance and are fast enough for planning:
FitVid (Babaeizadeh et al., 2021) and the modified version of the SVG model (Denton & Fer-
gus, 2018) introduced by Villegas et al. (2019), which contains convolutional as opposed to fully-
connected LSTM cells and uses the first four blocks of VGG19 as the encoder/decoder architecture.
We denote this model as SVG′ . We perform experiments on two tabletop manipulation environ-
ments, robosuite and RoboDesk, which each admit multiple potential downstream task goals.
Additional environment details are in Section 4.
When selecting models to analyze, our goal is to train models that have varying performance on ex-
isting metrics. One strategy for learning models that align better with human perceptions of realism
is to add auxiliary perceptual losses such as LPIPS (Zhang et al., 2018). Thus, for each environment,
we train three variants of both the FitVid and SVG′ video prediction models. One variant is trained
with a standard pixel-wise ℓ2 reconstruction loss (MSE), while the other two are trained using an
additional perceptual loss in the form of adding the LPIPS score with VGG features implemented by
Kastryulin et al. (2022) between the predicted and ground truth images at weightings 1 and 10. We
train each model for 150K gradient steps. We then evaluate each model in terms of FVD (Unterthiner
et al., 2018), LPIPS (Zhang et al., 2018), and SSIM (Wang et al., 2004) on held-out validation sets,
as well as planning performance on robotic manipulation via visual foresight (Finn & Levine, 2017;


                                                        3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


    Task De nitions                                        Planning Implementation


    Environments
                                                                                              MPPI/CEM
    (Robosuite &
                                                                                            sampling-based
    RoboDesk)
                                                                                                optimizers


                                                                                        Pre-trained classi er
    Task instance                                                                              cost functions
    speci cations

                                                           Video Prediction Interface
                           Start            Goal
                                                           # Only required to implement one function!
    Training Datasets                                      def __call__(self, context_frames, action_seq):

                                                               # Input: 2 context frames & T actions
    Expert scripted                                            # Output: Predictions for T future frames
    interaction datasets                                       return model_predictions
      fi     fi     fi


Figure 2: Overview of the VP2 benchmark, which contains simulated environments, training data, and task
instance specifications, along with a planning implementation with pre-trained cost functions. The interface for
evaluating a new model on the benchmark is a model forward pass.


Ebert et al., 2018). As shown in Table 1, we find that models that show improved performance on
these metrics do not always perform well when used for planning, and the degree to which they are
correlated with control performance appears highly task-dependent.
For example, FVD tends to be low for models that are trained with an auxiliary LPIPS loss at
weight 10 on robosuite pushing, despite weak control performance. At the same time, for the
upright block off table task, FVD is much better correlated with task success compared
to LPIPS and SSIM, which show little relation to control performance. We also see that models can
perform almost identically on certain metrics while ranging widely in control performance.
This case study is conducted in a relatively narrow setting, and because data from these simulated
environments is less complex than “in-the-wild” datasets, the trained models tend to perform well
on an absolute scale across all metrics. Existing metrics can certainly serve as effective indicators
of general prediction quality, but we can observe even in this example that they can be misaligned
with a model’s performance when used for control and could lead to erroneous model selection
for downstream manipulation. Therefore, we believe that a control-centric benchmark represents
another useful axis of comparison for video prediction models.

4     T HE VP 2 B ENCHMARK
In this section, we introduce the VP2 benchmark. The main goal of our benchmark is to evaluate
the downstream control performances of video prediction models. To help isolate the effects of
models as opposed to the environment or control algorithm, we include the entire control scheme
for each task as part of the benchmark. We design VP2 with three intentions in mind: (1) it should
be accessible, that is, evaluating models should not require any experience in control or RL, (2) it
should be flexible, placing as few restrictions as possible on models, and (3) it should emphasize
settings where model-based methods may be advantageous, such as specifying goals on the fly after
training on a multi-task dataset.
VP2 consists of three main components: environment and task definitions, a sampling-based
planner, and training datasets. These components are shown in Figure 2.
4.1        E NVIRONMENT AND TASK DEFINITIONS
One advantage of model-based methods is that a single model can be leveraged to complete a va-
riety of commanded goals at test time. Therefore, to allow our benchmark to evaluate models’


                                                       4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


abilities to perform multi-task planning, we select environments where there are many different
tasks for the robot to complete. VP2 consists of two environments: a tabletop setting created using
robosuite (Zhu et al., 2020), and a desk manipulation setting based on RoboDesk (Kannan et al.,
2021). Each environment contains a robot model as well as multiple objects to interact with.
For each environment, we further define task categories, which represent semantic tasks in that
environment. Each task category is defined by a success criterion based on the simulator state.
Many reinforcement learning benchmarks focus on a single task and reset the environment to the
same simulator state at the beginning of every episode. This causes the agent to visit a narrow dis-
tribution of states, and does not accurately represent how robots operate in the real world. However,
simply randomizing initial environment states can lead to higher variance in evaluation. To test
models’ generalization capabilities and robustness to environment variations, we additionally define
task instances for each task category. A task instance is defined by an initial simulator state and an
RGB goal image Ig ∈ R64×64×3 observation of the desired final state. Goal images are a flexible
way of specifying goals, but can often be unachievable based on the initial state and action space.
We ensure that for each task instance, it is possible to reach an observation matching the goal image
within the time horizon by collecting them from actual trajectories executed in the environment.
VP2 currently supports evaluation on 11 tasks across two simulated environments:
Tabletop robosuite environment. The tabletop environment is built using robosuite (Zhu
et al., 2020) and contains 4 objects: two cubes of varying sizes, a cylinder, and a sphere. To pro-
vide more realistic visuals, we render the scene with the iGibson renderer (Li et al., 2021). This
environment contains 4 task categories: push {large cube, small cube, cylinder,
sphere}. We include 25 task instances per category, where the textures of all objects are ran-
domized from a set of 13 for each instance. When selecting the action space, we prefer a lower-
dimensional action space to minimize the complexity of sampling-based planning, but would like
one that can still enable a range of tasks. We choose to use an action space A ∈ R4 that fixes the
end-effector orientation and represents a change in end-effector position command, as well as an
action opening or closing the gripper, that is fed to an operational space controller (OSC).
RoboDesk environment. The RoboDesk environment (Kannan et al., 2021) consists of a
Franka Panda robot placed in front of a desk, and defines several tasks that the robot can com-
plete. Because the planner needs to be able to judge task success from several frames, we
consider a subset of these tasks that have obvious visual cues for success. Specifically, we
use 7 tasks: push {red, green, blue} button, open {slide, drawer}, push
{upright block, flat block} off table. We find that the action space in the original
RoboDesk environment works well for scripting data collection and for planning. Therefore in this
environment A ∈ R5 represents a change in gripper position, wrist angle, and gripper command.

4.2   S AMPLING - BASED PLANNING

Our benchmark provides not only environment and task definitions, but also a control setup that
allows models to be directly scored based on control performance. Each benchmark run consists of
a series of control trials, where each control trial executes sampling-based planning using the given
model on a particular task instance. At the end of T control steps, the success or failure on the task
instance is judged based on the simulator state.
To perform planning using visual foresight, at each step the sampling-based planner attempts to solve
the following optimization problem to plan an action sequence given a goal image Ig , context frames
                                                                         PT
Ic , cost function C, and a video prediction model fˆθ : mina1 ,a2 ,...aT i=1 C(fˆ(Ic , a1:T )i , Ig ). The
best action is then selected, and re-planning is performed at each step to reduce the effect of com-
pounding model errors. We use 2 context frames and predict T = 10 future frames across the
benchmark. As in prior work in model-based RL, we implement a sampling-based planner that uses
MPPI (Williams et al., 2016; Nagabandi et al., 2019) to sample candidate action sequences, perform
forward prediction, and then update the sampling distribution based on these scores. We provide de-
fault values for planning hyperparameters that have been tuned to achieve strong performance with
a perfect dynamics model, which can be found along with additional details in Appendix B.
VP2 additionally specifies the cost function C for each task category. For the task categories in the
robosuite environment, we simply use pixel-wise mean squared error (MSE) as the cost. For


                                                    5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


the RoboDesk task categories, we find that an additional task-specific pretrained classifier yields
improved planning performance. We train deep convolutional networks to classify task success on
each task, and use a weighted combination of MSE and classifier logits as the cost function. We
provide these pre-trained model weights as part of the benchmark.
4.3   T RAINING DATASETS
Each environment in VP2 comes with datasets for video prediction model training. Each training
dataset consists of trajectories with 35 timesteps, each containing 256 × 256 RGB image observa-
tions and the action taken at each step. Specifics for each environment dataset are as follows, with
additional details in Appendix D:
• robosuite Tabletop environment: We include 50K trajectories of interactions collected with
  a hand-scripted policy to push a random object in the environment in a random direction. Object
  textures are randomized in each trajectory.
• RoboDesk environment: For each task instance, we include 5K trajectories collected with a hand-
  scripted policy, for a total of 35K trajectories. To encourage the dataset to contain trajectories of
  varying success rates, we apply independent Gaussian noise to each dimension of every action
  from the scripted policy before executing it.

5     B ENCHMARK I NTERFACE
One of our goals is to make the benchmark easy as possible to use, without placing restrictions on
the deep learning framework nor requiring expertise in RL or planning. We achieve this through two
main design decisions. First, by our selection of a sampling-based planning method, we remove as
many assumptions as possible from the model definition, such as differentiability or an autoregres-
sive predictive structure. Second, by implementing and abstracting away control components, we
establish a code interface that requires minimal overhead.
To evaluate a model on VP2 , models must first be trained on one dataset per environment. This is an
identical procedure to typical evaluation on video benchmarking datasets. Then, with a forward pass
implementation, our benchmark uses the model directly for planning as described in Section 4.2.
Specifically, given context frames [I1 , I2 , ..., It ] and an action sequence [a1 , a2 , ..., at+T −1 ], the
forward pass should predict the next N frames [Iˆt+1 , Iˆt+2 , ..., Iˆt+T ]. We anticipate this will incur
low overhead, as similar functions are often implemented to track model validation performance.
While this interface is designed for for ease-of-use and comparison, VP2 can also be used in an
“open” evaluation format where controllers may be modified, to benchmark entire planning systems.

6     E MPIRICAL A NALYSIS OF V IDEO P REDICTION AT S CALE FOR C ONTROL
Next, we leverage our benchmark as a starting point for investigating questions relating to model
and data scale in the context of control. We first evaluate a set of baseline models on our benchmark
tasks. Then in order to better understand how we can build models with better downstream control
performance on VP2 , we empirically study the following questions:
       • How does control performance scale with model size? Do different models scale similarly?
         What are the computational costs at training and test time?
       • How does control performance scale with training data quantity?
       • Can planning performance be improved by models with better uncertainty awareness that
         can detect when they are queried on out-of-distribution action sequences?

6.1   P ERFORMANCE OF E XISTING M ODELS ON VP 2
To establish performance baselines, we consider five models that achieve either state-of-the-art or
competitive performance on metrics such as SSIM, LPIPS, and FVD. See Appendix A for details.
       • FitVid (Babaeizadeh et al., 2021) is a variational video prediction model that achieved
         state-of-the-art results on the Human 3.6M (Ionescu et al., 2014) and RoboNet (Dasari
         et al., 2019) datasets. It has shown the ability to fit large diverse datasets, where previous
         models suffered from underfitting.


                                                     6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023



                                             Success rates for existing models on benchmark tasks
                             FitVid         SVG’          MCVD            MaskViT          Struct-VRNN           Simulator
                1.0

                0.8
 Success rate

                0.6

                0.4

                0.2

                0.0
                        Robosuite push Flat block Open drawer Open slide Blue button Green button Red button Upright block   Aggregate
                                                                          Task name
Figure 3: Performance of existing models on VP2 . We aggregate results over the 4 robosuite task cate-
gories. Error bars show min/max performance over 5 control runs, except for MCVD where we use 3 runs due
to computational constraints. On the right, we show the mean scores for each model averaged across all tasks,
normalized by the performance of the simulator.

                      • SVG′ (Villegas et al., 2019) is also a variational RNN-based model, but makes sev-
                        eral unique architectural choices – it opts for convolutional LSTMs and a shallower en-
                        coder/decoder. We use the ℓ2 loss as in the original SVG model rather than ℓ1 prescribed
                        by Villegas et al. (2019) to isolate the effects of model architecture and loss function.
                      • Masked Conditional Video Diffusion (MCVD) (Voleti et al., 2022) is a diffusion model
                        that can perform many video tasks by conditioning on different subsets of video frames. To
                        our knowledge, diffusion-based video prediction models have not previously been applied
                        to learn action-conditioned models. We adapt MCVD to make it action-conditioned by
                        following a tile-and-concatenate procedure similar to Finn et al. (2016).
                      • Struct-VRNN (Minderer et al., 2019) uses a keypoint-based representation for dynamics
                        learning. We train Struct-VRNN without keypoint sparsity or temporal correlation losses
                        for simplicity, finding that they do not significantly impact performance on our datasets.
                      • MaskViT (Gupta et al., 2022) uses a masked prediction objective and iterative decoding
                        scheme to enable flexible and efficient inference using a transformer-based architecture.

We train each model except MCVD to predict 10 future frames given 2 context frames and agent
actions. For MCVD, we also use a planning horizon of 10 steps, but following the procedure from
the paper, we predict 5 future frames at a time, and autoregressively predict longer sequences.
While we can compare relative planning performance between models based on task success rate, it
is difficult to evaluate absolute performance when models are embedded into a planning framework.
To provide an upper bound on how much the dynamics model can improve control, we include a
baseline that uses the simulator directly as the dynamics but retains the planning pipeline. This
disentangles weaknesses of video prediction models from suboptimal planning or cost functions.
In Figure 3, we show the performance of the five models on our benchmark tasks. We see that for
the simpler task push blue button, the performance of existing models approaches that of the
true dynamics. However, for robosuite and the other RoboDesk tasks, there are significant gaps
in performance for learned models.
6.2               M ODEL C APACITY
Increasingly expressive models have pushed prediction quality on visually complex datasets. How-
ever, it is unclear how model capacity impacts downstream manipulation results on VP2 tasks. In
this section, we use our benchmark to study this question. Due to computational constraints, we
consider only tasks in the robosuite tabletop environment. We train variants of the FitVid and
SVG′ models with varying parameter counts. For FitVid, we create two smaller variants by halving
the number of encoder layers and decreasing layer sizes in one model, and then further decreasing
the number of encoder filters and LSTM hidden units in another (“mini”). For SVG′ , we vary the


                                                                             7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                         1.0
                                                            Model Size vs. Control Performance on RoboSuite Tasks

 Control success rate (threshold=0.05)
                                               Model type
                                                  FitVid                                                                                                     Simulator as model
                                                  MCVD
                                         0.9      SVG’                                                                                                             SVG’
                                                                                        SVG’                                         SVG’                          M=2,K=1
                                                                                        M=0.5,K=0.5                                  M=1,K=1
                                                                                                                                                                     SVG’
                                         0.8                                                                                                 SVG’                    M=2,K=2
                                                           FitVid     FitVid                                                                 M=1,K=2
                                                           Mini       Smaller encoder                                 MCVD                                         FitVid
                                         0.7                                                                                                                       Full

                                         0.6 6
                                            10                           10 7                                                        10 8                                                    10 9
                                                                          Number of Parameters (log scale)
Figure 4: Control performance on robosuite tasks across a models with capacities ranging from 6 million
to 300 million parameters. Error bars represent standard error of the mean (SEM) across 3 control runs over the
set of 100 task instances, except for MCVD where we perform 2 control runs due to computational constraints.
We hypothesize that larger versions of FitVid overfit the data, and see that in general, model capacity does not
seem to yield signficantly improved performance on these tasks.

model size by changing parameters M and K as described by Villegas et al. (2019), which represent
expanding factors on the size of the LSTM and encoder/decoder architectures respectively.
In Figure 4, we plot the control performance on the
                                                                                                                                Model Variant                    # Params Pred. time (s)
robosuite tabletop environment versus the number of
parameters. While SVG′ sees slight performance im-                                                                              FitVidFull                          302M                     5.63
                                                                                                                                      Small encoder                  6.5M                    0.48
provements with certain larger configurations, in general                                                                             Mini                           2.3M                    0.29
                                                                                                                                    ′
we do not see a strong trend that increased model capacity                                                                      SVG   M = 2,K = 2                   325M                     3.58
yields improved performance. We hypothesize that this                                                                                 M = 2,K = 1                   312M                     2.40
                                                                                                                                      M = 1,K = 2                    96M                     2.39
is because larger models like the full FitVid architecture                                                                            M = 1,K = 1                    83M                     1.21
tend to overfit to action sequences seen in the dataset.                                                                              M = 21 ,K = 12                21.5M                    0.52
                                                                                                                                MCVD Base                            56M                      220
We additionally note the wall clock forward prediction Table 2: Comparison of median wall clock
time for each model in Table 2. Notably, while the forward pass time for predicting 10 future
MCVD model achieves competitive control performance, frames. We use a batch size of 200 samples
its forward pass computation time is more than 10× that and one NVIDIA Titan RTX GPU.
of the full FitVid model. While diffusion models have
shown comparable prediction quality compared to RNN-based video prediction models, the chal-
lenge of using these models efficiently for planning remains.

6.3                                        DATA Q UANTITY
Data-driven video prediction models require suffi-                                                                Effect of data size on control success: RoboSuite pushing
cient coverage of the state space to be able to per-                                                                  1.0
                                                                                                                                                                                         FitVid
form downstream tasks, and much effort has gone                                                                                                                                          SVG’
into developing models that are able to fit large                                                                     0.8
                                                                                               Control success rate


datasets. Therefore, it is natural to ask: How does
                                                                                                                      0.6
the number of training samples impact downstream
control performance? To test this, we train the full                                                                  0.4
FitVid and base SVG′ models on subsets of the
robosuite tabletop environment dataset consist-                                                                       0.2
ing of 1K, 5K, 15K, 30K, and 50K trajectories of
35 steps each. We then evaluate the control per-                                                                      0.0
                                                                                                                            0            10000       20000        30000          40000
formance for each model for the aggregated 100                                                                                            Number of training data trajectories
robosuite control tasks. Figure 5 shows the con-                                               Figure 5: Evaluating the effects of increasing
trol results for models trained on consecutively in-                                           training dataset size on all robosuite tasks.
creasing data quantities. We find that performance                                             Additional data boosts performance slightly, but
improves when increasing from smaller quantities of                                            the benefit quickly plateaus. Shaded areas show
data on the order of hundreds to thousands of trajec-                                          95% confidence intervals across 3 runs.


                                                                                        8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


tories, but gains quickly plateau. We hypothesize that this is because the distribution of actions in
the dataset is relatively constrained due to the scripted data collection policy.

6.4   U NCERTAINTY E STIMATION VIA E NSEMBLES
Because video prediction models are trained on fixed datasets before being deployed for control in
visual foresight, they may yield incorrect predictions when queried on out-of-distribution actions
during planning. As a result, we hypothesize that planning performance might be improved through
improved uncertainty awareness – that is, a model should detect when it is being asked to make pre-
dictions it will likely make mistakes on. We test this hypothesis by estimating epistemic uncertainty
through a simple ensemble disagreement method and integrating it into the planning procedure.
Concretely, we apply a score penalty during                                  Control performance of ensemble disagreement strategy
planning based on the instantiation of ensem-                                       Ensemble          Single model
ble disagreement from Yu et al. (2020). Given                          1.0
an ensemble of N = 4 video prediction mod-                             0.8


                                                        Success rate
els, we use all models from the ensemble to
perform prediction for each action sequence.                           0.6
Then, we compute the standard task score using                         0.4
a randomly selected model, and then subtract
a penalty based on the largest ℓ1 model devi-                          0.2
ation from the mean prediction. Because sub-
                                                                       0.0
tracting the score penalty decreases the scale of                               FitVid SVG’       FitVid SVG’         FitVid SVG’
rewards, we experiment with the temperature                                     Open slide     Push green button     Upright block
                                                                                                                       off table
γ = 0.01, 0.03, 0.05 for MPPI, and report the                                                        Task
best control result for each task across values     Figure 6: Control performance when using ensem-
of γ for single and ensembled models. Addi-         ble disagreement for control on three tasks. We can
tional details about the penalty computation can    see that for upright block off table, ensem-
be found in Appendix E.                             ble disagreement improves performance, but on the
                                                    other two tasks, performance is comparable or slightly
The results of using this approach for control      weaker than a single model. Error bars show min/max
are shown in Figure 6. We find that the un-         performance across 2 control runs.
certainty penalty is able to achieve slightly im-
proved performance on the upright block off table task, comparable performance on
push green button, and slightly weaker performance on open slide. This also causes
expensive training and inference times to scale linearly with ensemble size when using a naı̈ve im-
plementation. However, our results indicate that efforts in developing uncertainty-aware models
may be one avenue for improved downstream planning performance.

7     C ONCLUSION
In this paper, we proposed a control-centric benchmark for video prediction. After finding em-
pirically that existing perceptual and pixel-wise metrics can be poorly correlated with downstream
performance for planning robotic manipulation, we proposed VP2 as an additional control-centric
evaluation method. Our benchmark consists of 13 task categories in two simulated multi-task robotic
manipulation environments, and has an easy-to-use interface that does not place any limits on model
structure or implementation. We then leveraged our benchmark to investigate questions related to
model and data scale for five existing models – and find that while scale is important to some de-
gree for VP2 tasks, improved performance on these tasks may also come from building models
with improved uncertainty awareness. We hope that this spurs future efforts in developing action-
conditioned video prediction models for downstream control applications, and also provides a help-
ful testbed for creating new planning algorithms and cost functions for visual MPC.
Limitations. VP2 consists of simulated, shorter horizon tasks. As models and planning methods
improve, it may be extended to include more challenging tasks. Additionally, compared to widely
adopted metrics, evaluation scores on our benchmark are more computationally intensive to obtain
and may be less practical to track over the course of training. Finally, robotic manipulation is one
of many downstream tasks for video prediction, and our benchmark may not be representative of
performance on other tasks. We anticipate evaluation scores on VP2 to be used in conjunction with
other metrics for a holistic understanding of model performance.


                                                    9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT

We provide our open-sourced for the benchmark in Appendix F. We have also released the training
datasets and pre-trained cost function weights at that link.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We thank Tony Zhao for providing the initial FitVid model code, Josiah Wong for guidance with
robosuite, Fei Xia for help customizing the iGibson renderer, as well as Yunzhi Zhang, Agrim
Gupta, Roberto Martı́n-Martı́n, Kyle Hsu, and Alexander Khazatsky for helpful discussions. This
work is in part supported by ONR MURI N00014-22-1-2740 and the Stanford Institute for Human-
Centered AI (HAI). Stephen Tian is supported by an NSF Graduate Research Fellowship under
Grant No. DGE-1656518.

R EFERENCES
Michael Ahn, Henry Zhu, Kristian Hartikainen, Hugo Ponte, Abhishek Gupta, Sergey Levine, and
 Vikash Kumar. ROBEL: RObotics BEnchmarks for Learning with low-cost robots. In Conference
 on Robot Learning (CoRL), 2019.
Mohammad Babaeizadeh, Mohammad Taghi Saffar, Suraj Nair, Sergey Levine, Chelsea Finn, and
 Dumitru Erhan. Fitvid: Overfitting in pixel-level video prediction. arXiv preprint arXiv: Arxiv-
 2106.13195, 2021.
Peter W. Battaglia, Jessica B. Hamrick, and Joshua B. Tenenbaum. Simulation as an engine of
  physical scene understanding. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 110(45):18327–
  18332, 2013.
Daniel Bear, Elias Wang, Damian Mrowca, Felix J. Binder, Hsiao-Yu Tung, R. T. Pramod, Cameron
  Holdaway, Sirui Tao, Kevin A. Smith, Fan-Yun Sun, Fei-Fei Li, Nancy Kanwisher, Josh Tenen-
  baum, Dan Yamins, and Judith E. Fan. Physion: Evaluating physical prediction from vision in
  humans and machines. In Proceedings of the Neural Information Processing Systems Track on
  Datasets and Benchmarks 1, NeurIPS Datasets and Benchmarks 2021, 2021.
Greg Brockman, Vicki Cheung, Ludwig Pettersson, Jonas Schneider, John Schulman, Jie Tang, and
  Wojciech Zaremba. Openai gym, 2016.
Marius Cordts, Mohamed Omran, Sebastian Ramos, Timo Rehfeld, Markus Enzweiler, Rodrigo
 Benenson, Uwe Franke, Stefan Roth, and Bernt Schiele. The cityscapes dataset for semantic
 urban scene understanding. In Proc. of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
 Recognition (CVPR), 2016.
Sudeep Dasari, Frederik Ebert, Stephen Tian, Suraj Nair, Bernadette Bucher, Karl Schmeckpeper,
  Siddharth Singh, Sergey Levine, and Chelsea Finn. Robonet: Large-scale multi-robot learning. In
  3rd Annual Conference on Robot Learning, CoRL 2019, Osaka, Japan, October 30 - November
  1, 2019, Proceedings, volume 100 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 885–897.
  PMLR, 2019.
Pieter-Tjerk de Boer, Dirk P. Kroese, Shie Mannor, and Reuven Y. Rubinstein. A tutorial on the
  cross-entropy method. Annals of Operations Research, 134(1):19–67, February 2005.
Emily Denton and Rob Fergus. Stochastic video generation with a learned prior. In Proceedings of
  the 35th International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML 2018, Stockholmsmässan, Stock-
  holm, Sweden, July 10-15, 2018, volume 80 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp.
  1182–1191. PMLR, 2018.
Frederik Ebert, Chelsea Finn, Sudeep Dasari, Annie Xie, Alex Lee, and Sergey Levine. Visual fore-
  sight: Model-based deep reinforcement learning for vision-based robotic control. arXiv preprint
  arXiv: Arxiv-1812.00568, 2018.
Chelsea Finn and Sergey Levine. Deep visual foresight for planning robot motion. In 2017 IEEE
  International Conference on Robotics and Automation, ICRA 2017, Singapore, Singapore, May
  29 - June 3, 2017, pp. 2786–2793. IEEE, 2017.


                                               10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Chelsea Finn, Ian J. Goodfellow, and Sergey Levine. Unsupervised learning for physical interaction
  through video prediction. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 29: Annual
  Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems 2016, December 5-10, 2016, Barcelona,
  Spain, pp. 64–72, 2016.
Justin Fu, Aviral Kumar, Ofir Nachum, George Tucker, and Sergey Levine. D4rl: Datasets for deep
  data-driven reinforcement learning, 2020.
Andreas Geiger, Philip Lenz, Christoph Stiller, and Raquel Urtasun. Vision meets robotics: The
  kitti dataset. International Journal of Robotics Research (IJRR), 2013.
Daniel Geng, Max Hamilton, and Andrew Owens. Comparing correspondences: Video prediction
  with correspondence-wise losses. In CVPR, 2022.
Caglar Gulcehre, Ziyu Wang, Alexander Novikov, Tom Le Paine, Sergio Gomez Colmenarejo, Kon-
  rad Zolna, Rishabh Agarwal, Josh Merel, Daniel Mankowitz, Cosmin Paduraru, Gabriel Dulac-
  Arnold, Jerry Li, Mohammad Norouzi, Matt Hoffman, Ofir Nachum, George Tucker, Nicolas
  Heess, and Nando de Freitas. Rl unplugged: A suite of benchmarks for offline reinforcement
  learning. arXiv preprint arXiv: Arxiv-2006.13888, 2020.
Agrim Gupta, Stephen Tian, Yunzhi Zhang, Jiajun Wu, Roberto Martı́n-Martı́n, and Li Fei-Fei.
  Maskvit: Masked visual pre-training for video prediction. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.11894,
  2022.
David Ha and Jürgen Schmidhuber. World models. arXiv preprint arXiv: Arxiv-1803.10122, 2018.
William Harvey, Saeid Naderiparizi, Vaden Masrani, Christian Weilbach, and Frank Wood. Flexible
 diffusion modeling of long videos. arXiv preprint arXiv: Arxiv-2205.11495, 2022.
Martin Heusel, Hubert Ramsauer, Thomas Unterthiner, Bernhard Nessler, and Sepp Hochreiter.
 Gans trained by a two time-scale update rule converge to a local nash equilibrium. In Advances in
 Neural Information Processing Systems 30: Annual Conference on Neural Information Process-
 ing Systems 2017, December 4-9, 2017, Long Beach, CA, USA, pp. 6626–6637, 2017.
Kevin Huang, Sahin Lale, Ugo Rosolia, Yuanyuan Shi, and Anima Anandkumar. Cem-gd: Cross-
  entropy method with gradient descent planner for model-based reinforcement learning. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2112.07746, 2021.
Catalin Ionescu, Dragos Papava, Vlad Olaru, and Cristian Sminchisescu. Human3.6m: Large scale
  datasets and predictive methods for 3d human sensing in natural environments. IEEE Transactions
  on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 36(7):1325–1339, jul 2014.
Harini Kannan, Danijar Hafner, Chelsea Finn, and Dumitru Erhan. Robodesk: A multi-task rein-
  forcement learning benchmark. https://github.com/google-research/robodesk,
  2021.
Sergey Kastryulin, Jamil Zakirov, Denis Prokopenko, and Dmitry V. Dylov. Pytorch image qual-
  ity: Metrics for image quality assessment, 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2208.
  14818.
Chengshu Li, Fei Xia, Roberto Martı́n-Martı́n, Michael Lingelbach, Sanjana Srivastava, Bokui Shen,
  Kent Elliott Vainio, Cem Gokmen, Gokul Dharan, Tanish Jain, Andrey Kurenkov, C. Karen Liu,
  Hyowon Gweon, Jiajun Wu, Li Fei-Fei, and Silvio Savarese. igibson 2.0: Object-centric simu-
  lation for robot learning of everyday household tasks. In Conference on Robot Learning, 8-11
  November 2021, London, UK, volume 164 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp.
  455–465. PMLR, 2021.
Dong C. Liu and Jorge Nocedal. On the limited memory BFGS method for large scale optimization.
  Math. Programming, 1989.
Cong Lu, Philip J. Ball, Tim G. J. Rudner, Jack Parker-Holder, Michael A. Osborne, and Yee Whye
  Teh. Challenges and opportunities in offline reinforcement learning from visual observations.
  arXiv preprint arXiv: Arxiv-2206.04779, 2022.


                                               11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Matthias Minderer, Chen Sun, Ruben Villegas, Forrester Cole, Kevin Murphy, and Honglak Lee.
 Unsupervised learning of object structure and dynamics from videos. In arXiv: 1906.07889,
 2019.
Anusha Nagabandi, Kurt Konolige, Sergey Levine, and Vikash Kumar. Deep dynamics models for
  learning dexterous manipulation. In 3rd Annual Conference on Robot Learning, CoRL 2019,
  Osaka, Japan, October 30 - November 1, 2019, Proceedings, volume 100 of Proceedings of
  Machine Learning Research, pp. 1101–1112. PMLR, 2019.
Junhyuk Oh, Xiaoxiao Guo, Honglak Lee, Richard L. Lewis, and Satinder Singh. Action-conditional
  video prediction using deep networks in atari games. In Advances in Neural Information Process-
  ing Systems 28: Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems 2015, December
  7-12, 2015, Montreal, Quebec, Canada, pp. 2863–2871, 2015.
Adam Paszke, Sam Gross, Francisco Massa, Adam Lerer, James Bradbury, Gregory Chanan, Trevor
  Killeen, Zeming Lin, Natalia Gimelshein, Luca Antiga, Alban Desmaison, Andreas Kopf, Edward
  Yang, Zachary DeVito, Martin Raison, Alykhan Tejani, Sasank Chilamkurthy, Benoit Steiner,
  Lu Fang, Junjie Bai, and Soumith Chintala. Pytorch: An imperative style, high-performance deep
  learning library. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 32. 2019.
Aravind Rajeswaran, Vikash Kumar, Abhishek Gupta, Giulia Vezzani, John Schulman, Emanuel
  Todorov, and Sergey Levine. Learning Complex Dexterous Manipulation with Deep Reinforce-
  ment Learning and Demonstrations. In Proceedings of Robotics: Science and Systems (RSS),
  2018.
Reuven Rubinstein. The cross-entropy method for combinatorial and continuous optimization.
  Methodology and computing in applied probability, 1(2):127–190, 1999.
Adam N. Sanborn, Vikash K. Mansinghka, and Thomas L. Griffiths. Reconciling intuitive physics
  and newtonian mechanics for colliding objects. Psychological review, 120(2):411–437, 2013.
Nitish Srivastava, Elman Mansimov, and Ruslan Salakhutdinov. Unsupervised learning of video
  representations using lstms. In Proceedings of the 32nd International Conference on Machine
  Learning, ICML 2015, Lille, France, 6-11 July 2015, volume 37, pp. 843–852, 2015.
Yuval Tassa, Yotam Doron, Alistair Muldal, Tom Erez, Yazhe Li, Diego de Las Casas, David Bud-
  den, Abbas Abdolmaleki, Josh Merel, Andrew Lefrancq, Timothy Lillicrap, and Martin Ried-
  miller. Deepmind control suite. arXiv preprint arXiv: Arxiv-1801.00690, 2018.
Thomas Unterthiner, Sjoerd van Steenkiste, Karol Kurach, Raphael Marinier, Marcin Michalski, and
  Sylvain Gelly. Towards accurate generative models of video: A new metric & challenges. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1812.01717, 2018.
Ruben Villegas, Arkanath Pathak, Harini Kannan, Dumitru Erhan, Quoc V. Le, and Honglak Lee.
  High fidelity video prediction with large stochastic recurrent neural networks. In Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems 32: Annual Conference on Neural Information Process-
  ing Systems 2019, NeurIPS 2019, December 8-14, 2019, Vancouver, BC, Canada, pp. 81–91,
  2019.
Vikram Voleti, Alexia Jolicoeur-Martineau, and Christopher Pal. Masked conditional video diffu-
  sion for prediction, generation, and interpolation. (NeurIPS) Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2205.09853.
Zhou Wang, A.C. Bovik, H.R. Sheikh, and E.P. Simoncelli. Image quality assessment: from error
  visibility to structural similarity. IEEE Transactions on Image Processing, 13(4):600–612, 2004.
  doi: 10.1109/TIP.2003.819861.
Grady Williams, Paul Drews, Brian Goldfain, James M. Rehg, and Evangelos A. Theodorou. Ag-
  gressive driving with model predictive path integral control. In 2016 IEEE International Con-
  ference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pp. 1433–1440, 2016. doi: 10.1109/ICRA.2016.
  7487277.
Wilson Yan, Yunzhi Zhang, Pieter Abbeel, and Aravind Srinivas. Videogpt: Video generation using
 vq-vae and transformers, 2021.

                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Tianhe Yu, Deirdre Quillen, Zhanpeng He, Ryan Julian, Karol Hausman, Chelsea Finn, and Sergey
  Levine. Meta-world: A benchmark and evaluation for multi-task and meta reinforcement learning.
  In Conference on Robot Learning (CoRL), 2019. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1910.
  10897.
Tianhe Yu, Garrett Thomas, Lantao Yu, Stefano Ermon, James Y. Zou, Sergey Levine, Chelsea Finn,
  and Tengyu Ma. MOPO: model-based offline policy optimization. In Advances in Neural Infor-
  mation Processing Systems 33: Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems
  2020, NeurIPS 2020, December 6-12, 2020, virtual, 2020.
Richard Zhang, Phillip Isola, Alexei A Efros, Eli Shechtman, and Oliver Wang. The unreasonable
  effectiveness of deep features as a perceptual metric. In CVPR, 2018.
Yuke Zhu, Josiah Wong, Ajay Mandlekar, and Roberto Martı́n-Martı́n. robosuite: A modular simu-
  lation framework and benchmark for robot learning. In arXiv preprint arXiv:2009.12293, 2020.


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A     M ODEL T RAINING D ETAILS
In this section, we provide specific training details for video prediction model training here.
A.1    F IT V ID
We reimplement FitVid according to the official implementation by the authors. We train using the
architecture defaults from the original paper. The training hyperparameters are shown in Table 3.
For the smaller variants shown in the model capacity experiments, we detail the modifications in
architecture in Table 4 and 5.
We train FitVid at 64 × 64 image resolution to predict 10 future frames given 2 future frames.
When training, we use FP16 precision using PyTorch’s autocast functionality and use either 2 or 4
NVIDIA TITAN RTX GPUs. We train all models for 153K gradient steps.

                                      Hyperparameter                 Value
                                      Batch size                        32
                                      Optimizer                      Adam
                                      Learning rate                   3e-4
                                      Adam ϵ                          1e-8
                                      Gradient clip                    100
                                      β                               1e-4
Table 3: Hyperparameters for FitVid training. Note that we use a learning rate of 3e − 4 because we find that
it allows for more stable training. We also tried 1e − 3 as in the original paper, but we found that this tended to
cause numerical instability and did not yield significantly different results.


                      Hyperparameter                                                  Value
                      Encoder (h) dimension                                               64
                      LSTM size                                                         128
                      Num of encoder/decoder layers per stage                    [1, 1, 1, 1]
                         Table 4: Hyperparameters for FitVid model: smaller encoder.


                   Hyperparameter                                                         Value
                   Encoder (h) dimension                                                     32
                   LSTM size                                                                 64
                   Num of encoder/decoder layers per stage                          [1, 1, 1, 1]
                   Encoder/Decoder # filters                                 All scaled by 1/4
                               Table 5: Hyperparameters for FitVid model: mini.

A.2    SVG′
For SVG′ , we start with the implementation of the SVG model by Denton & Fergus (2018). Then,
we make the modifications described by Villegas et al. (2019). Specifically, we use the first 4 blocks
of VGG as the encoder/decoder architecture. Then, rather than flattening encoder outputs before
feeding them into the LSTM layers, we use Convolutional LSTMs to directly process the 2D feature
maps. Unless otherwise stated, we train with the model size M = 1, K = 1, which is the base
model size described in Villegas et al. (2019). Note that for fairer comparisons, unlike Villegas et al.
(2019), we retain the ℓ2 loss for the reconstruction portion of the loss function.
For action conditioning with SVG′ , we tile the action for each timestep into a 2D feature map with
the same dimensions as the encoded image, where the number of channels is the action size. We
then concatenate this along with the latent z to the encoded image before passing it into the frame
predictor RNN.
When testing higher and lower capacity variants, we adjust the values of M and K, which as defined
by Villegas et al. (2019), are hyperparameters that multiplicatively scale the number of filters in the
LSTM layers and encoder/decoder, respectively.


                                                        14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


We train SVG′ at 64×64 image resolution to predict 10 future frames given 2 context frames. We use
1-2 NVIDIA TITAN RTX GPUs to train SVG′ for 153K gradient steps. Training hyperparameters
are shown in Table 6.

                                   Hyperparameter             Value
                                   Batch size                    32
                                   Optimizer                  Adam
                                   Learning rate               3e-4
                                   Adam β1                       0.9
                                   Adam β2                    0.999
                                   Adam ϵ                      1e-8
                              Table 6: Hyperparameters for SVG′ training.



A.3   MCVD

We use the code implementation for MCVD provided by the original authors at https://
github.com/voletiv/mcvd-pytorch. We use the SPATIN version of the model, following
the setup for training the Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Models (DDPM) version of the model
on SMMNIST in the original paper.
We additionally modify the architecture to be action-conditioned by concatenating first converting a
sequence of actions into a flat vector containing actions from all timesteps. We then tile this action
vector a ∈ RT ∗|A| into a 2D feature map with the same spatial dimensions as the context images, and
concatenate the feature map and context images channel-wise. Additional training hyperparameters
are shown in Table 7.

                               Hyperparameter                     Value
                               Batch size                             64
                               Optimizer                          Adam
                               Learning rate                       2e-4
                               Adam β1                              0.9
                               Adam β2                            0.999
                               Adam ϵ                              1e-8
                               Gradient clip                         1.0
                               Weight decay                          0.0
                               # diffusion steps (train)            100
                               # diffusion steps (test)             100
                             Table 7: Hyperparameters for MCVD training.


We train MCVD to generate 64 × 64 RGB images. MCVD can be used for a number of different
video tasks based on which frames are provided for conditioning, but we use it for video prediction
(only future frame prediction provided context). Although during planning we use MCVD to predict
to a horizon of length 10 like other models, we train the model to predict 5 future frames given 2
context frames, following the procedure by the original authors. In order to make predictions of
length 10, we feed in the results of the first prediction autoregressively to the model to obtain the
last 5 predictions. Note that only the actions for the first 5 frames are provided for the first forward
pass, and only the actions for the second 5 frames are provided in the second pass.
We train the MCVD model for robosuite tasks for 360K gradient steps, and the one for Ro-
boDesk tasks for 270K gradient steps. Each model is trained on 2 NVIDIA TITAN RTX GPUs.

A.4   M ASK V I T

We use the hyperparameters used by the authors when training on the BAIR dataset, but with a
slightly increased positional embedding size (1024 rather than 768). We did not tune these parame-
ters further.


                                                   15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A.5    S TRUCT-VRNN
We reimplement the Struct-VRNN model from Minderer et al. (2019). We tune the weighting of
the KL-divergence parameter in the set of values 1e − 0, 1e − 1, 1e − 2, 1e − 3, 1e − 4, and use the
value of 1e − 4, that achieves the best control performance on the RoboSuite tasks, for the rest of
the experiments. We use 64 keypoints in the representation, matching the largest number used for
any dataset in the original paper. Full hyperparameters are shown in Table 8.

                    Hyperparameter                                              Value
                    Batch size                                                      4
                    Optimizer                                                   Adam
                    Learning rate                                                3e-4
                    Reconstruction loss weight                                   10.0
                    KL loss weight                                              0.001
                    Coordinate prediction loss                                    1.0
                    # keypoints                                                    64
                    Keypoint σ                                                    0.1
                    Encoder initial number of filters                              32
                    Appearance encoder initial number of filters                   32
                    Decoder initial # of filters                                  256
                    Dynamics model hidden size                                    512
                    Prior/posterior # of layers                                     2
                    Prior/posterior hidden size                                   512
                           Table 8: Hyperparameters for Struct-VRNN training.


B     P LANNING I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS
In this section we provide details for the planning implementation of VP2 . For all tasks, we use
T = 15 as the rollout length.
B.1    MPPI O PTIMIZER
We perform sampling-based planning using the model-predictive path integral (MPPI) (Williams
et al., 2016), using the implementation from Nagabandi et al. (2019) as a guideline. Table 9 details
the hyperparameters that we use for planning for each task category.

      Hyperparameter                                                                         Value
      Number of samples                                              200 for all tasks except 800
                                                                for open {drawer, slide}
      Scaling factor γ                                                                         0.05
      Sampling distribution correlation coefficient β                                           0.5
      Sampling distribution stdev. (RoboDesk)                                [0.5,0.5,0.5,0.1,0.1]
      Sample distribution stdev. (robosuite)                                      [0.5, 0.5, 0.5, 0]
      Sampling distribution initial mean                                                           0
                              Table 9: Hyperparameters for MPPI optimizer.

B.2    C LASSIFIER COST FUNCTIONS
For each classifier cost function, we take 2500 trajectories from the RoboDesk dataset for the given
task, and train a binary convolutional classifier to predict whether or not a given frame receives
reward >= 30, where the reward is provided by the RoboDesk environment. We train for 3000
gradient steps, and the architecture is described in Table 10.
B.3    P LANNING COST FUNCTIONS
Next we detail the cost functions for each of the tasks. The cost for the RoboSuite tasks is the
sum of the ℓ2 pixel-wise error between the 10 predicted images and the goal image, summed over
time. For the RoboDesk tasks, it is 0.5 times the ℓ2 pixel loss plus 10 times the classifier logit


                                                  16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                 Layer type   Out channels/hidden units   Kernel
                                  Conv2D                 32               3×3
                                  Conv2D                 32               3×3
                                   ReLU                   -                -
                                  Conv2D                 32               3×3
                                   ReLU                   -                -
                                  Conv2D                 32               3×3
                                   ReLU                   -                -
                                  Conv2D                 32               3×3
                                   ReLU                   -                -
                                  Conv2D                 32               3×3
                                   ReLU                   -                -
                                  Conv2D                 32               3×3
                                   ReLU                   -                -
                                  Conv2D                 32               3×3
                                  Flatten                 -                -
                                   Linear               1024               -
                                   ReLU                   -                -
                                   Linear                 1                -
Table 10: Classifier cost function architecture, with layers named as in PyTorch convention. The input is a
64 × 64 × 3 RGB image.


from a deep convolutional classifier trained for predicting success on that given task. We tuned
this weighting value after fixing the value of γ for MPPI. We tuned over the classifier weight as
[1, 10, 100, 1000, 10000] using the simulator as the planner and found that 10 resulted in the best
performance.
The score for the planner is computed by negating the cost.

C    A LTERNATIVE P LANNERS
While we implement and tune the sampling-based MPPI optimizer for accessibility and ease of use,
our code framework also enables benchmark users to modify and swap out the controller and model
independently. This allows for the coupled development of models and controllers on the task and
task instance definitions provided in the benchmark. We provide the following optimizers/controllers
with the released codebase. A star (*) indicates that the method requires gradient information.

       • Model-predictive path integral (MPPI) (Williams et al., 2016): This is our default plan-
         ner as described in the main text. Our implementation is based off of that of Nagabandi
         et al. (2019).
       • Cross-entropy method (CEM) (de Boer et al., 2005): The cross-entropy method itera-
         tively refines the sampling distribution of candidate distributions via importance sampling.
         In practice, this is implemented by computing the top percentile of elite samples and re-
         computing the mean and variance at each iteration. Our implementation is based off of that
         of Nagabandi et al. (2019).
       • Cross-entropy method with Gradient Descent* (CEM-GD) (Huang et al., 2021): This
         is a gradient-augmented version of CEM that refines individual CEM samples using gradi-
         ent steps. It also significantly reduces the number of CEM samples after the first planning
         step for computational speed. We keep most of the PyTorch implementation by the original
         authors.
       • Limited-memory BFGS* (L-BFGS) (Liu & Nocedal, 1989): A popular quasi-Newton
         method for continuous nonlinear optimization. We use the implementation from Py-
         Torch (Paszke et al., 2019).

We conducted initial control experiments with these planners using the SVG′ model on the
robosuite task categories. We find that CEM-GD promisingly achieves an 87% success rate
averaged across 3 seeds, and L-BFGS achieves a 48% success rate across 3 seeds after tuning the
learning rate for the optimizer across {1e-3, 1e-2, 5e-2, 7e-2}.

D    DATASET D ETAILS
Here we provide details abut the datasets that come with VP2 . Note that our datasets can be re-
rendered at any resolution.


                                                      17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


       • robosuite Tabletop environment: We collect 50K trajectories of interactions collected
         with a scripted policy. During each trajectory, a random one of the four possible objects
         is selected as the target for the push. Then, a random direction in [0, π] on the plane is
         selected as the direction for the object to be pushed, and the target object position is set to
         0.3 meters in this direction from the initial starting position. Then, we use a P-controller to
         first navigate the arm in position to push the object in the desired direction, and then to push
         it. At every step, we add independent Gaussian noise with σ = 0.05 to each dimension of
         the action except the last one, which represents the gripper action. Even if the object is not
         successfully pushed to the desired position using this policy, we still record the trajectory.
         The robosuite Tabletop dataset is rendered using the iGibson (Li et al., 2021) renderer,
         with modifications to the shadow computations to make the shadows softer and more re-
         alistic. We will supply the modified rendering code along with the environments in the
         released benchmark code.
       • RoboDesk environment: We script policies to complete each of the 7 tasks. The structure
         of each policy depends on the task, and they are included in the provided code. We apply
         noise to each action by adding independent Gaussian noise to every dimension. We create
         the dataset for the entire RoboDesk dataset by collecting 2500 noisy scripted trajectories
         using a noise level of σ = 0.1, and then 2500 additional trajectories with σ = 0.2, for a
         total of 35K trajectories.
         The RoboDesk dataset is rendered using the MuJoCo viewer, provided by the original
         implementation.

E    E NSEMBLING E XPERIMENTS
For the ensembling experiment, we apply the model disagreement penalty in the following way.
Given an action sequence, we first use all N models in the ensemble to predict video sequences
I 1 , I 2 , ...I N . We then compute the error of the prediction that most deviates from the mean of all
                                                              PN
predictions in ℓ1 error, i.e. δ = maxi=[0,1,..N ] ∥I i − N1 i=1 I i ∥1 . We compute the standard task
cost function c using one of the ensemble predictions, selected uniformly at random. We calculate
the final cost as c − λδ, where λ is a hyperparameter that we set as 0.01 for all experiments.

F    C ODE
We provide the open source code used for running control experiments here: https://github.
com/s-tian/vp2. Pretrained cost weights, datasets, and task definitions can be downloaded
from that link.

G    F ULL R ESULTS FOR M ETRIC C OMPARISONS
In Table 11 we present the results on the remaining two tasks from the case study presented in
Section 3.
In Figures 7-14, we provide detailed per-task plots of LPIPS, FVD, and SSIM compared to control
performance. We find that while none of these metrics is well-correlated with performance across all
tasks, they appear to be better correlated in the “push blue button”, “push green button”, and “open
drawer” tasks. However, we can see that even for those tasks, these metrics can conflict in ordering
models. For specific tasks, we observe that the “upright block off table” task particularly appears
well-correlated with FVD.


                                                   18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                             Perceptual                                             Control                                                                                     Perceptual                  Control
 Model Loss                                         FVD LPIPS* SSIM Success                                                                                 Model Loss                                    FVD LPIPS* SSIM Success
 FitVid MSE        9.6                                            0.65                               98.1            95%                                    FitVid MSE       10.6                                    0.65      98.0             88%
        +LPIPS=1 6.3                                              0.72                               98.0            98%                                           +LPIPS=1 8.3                                      0.69      97.9             88%
        +LPIPS=10 9.2                                             0.88                               97.8            88%                                           +LPIPS=10 8.3                                     0.87      97.4             67%
 SVG′ MSE         16.7                                            1.13                               95.3            97%                                    SVG′ MSE         13.1                                    1.13      94.9             83%
        +LPIPS=1 8.4                                              1.06                               95.5            97%                                           +LPIPS=1 7.4                                      1.03      95.3             83%
        +LPIPS=10 41.8                                            1.28                               94.1            25%                                           +LPIPS=10 24.6                                    1.26      93.8             10%

                                   (a) RoboDesk: push blue button                                                                                                               (b) RoboDesk: push green button

                                                             Perceptual                                             Control
 Model Loss                                         FVD LPIPS* SSIM Success
 FitVid MSE        9.1                                            0.77                               96.3            10%
        +LPIPS=1 5.8                                              0.72                               96.0            10%
        +LPIPS=10 7.2                                             0.91                               94.8            10%
 SVG′ MSE         13.6                                            1.28                               92.8            10%
        +LPIPS=1 9.7                                              1.19                               92.7            13%
        +LPIPS=10 20.0                                            1.54                               91.0            10%

                                 (c) RoboDesk: flat block off table
                                    Table 11: Results for the remaining 3 tasks for the experiment described in Section 3.


                         1.0
                                        LPIPS vs. Control Performance on RoboSuite Tasks                                                                        1.0
                                                                                                                                                                               FVD vs. Control Performance on RoboSuite Tasks
                               Model type                                                                                                                             Model type
                         0.9       FitVid                                                                                                                       0.9       FitVid
                                   SVG’                                                                  SVG’                 SVG’                                        SVG’                                               SVG’                    SVG’
                         0.8                                                                             LPIPS=1                                                0.8                                                          LPIPS=1
  Control success rate


                                                                                                                                         Control success rate


                                  FitVid            FitVid                                                                                                               FitVid                            FitVid
                         0.7      LPIPS=1                                                                                                                       0.7      LPIPS=1
                         0.6                                                                                                                                    0.6
                         0.5                                                                                                                                    0.5
                                                                                            FitVid                     SVG’                                                               FitVid                                         SVG’
                         0.4                                                                                           LPIPS=10                                 0.4                                                                      LPIPS=10
                                                                                            LPIPS=10                                                                                      LPIPS=10
                         0.3                                                                                                                                    0.3
                                   0.030         0.035         0.040                                   0.045            0.050                                             20          25             30         35      40          45          50
                                               LPIPS (computed on task dataset)                                                                                                              FVD (computed on task dataset)

                                                                                      1.0
                                                                                                            SSIM vs. Control Performance on RoboSuite Tasks
                                                                                      0.9
                                                                                                        SVG’         SVG’
                                                                                      0.8                            LPIPS=1
                                                               Control success rate


                                                                                                                                                                                              FitVid
                                                                                                                                                                                FitVid        LPIPS=1
                                                                                      0.7
                                                                                      0.6
                                                                                      0.5
                                                                                                     SVG’                     FitVid
                                                                                      0.4            LPIPS=10                 LPIPS=10                                                    Model type
                                                                                                                                                                                              FitVid
                                                                                      0.3                                                                                                     SVG’
                                                                                                0.82         0.83      0.84       0.85                      0.86         0.87      0.88       0.89
                                                                                                                      SSIM (computed on task dataset)
  Figure 7: Detailed results comparing perceptual metric values and control performance: RoboSuite tasks.


                                                                                                                                       19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                         1.0
                                    LPIPS vs. Control Performance on RoboDesk push red Tasks                                                                             1.0
                                                                                                                                                                                    FVD vs. Control Performance on RoboDesk push red Tasks
                                                                                            SVG’                                                                                        SVG’
                                     FitVid                                                 LPIPS=1 SVG’                                                                                LPIPS=1              SVG’
                         0.8         LPIPS=1                                                                                                                             0.8
                                                                                                                                                                                   FitVid
  Control success rate


                                                                                                                                                  Control success rate
                                    FitVid                                                                                                                                         LPIPS=1       FitVid
                         0.6                                                                                                                                             0.6

                         0.4                   FitVid                                                                                                                    0.4          FitVid
                                               LPIPS=10                                                                                                                               LPIPS=10
                         0.2                                                                                                                                             0.2
                               Model type                                                                                  SVG’                                                Model type                                                                 SVG’
                                    FitVid                                                                                 LPIPS=10                                                 FitVid                                                                LPIPS=10
                         0.0        SVG’                                                                                                                                 0.0        SVG’
                            0.006        0.007          0.008                     0.009                    0.010               0.011                                                  7.5        10.0          12.5       15.0    17.5        20.0        22.5        25.0
                                                  LPIPS (computed on task dataset)                                                                                                                      FVD (computed on task dataset)

                                                                                          1.0
                                                                                                      SSIM vs. Control Performance on RoboDesk push red Tasks
                                                                                                 Model type        SVG’
                                                                                                         FitVid                LPIPS=1                                                             FitVid
                                                                                          0.8            SVG’                   SVG’                                                               LPIPS=1
                                                                   Control success rate


                                                                                                                                                                                                        FitVid
                                                                                          0.6

                                                                                          0.4                                                                                                  FitVid
                                                                                                                                                                                               LPIPS=10
                                                                                          0.2
                                                                                                        SVG’
                                                                                                        LPIPS=10
                                                                                          0.0
                                                                                                 0.940         0.945       0.950          0.955                           0.960     0.965        0.970          0.975
                                                                                                                           SSIM (computed on task dataset)
Figure 8: Detailed results comparing perceptual metric values and control performance: RoboDesk push red
button task.


                         1.0
                                    LPIPS vs. Control Performance on RoboDesk push blue Tasks                                                                            1.2
                                                                                                                                                                                     FVD vs. Control Performance on RoboDesk push blue Tasks
                         0.9         FitVid                                                        SVG’ SVG’                                                                   FitVid SVG’
                                                                                                                                                                                      LPIPS=1
                             FitVid LPIPS=1                                                        LPIPS=1                                                               1.0
                         0.8                              FitVid                                                                                                                              FitVid SVG’
  Control success rate


                                                                                                                                                  Control success rate


                                                          LPIPS=10                                                                                                                            LPIPS=1
                         0.7                                                                                                                                             0.8                FitVid
                         0.6                                                                                                                                                                LPIPS=10
                         0.5                                                                                                                                             0.6
                         0.4
                                                                                                                         SVG’                                            0.4                                                                              SVG’
                         0.3 Model type                                                                                  LPIPS=10                                              Model type                                                                 LPIPS=10
                         0.2     FitVid                                                                                                                                             FitVid
                                 SVG’                                                                                                                                    0.2        SVG’
                         0.1
                                  0.007     0.008          0.009                     0.010               0.011         0.012           0.013                                   5       10              15            20      25          30          35          40
                                                  LPIPS (computed on task dataset)                                                                                                                      FVD (computed on task dataset)

                                                                                          1.0
                                                                                                        SSIM vs. Control Performance on RoboDesk push blue Tasks
                                                                                                                                    SVG’                                                           FitVid
                                                                                          0.9                                  SVG’ LPIPS=1                                                             FitVid
                                                                                          0.8                                                                                                 FitVid LPIPS=1
                                                                   Control success rate


                                                                                                                                                                                              LPIPS=10
                                                                                          0.7
                                                                                          0.6
                                                                                          0.5
                                                                                          0.4
                                                                                                        SVG’
                                                                                          0.3           LPIPS=10                                                                                  Model type
                                                                                          0.2                                                                                                               FitVid
                                                                                                                                                                                                            SVG’
                                                                                          0.1
                                                                                                0.940     0.945        0.950     0.955         0.960                      0.965     0.970      0.975        0.980
                                                                                                                          SSIM (computed on task dataset)
Figure 9: Detailed results comparing perceptual metric values and control performance: RoboDesk push blue
button task.


                                                                                                                                               20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                         1.0
                                    LPIPS vs. Control Performance on RoboDesk push green Tasks                                                                                           FVD vs. Control Performance on RoboDesk push green Tasks
                                  FitVid                                                                                                                                   1.0           FitVid FitVid
                                                                                                                                                                                         LPIPS=1
                         0.8         FitVid                                                             SVG’                                                               0.8 SVG’
                                                                                                        LPIPS=1 SVG’                                                                                              SVG’
  Control success rate


                                                                                                                                                    Control success rate
                                     LPIPS=1                                                                                                                                   LPIPS=1
                         0.6                           FitVid                                                                                                              0.6       FitVid
                                                       LPIPS=10                                                                                                                      LPIPS=10
                         0.4                                                                                                                                               0.4

                         0.2                                                                                                                                               0.2
                                 Model type                                                                                          SVG’                                         Model type                                                                               SVG’
                                     FitVid                                                                                          LPIPS=10                                            FitVid                                                                            LPIPS=10
                         0.0         SVG’                                                                                                                                  0.0           SVG’
                                      0.007        0.008          0.009                           0.010           0.011         0.012                                              7.5            10.0          12.5            15.0        17.5        20.0        22.5          25.0
                                                       LPIPS (computed on task dataset)                                                                                                                        FVD (computed on task dataset)

                                                                                                  1.0
                                                                                                               SSIM vs. Control Performance on RoboDesk push green Tasks
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 FitVid
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 LPIPS=1
                                                                                                  0.8                                                                                                                  FitVid
                                                                                                                                SVG’ SVG’
                                                                           Control success rate


                                                                                                                                     LPIPS=1
                                                                                                  0.6                                                                                                         FitVid
                                                                                                                                                                                                              LPIPS=10
                                                                                                  0.4

                                                                                                  0.2
                                                                                                           SVG’                                                                                               Model type
                                                                                                           LPIPS=10                                                                                                   FitVid
                                                                                                  0.0                                                                                                                 SVG’
                                                                                                            0.94                  0.95                     0.96                               0.97                       0.98
                                                                                                                                  SSIM (computed on task dataset)
Figure 10: Detailed results comparing perceptual metric values and control performance: RoboDesk push green
button task.


                         1.0
                               LPIPS vs. Control Performance on RoboDesk upright block off table Tasks                                                                     1.0
                                                                                                                                                                                 FVD vs. Control Performance on RoboDesk upright block off table Tasks

                                 FitVid                                                                                                                                                           FitVid
                         0.8 LPIPS=1                                                                                                                                       0.8             LPIPS=1
  Control success rate


                                                                                                                                                    Control success rate


                                              FitVid                                                                                                                                 FitVid
                                              LPIPS=10                                                                                                                               LPIPS=10
                         0.6                                                                              SVG’                                                             0.6                                 SVG’
                                                                                                          LPIPS=1                                                                                              LPIPS=1
                         0.4
                             FitVid                                                                                       SVG’                                             0.4                                                                                 SVG’          FitVid
                                                                                                                                     SVG’                                                                                                                      SVG’
                                 Model type                                                                                          LPIPS=10                                     Model type                                                                   LPIPS=10
                         0.2         FitVid                                                                                                                                0.2           FitVid
                                     SVG’                                                                                                                                                SVG’
                                          0.013          0.014            0.015                             0.016              0.017                                                      8              10              12            14          16          18            20
                                                       LPIPS (computed on task dataset)                                                                                                                        FVD (computed on task dataset)

                                                                                                  1.0
                                                                                                        SSIM vs. Control Performance on RoboDesk upright block off table Tasks

                                                                                                                                                                                         FitVid
                                                                                                  0.8                                                                                    LPIPS=1
                                                                           Control success rate


                                                                                                                                                                                 FitVid
                                                                                                                                                                                 LPIPS=10
                                                                                                  0.6               SVG’
                                                                                                                    LPIPS=1
                                                                                                  0.4                         SVG’                                                                                    FitVid
                                                                                                               SVG’
                                                                                                               LPIPS=10                                                                                   Model type
                                                                                                  0.2                                                                                                             FitVid
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  SVG’
                                                                                                          0.905       0.910      0.915      0.920     0.925                       0.930       0.935           0.940      0.945
                                                                                                                                 SSIM (computed on task dataset)
Figure 11: Detailed results comparing perceptual metric values and control performance: RoboDesk upright
block off table task.


                                                                                                                                                21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                         1.0
                               LPIPS vs. Control Performance on RoboDesk flat block off table Tasks                                                              1.0
                                                                                                                                                                            FVD vs. Control Performance on RoboDesk flat block off table Tasks
                                                                                        Model type                                                                                                                                  Model type
                                                                                                                              FitVid                                                                                                                 FitVid
                         0.8                                                                                                  SVG’                               0.8                                                                                 SVG’
  Control success rate


                                                                                                                                          Control success rate
                         0.6                                                                                                                                     0.6

                         0.4                                                                                                                                     0.4

                                              FitVid                                                                                                                                FitVid
                         0.2 FitVid                                          SVG’                                                                                0.2 FitVid LPIPS=10                     SVG’
                             LPIPS=1          LPIPS=10                       LPIPS=1 SVG’                                SVG’                                        LPIPS=1                             LPIPS=1                                SVG’
                                                                                                                         LPIPS=10                                                                                           SVG’                LPIPS=10
                         0.0      FitVid                                                                                                                         0.0                              FitVid
                                    0.008              0.010                              0.012                0.014                                                         6             8             10            12        14   16   18           20
                                                LPIPS (computed on task dataset)                                                                                                                    FVD (computed on task dataset)

                                                                                         1.0
                                                                                                SSIM vs. Control Performance on RoboDesk flat block off table Tasks
                                                                                                                                                        Model type
                                                                                                                                                                                                         FitVid
                                                                                         0.8                                                                                                             SVG’
                                                                  Control success rate


                                                                                         0.6

                                                                                         0.4
                                                                                                                                                                                    FitVid                    FitVid
                                                                                         0.2                                    SVG’                                                LPIPS=10
                                                                                                   SVG’                         LPIPS=1
                                                                                                   LPIPS=10
                                                                                         0.0                                    SVG’                                                                FitVid
                                                                                                                                                                                                    LPIPS=1
                                                                                                0.91           0.92              0.93                            0.94               0.95             0.96
                                                                                                                       SSIM (computed on task dataset)
Figure 12: Detailed results comparing perceptual metric values and control performance: RoboDesk flat block
off table task.


                         1.0
                                 LPIPS vs. Control Performance on RoboDesk open drawer Tasks                                                                     1.0
                                                                                                                                                                                 FVD vs. Control Performance on RoboDesk open drawer Tasks
                                                                                    Model type                                                                                                                                     Model type
                                                                                                                          FitVid                                                                                                                 FitVid
                         0.8                                                                                              SVG’                                   0.8                                                                             SVG’
  Control success rate


                                                                                                                                          Control success rate


                         0.6                                                                                                                                     0.6
                                            FitVid                                                                                                                                  FitVid
                         0.4 FitVid        LPIPS=10                                                                                                              0.4                LPIPS=10
                             LPIPS=1                                                     SVG’                                                                                                     FitVid
                                                                                         LPIPS=1
                         0.2        FitVid                                                                                                                       0.2 FitVid                SVG’
                                                                                                                         SVG’                                        LPIPS=1               LPIPS=1                                              SVG’
                                                                         SVG’                                            LPIPS=10                                                                          SVG’                                 LPIPS=10
                         0.0                                                                                                                                     0.0
                                 0.003         0.004           0.005                              0.006               0.007                                             5                  10                 15            20        25        30
                                                LPIPS (computed on task dataset)                                                                                                                    FVD (computed on task dataset)

                                                                                         1.0
                                                                                                   SSIM vs. Control Performance on RoboDesk open drawer Tasks
                                                                                                                                                      Model type
                                                                                                                                                                                                         FitVid
                                                                                         0.8                                                                                                             SVG’
                                                                  Control success rate


                                                                                         0.6
                                                                                                                                                                                                FitVid
                                                                                         0.4                                                                                                    LPIPS=10
                                                                                                                                SVG’                                                                 FitVid
                                                                                                                                LPIPS=1
                                                                                         0.2                                                                                                             FitVid
                                                                                                  SVG’                                                                                                   LPIPS=1
                                                                                                  LPIPS=10                                SVG’
                                                                                         0.0
                                                                                                       0.955      0.960           0.965                          0.970             0.975           0.980
                                                                                                                       SSIM (computed on task dataset)
Figure 13: Detailed results comparing perceptual metric values and control performance: RoboDesk open
drawer task.


                                                                                                                                        22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                         1.0
                                    LPIPS vs. Control Performance on RoboDesk open slide Tasks                                                                       1.0
                                                                                                                                                                                  FVD vs. Control Performance on RoboDesk open slide Tasks
                                                                                        Model type                                                                                                                                   Model type
                                                                                                                                   FitVid                                                                                                    FitVid
                         0.8                                                                                                       SVG’                              0.8                                                                     SVG’
  Control success rate


                                                                                                                                              Control success rate
                         0.6                                                                                                                                         0.6
                               FitVid                                                                                                                                       FitVid
                               LPIPS=1                                                           SVG’                                                                       LPIPS=1                                                              SVG’
                         0.4                                                                                                                                         0.4
                                FitVid             FitVid                                                                                                                     FitVid                              FitVid
                         0.2                       LPIPS=10                                                                                                          0.2      LPIPS=10
                                                                                                             SVG’            SVG’                                                                                   SVG’                  SVG’
                                                                                                             LPIPS=1 LPIPS=10                                                                                         LPIPS=1             LPIPS=10
                         0.0                                                                                                                                         0.0
                                        0.012   0.014       0.016     0.018                         0.020          0.022          0.024                                      10             12            14            16      18   20       22
                                                   LPIPS (computed on task dataset)                                                                                                                 FVD (computed on task dataset)

                                                                                           1.0
                                                                                                         SSIM vs. Control Performance on RoboDesk open slide Tasks
                                                                                                                                                            Model type
                                                                                                                                                                                                         FitVid
                                                                                           0.8                                                                                                           SVG’
                                                                    Control success rate


                                                                                           0.6
                                                                                                                                                                                                 FitVid
                                                                                                                                  SVG’                                                           LPIPS=1
                                                                                           0.4
                                                                                                                                                                                     FitVid               FitVid
                                                                                           0.2                                                                                       LPIPS=10
                                                                                                        SVG’               SVG’
                                                                                                        LPIPS=10           LPIPS=1
                                                                                           0.0
                                                                                                 0.88       0.89           0.90       0.91    0.92                         0.93      0.94         0.95         0.96
                                                                                                                              SSIM (computed on task dataset)
Figure 14: Detailed results comparing perceptual metric values and control performance: RoboDesk open slide
task.


                                                                                                                                             23
