Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


M ANIFOLD C HARACTERISTICS T HAT                                                      P REDICT
D OWNSTREAM TASK P ERFORMANCE
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT

         Pretraining methods are typically compared by evaluating the accuracy of linear
         classifiers, transfer learning performance, or visually inspecting the representation
         manifold’s (RM) lower-dimensional projections. We show that the differences be-
         tween methods can be understood more clearly by investigating the RM directly,
         which allows for a more detailed comparison. To this end, we propose a frame-
         work and new metric to measure and compare different RMs. We also investigate
         and report on the RM characteristics for various pretraining methods. These char-
         acteristics are measured by applying sequentially larger local alterations to the
         input data, using white noise injections and Projected Gradient Descent (PGD)
         adversarial attacks, and then tracking each datapoint. We calculate the total dis-
         tance moved for each datapoint and the relative change in distance between suc-
         cessive alterations. We show that self-supervised methods learn an RM where
         alterations lead to large but constant size changes, indicating a smoother RM than
         fully supervised methods. We then combine these measurements into one metric,
         the Representation Manifold Quality Metric (RMQM), where larger values indi-
         cate larger and less variable step sizes, and show that RMQM correlates positively
         with performance on downstream tasks.



1   I NTRODUCTION

Understanding why deep neural networks generalise so well remains a topic of intense research,
despite the practical successes that have been achieved with such networks. Less ambitiously than
aiming for a complete understanding, we can search for characteristics that indicate good generali-
sation. Knowledge of such characteristics can then be incorporated into training methods and open
more research avenues. These characteristics can also be used to evaluate and compare networks.
Arguably the most successful current theories of generalisation focus on the flatness of the loss
surface at the minima (Hochreiter & Schmidhuber, 1997; Dziugaite & Roy, 2017; Dherin et al.,
2021) (even though the most straightforward measures of flatness are known to be deficient Dinh
et al. (2017)). Petzka et al. (2021) expands on this argument and shows that these methods correlate
strongly with model performance, and reflect the assumption that the labels are locally constant in
feature space. A thorough survey by Jiang et al. (2020) shows that some recent methods are, in fact,
negatively correlated with generalisation.
To our knowledge, no theory looks at the structural characteristics of the learned Representation
Manifold (RM) as a predictor for generalisation. We investigate whether structural characteristics in
the RMs correlate with generalisation to task performance.
To illustrate the intuition behind our investigation, consider Figure 1, which represents two RMs, A
and B. Assume that each RM is produced by the same architecture, trained on the same dataset; both
have a flat minima but are trained with different methods. In the case of A, where the manifold is
smooth, the sample representations of the Green class are, on average, closer to other Green class’s
points. Likewise, presentations of the Red class will, on average, be closer to other Red class’s
samples. On the other hand, if we consider RM B, there are chasms in the manifold that lead to
some sample representations being closer to samples of the other class rather than samples of their
own class, as illustrated in the blue patch.


                                                  1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 1: An illustration to give an intuitive understanding of why the structural characteristics of a
RM should be considered a predictor of generalisation.


The purpose of this paper is to justify our claim that specific RM characteristics lead to general-
isation. However, to do this, we must first define appropriate RM characteristics that reflect this
intuition and show how to measure them.

Contribution This paper aims to show with enough empirical evidence that looking at the repre-
sentation manifold (RM) structure is a good research direction for explaining generalisation in deep
learning structures. Following these strong empirical results, future work will require a deeper the-
oretical investigation into our findings. Our contributions in this paper can then be summarised as
defining a model-agnostic and straightforward framework to measure RM characteristics. Using this
framework, we compare the RMs learned by encoders trained using supervised, self-supervised and
a mixture of both methods on the MNIST and CIFAR-10 datasets. We then present a new metric that
calculates the quality of a manifold for generalisation, the Representation Manifold Quality Metric
(RMQM). We show that this metric correlates strongly with downstream task performance. These
observations support our intuition on the characteristics of an RM that lead to generalisation.

2   R ELATED W ORK
Representation learning Some of the earliest work in representation learning focused on pre-
training networks by generating artificial labels from images and then training the network to pre-
dict these labels (Doersch et al., 2015; Zhang et al.; Gidaris et al., 2018). Other techniques involve
contrastive learning where representations from images are directly contrasted against one another
such that the network learns to encode similar images to similar representations (Schroff et al., 2015;
Oord et al., 2018; Chen et al., 2020; He et al., 2020; Le-Khac et al., 2020).

Comparing representations from trained neural networks Yamins et al. (2014); Cadena et al.
(2019) compares how similar representations are by linearly regressing over the one representation
to predict the other representation. The R2 coefficient is then used as a metric to quantify similarity.
This metric is not symmetric. Symmetrical methods compare representations from different neural
networks by creating a similarity matrix between the hidden representations of all layers as was done
in (Laakso & Cottrell, 2000; Kriegeskorte et al., 2008; Li et al., 2016; Wang et al., 2018; Kornblith
et al.).

Manifold Learning The Manifold Hypothesis states that practical high dimensional datasets lie
on a much lower dimensional manifold Carlsson et al. (2008); Fefferman et al. (2016); Goodfellow
et al. (2016). Manifold learning techniques aim to learn this lower-dimensional manifold by per-
forming non-linear dimensionality reduction. A typical application of these non-linear reductions is
visualising high dimensional data in two-dimensional or three-dimensional settings. Popular tech-
niques includeTenenbaum et al. (2000); Van der Maaten & Hinton (2008); McInnes et al. (2018).
These techniques have been used in various studies to compare different learned representation man-
ifolds (Chen et al., 2019; van der Merwe, 2020; Li et al., 2020; Liu et al., 2022).

Comparing manifolds To evaluate the performance of Generative Adversarial Networks, Baran-
nikov et al. (2021) introduces the Cross-Barcode tool that measures the differences in topologies
between two manifolds, which they approximate by the sampled data points from the underlying
data distributions. They then derive the Manifold Topology Divergence based on the sum of the


                                                   2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


lengths of segments in the Cross-Barcode. Zhou et al. (2021) also evaluates generative models by
quantifying representation disentanglement. They do this by measuring the topological similarity
of conditional submanifolds from the latent space. Shao et al. (2018) investigates the Riemannian
geometry of latent manifolds, specifically the curvature of the manifolds. They conclude that having
latent coordinates that approximate geodesics is a desirable property of latent manifolds. To our
knowledge, there has not been a study done on measuring the manifold’s structural characteristics
based on small local alterations to the input data, applied to non-generative encoders.

Predictors of generalisation Jiang et al. (2020) performed a large scale study of generalisation in
deep learning, and we refer the reader to this work for a well-documented review. To our knowledge,
there has been no work done on using the structure of the RM as a predictor of generalisation.

3     A PPROACH

Describing all the details of a high-dimensional representation manifold (RM) is an impossible task;
we can at best strive to find characteristics that summarise salient properties of the RM. When mea-
suring these characteristics, one will therefore have a discrete view of the RM Barannikov et al.
(2021), made out of the predicted representations from the input data. We propose measuring indi-
vidual distance metrics for each representation of an input sample relative to representations of data
close to it.
By staying in the neighbourhood of each representation, we can measure the surface surrounding that
point using standard distance metrics, effectively walking on the local structure and measuring the
size of each step relative to the change in input. By inspecting all these locally measured structures
together, one describes the structure for the entire RM in terms of its local stability.
The caveat is that one requires representations in close proximity on the RM to do these measure-
ments. However, practical RMs have many dimensions, implying that data points tend to be well
separated, even if they originate from the same underlying class (Bárány & Füredi, 1988; Balestriero
et al., 2021). We thus need to create these proximate representations artificially.
We do this by applying sequentially larger local alterations to the input data and computing the
resulting representations. By increasing the size of the alteration, we step further on the RM surface
and thus measure characteristics further away but still local for the magnitude of changes that we
employ.

3.1   A LTERATION M ETHODS

Let an RM be represented by ϕ = f (X), where f is a feature extractor and X is a dataset (e.g.
input images). With A representing a function that applies small local alterations to pixels in the
image, each altered data point projected down to the RM is represented as ϕi = f (Aj (xi )), where
xi ∈ X and Aj the jth iteration of the alteration function.
The two alteration methods we use in our experiments are the same methods Hoffman et al. (2019)
used to evaluate the robustness of a Jacobian regulariser. We chose these methods because they
result in either random local alterations or guided alteration, thus giving us different paths on the
RM to evaluate.

White noise injection. Here we alter each input image xi by adding an alteration vector randomly,
a, with components independently drawn from a normal distribution with variance ϵ2 , thus a ∼
N (0, ϵ2 ). In order to increase the alteration strength, we increase ϵ from zero to one in 100 in
equal steps, indexed by j. Thus, alteration j for datapoint xi is given by xij = [xi + aj ]clip , where
aj ∼ N (0, ϵ2j ) and [.]clip clips the image to be between zero and one.

PGD attack. Whereas white noise injections will allow us to walk on the surface of an RM in
random directions, altering the image in a way that deliberately aims to fool the trained function
fθ will allow us to walk in a direction influenced by decision boundaries on the RM. In this paper
we will implement an extension of fast gradient sign method (FGSM) Goodfellow et al. (2015),
namely projected gradient descent (PGD) (Madry et al., 2018). FGSM consists of adding a vector to


                                                  3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


the original image, where this vector consists of the sign of the gradient for the loss functions with
respect to the input image, scaled by a value ϵF GSM . PGD iterates this process for several iterations.
Calculating the jth alteration of xi , represented by xi,j can be defined as
                       xi,j = [xi,j−1 + ϵF SGM · (∇xi,j−1 L(θ, xi,j−1 , y))]clip                    (1)
where L is the loss function for the relevant training method.
Given that the original target for these adversarial attacks was a network that classifies images. In
order to then apply PGD attack to the triplet variants, we calculate the loss precisely as usual and
then calculate the gradient with regards to the anchor image. When calculating the gradient for NT-
XENT methods, we compare a non-augmented image with an augmented version and then calculate
the gradient with respect to the unaugmented image. We apply the PGD attack for 30 iterations and
save each iteration, with ϵF GSM = 2/255.

3.2   M ANIFOLD C HARACTERISTICS

Let Aj be the jth iteration of an alteration method, where each successive iteration employs a
stronger alteration. Also, let ϕi,j be the projected point on the RM produced by f (Aj (xi )), where
xi ∈ X.

Average distance moved. The first characteristic we measure is the total of the normalised Eu-
clidean distances between the original point, ϕi,0 , and each altered point, ϕi,j , where ϕ is the nor-
malised vector. The average distance moved for image xi is represented as J1 j ∥ϕi,0 − ϕi,j ∥2 ,
                                                                                    P
where we can then average over each point to find the average distance moved for a given RM and
alteration. Finally, the average over images is
                                                  N    J
                                              1 XX
                               D(ϕ, A) =            ∥ϕi,0 − ϕi,j ∥2                                 (2)
                                             NJ i j

where N is the number of images considered and J is the number of alterations. D(ϕ, A) thus
indicates how robust the RM is to alterations A.

Average distance spikes. We also measure the relative change in distance between successive
alterations. These relative distance changes are measured both with respect to the original represen-
tation and relative to each previous alteration. We average the magnitudes of these changes as we
are not interested in the direction of the change to gauge how smooth an RM is. To understand how
relative changes relate to smoothness, recall that we only apply alterations that keep us close to the
given data points. Therefore, we can only have big spikes if the RM contains significant chasms
or bumps (small alterations in input data should result in constant distance increases if the RM is
smooth).
In order to calculate these relative changes for a single representation, refer to Equation (3) which
calculates the relative change according to the original representation, DRC and Equation (4) which
calculates the relative change according to the distance between the previous alterations PRC . In
both equations, d() is a distance function. In order to get the overall metrics, we average the values
over all data points.
                                             J
                                        1 X d(ϕi,0 , ϕi,j ) − d(ϕi,0 , ϕi,j−1 )
                       D(ϕi , A)RC =                                                                (3)
                                        J j=1         d(ϕi,0 , ϕi,j )

                                         J
                                     1 X d(ϕi,j−1 , ϕi,j ) − d(ϕi,j−1 , ϕi,j−2 )
                    P (ϕi , A)RC =                                                                  (4)
                                     J j=2          d(ϕi,j−1 , ϕi,j )


4     C OMPARING D IFFERENT T RAINING M ETHODS
We now measure the characteristics defined in Section 3 for five different training methods applied
to two different encoders and datasets. These five methods range from purely unsupervised to fully


                                                   4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


supervised. By comparing these five methods, we discover common properties for related methods,
thereby gaining a better understanding of the learned RMs. For further details on these training
methods, please refer to Appendix C.
To ensure that each learned RM can be compared fairly to each other, all image alterations are
exactly the same for each method when calculating the manifold characteristics. We report in the
rest of this section using the average results over both the Adam and SGD trained encoders, as the
results were similar for both.


Figure 2: The normalised Euclidean distance between the original MNIST digit and the same digit
altered by our white noise injection method. We perform this measurement for each embedding
dimension and digit in the test set. We then calculate the standard error shown with the mean
results.


4.1   M EASURING D ISTANCES

Figure 2 shows the average normalised Euclidean distance to the original MNIST digits as we in-
crease the amount of alteration applied to each digit. Here, A is the white noise injection alteration.
As the embedding dimension increases, the self-supervised methods move further from the original
point than the supervised signal methods. We also notice that the Cross-Entropy encoder’s average
distance away from the original representation stays very low, with the Triplet-Entropy and Triplet-
Supervised encoders falling in between. We suspect this is because they contain both supervised and
unsupervised signals in the training process.
When A is the PGD attack, we see the same pattern emerging for the CIFAR-10 encoders, shown
in Figure 3. Here though, we can see a much more significant difference between self-supervised
methods and methods containing a supervised signal: the NT-XENT and Triplet-SS measurements
grow to have much larger values.
In Table 1 we summarise the D values, which is calculated using Equation (2), for the MNIST
encoders. We average over embedding dimensions and calculate the standard deviation for each
method. The common trend among both alteration methods is that NT-XENT and Triplet-SS alter-
ations always move farther away from the original representation than the other methods. We can
also see that the total distance moved decreases from self-supervised to pure supervised learning
methods.
These results indicate that the encoder is more robust to minor perturbations (as measured by the
distance moved from the original image) if the training method contains a strong supervised signal.


                                                  5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 3: The normalised Euclidean distance between the original CIFAR-10 image and the same
image altered by sequential PGD attack iterations.


Table 1: The average distance each points moves relative to the original point for both the white
noise injection and PGD Attack alterations for the MNIST encoders. The results are averaged over
both the embedding dimension of an encoder and the optimiser used.


                          METHOD                      NOISE        PGD
                          C ROSS -E NTROPY        0.33±0.15     0.21±0.08
                          T RIPLET-E NTROPY       0.73±0.11     0.33±0.08
                          T RIPLET-S UPERVISED    0.77±0.06     0.38±0.10
                          T RIPLET-SS             0.93±0.13     0.66±0.17
                          NT-XENT                 1.01±0.04     0.68±0.10


4.2   M EASURING S PIKES


Following the same steps as in Section 4.1, we now study the relative change in distances measured.
The relative change in distance to the original representation, plotted against the amount of PGD
attack iterations, is shown in Figure 4.
We see a reversal of the graphs in Section 4.1: the self-supervised methods start with high relative
changes, which decrease rapidly. Methods containing a supervised signal have larger spikes and
error bands. All this indicates a less smooth journey in the RM between alterations for the supervised
methods.
The same trend is present for CIFAR-10 models when we inject white noise. Here though, the
Triplet-Supervised method is unstable for several values of the embedding dimension, whereas the
NT-XENT and Triplet-SS again have the smallest spikes.
Table 2 shows the overall average values for each spike metric for each method. NT-XENT and
Triplet-SS have the smallest spikes for both forms of alteration, whereas Triplet-Supervised results
in very non-smooth RMs.
Self-supervised methods therefore learn structures in which a step in most directions, at most loca-
tions, induces steps of similar size on the RM. That is, these self-supervised methods have smoother
RMs than the other methods.


                                                  6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 4: The relative change in distance to the original point plotted against the number of PGD
iterations for the encoders trained on the MNIST dataset.


Table 2: The average change in the distance each point moves relative to the original point, compared
against the previous alteration’s distance. Results are calculated for both the white noise injection
and PGD Attack alterations for the CIFAR-10 encoders. The results are averaged over both the
embedding dimension of an encoder and the optimiser used.


                          METHOD                      NOISE         PGD
                          C ROSS -E NTROPY         0.11±0.03     0.34±0.04
                          T RIPLET-E NTROPY        0.18±0.04     0.89±0.35
                          T RIPLET-S UPERVISED     0.86±0.85     2.97±1.61
                          T RIPLET-SS              0.06±0.01     0.06±0.04
                          NT-XENT                  0.04±0.01     0.10±0.01


5   R EPRESENTATION M ANIFOLD Q UALITY M ETRIC

In Section 4 we showed empirically that an RM learned by self-supervised methods has a structure
that has the following property: When moving in any direction on the surface of RM, it will result in
a relatively large displacement, but these displacements are on average the same size no matter where
or in what direction a step is taken. The opposite is true with methods containing a supervised signal:
moving in the surface results in smaller displacements, but those displacements are significantly
more variable in size.
In order to determine which of these two groups of characteristics are more desirable for downstream
tasks, we combine these characteristics into one metric, the Representation Manifold Quality Metric
(RMQM).
With this single metric describing an RM, we can perform various downstream tasks with our en-
coders and see how the performance correlates with the value of the RMQM. We define the RMQM
as
                             RM QM = ln 1 + D + DP−1C + PP−1

                                                                  C                        (5)
Here D is the average distance moved measured relative to the original representation, DP C is the
relative change in distance between each subsequent alteration and the original representation and
PP C is the relative change of the distances between altered representations, as defined in Equa-
tions (2) to (4).
We apply the natural logarithm to scale the values, and we add one to ensure we do not have any
negative values.


                                                  7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


 Figure 5: RMQM for white noise injections, over every embedding dimension for each encoder.


Thus, RMQM is designed to yield large values for relatively smooth RMs with relatively large
sensitivity to changes in the input. Below, we only interpret the RMQM score when A is the white
noise injection alteration, since the method dependence of the PGD alterations complicates our
ability to compare the various methods.
In Figure 5 we show the RMQM score for each of our encoders, with A being white noise injec-
tions. For the MNIST encoders trained using SGD and Nesterov momentum, as the embedding
size increases, the RMQM for Cross-Entropy overtakes Triplet-SS, indicating that the RM is more
similar in this setup to one produced by NT-XENT trained encoders. In the other cases, there is an
overall trend for the NT-XENT and Triplet-SS encoders to have the highest RMQM, followed by
Cross-Entropy and then lastly, Triplet-Entropy and Triplet-Supervised.

5.1   C ORRELATION BETWEEN RMQM AND D OWNSTREAM TASKS .

In order to find what RM characteristics are desirable, we measure how RMQM correlates with
downstream task performance. If we find a strong positive correlation, an RM with a smooth struc-
ture and large displacements is desirable. If there is a strong negative correlation, then an RM that
contains chasms and bumps and small displacements is desirable.
We define the task performance as the normalised test accuracy of a K-Nearest Neighbour (KNN)
model, with only one nearest neighbour (K = 1), trained on the representations created by the
encoder, as well as the normalised test accuracy when doing a linear probe on the final layers of the
network. We believe these are appropriate measures of task performance as most use cases today
utilise representations. We also use these tasks, as these task do not change the learned RM structure,
as would be the case when fine-tuning the encoders on a new dataset with Cross-Entropy.
The MNIST encoders will be tested on the OMNIGLOT (Lake et al., 2015) and the KMNIST
(Clanuwat et al., 2018) datasets, with the CIFAR-10 encoders being tested on the Caltech-101 (Fei-
Fei et al., 2004) and CIFAR-100 (Krizhevsky et al., 2009) datasets. We believe these datasets provide
a large enough semantic gap towards the original datasets, as we do not measure for extreme gener-
alisation to any dataset. We exclude the Omniglot dataset results for the linear probe performs tasks
as they perform poorly across all model variations (we believe the task is too hard for probing),
which skews the results heavily.


                                                  8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 6: RMQM versus the normalised KNN task performance. The dots represent each encoder’s
performance and RMQM score, colour coded by the downstream dataset. As one can see, there is a
strong positive correlation between RMQM and downstream task performance



Figure 6 visualises RMQM versus the downstream KNN task performance, where each dot refers
to a differently trained model. We find that RMQM correlates positively to the KNN task with a
coefficient of 0.75. These results also stay true for larger values of K. We also find a positive
correlation to the linear probing results with a coefficient of 0.78. Combining both of the tasks, there
is a positive correlation of 0.72. This justifies our statement that RM characteristics are essential.
In other words, when vector search is the downstream task performance, an encoder that learned
an RM with a smooth structure and large displacements will tend to perform well on downstream
search tasks. To gain an intuition for why this can be, please refer to Appendix B, where we give
our intuitive explanation.


6   C ONCLUSION

We propose a framework to measure the characteristics of learned representation manifolds (RM).
We measure the characteristics by applying sequentially stronger local alterations to the input data
and measuring how these altered representations move relative to the original representation and
the successive alterations. We show that self-supervised learning methods learn RMs in which
motion in any direction on the surface will result in relatively large displacements. However, these
displacements are relatively similar no matter where or in what direction a step is taken.
To identify RM characteristics related to good downstream task performance, we combine our mea-
surements into a single metric, the Representation Manifold Quality Metric (RMQM). RMQM is
designed to yield large values for relatively smooth RMs with relatively large sensitivity to changes
in the input. We then measure the downstream task performance for several tasks and find a strong
positive correlation with RMQM. This strong correlation indicates that the structure of a learned
manifold is another strong predictor for the generalisation of neural networks. This also shows that
self-supervised methods lead to state-of-the-art performance due to the underlying RM structure,
which is sensitive to alterations in the input, utilising a relatively smooth manifold.


                                                   9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


R EFERENCES
Randall Balestriero, Jerome Pesenti, and Yann LeCun. Learning in high dimension always amounts
  to extrapolation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.09485, 2021.

Serguei Barannikov, Ilya Trofimov, Grigorii Sotnikov, Ekaterina Trimbach, Alexander Korotin,
  Alexander Filippov, and Evgeny Burnaev. Manifold topology divergence: a framework for com-
  paring data manifolds. In A. Beygelzimer, Y. Dauphin, P. Liang, and J. Wortman Vaughan (eds.),
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2021. URL https://openreview.
  net/forum?id=Fj6kQJbHwM9.

Imre Bárány and Zoltán Füredi. On the shape of the convex hull of random points. Probability
  theory and related fields, 77(2):231–240, 1988.

Santiago A Cadena, Fabian H Sinz, Taliah Muhammad, Emmanouil Froudarakis, Erick Cobos,
  Edgar Y Walker, Jake Reimer, Matthias Bethge, Andreas Tolias, and Alexander S Ecker. How
  well do deep neural networks trained on object recognition characterize the mouse visual system?
  2019.

Gunnar Carlsson, Tigran Ishkhanov, Vin De Silva, and Afra Zomorodian. On the local behavior of
  spaces of natural images. International journal of computer vision, 76(1):1–12, 2008.

Ting Chen, Simon Kornblith, Mohammad Norouzi, and Geoffrey E. Hinton. A simple framework for
  contrastive learning of visual representations. In Proceedings of the 37th International Conference
  on Machine Learning, ICML 2020, 13-18 July 2020, Virtual Event, volume 119 of Proceedings
  of Machine Learning Research, pp. 1597–1607. PMLR, 2020. URL http://proceedings.
  mlr.press/v119/chen20j.html.

Zhao-Min Chen, Xiu-Shen Wei, Peng Wang, and Yanwen Guo. Multi-label image recognition with
  graph convolutional networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and
  Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 5177–5186, 2019.

Tarin Clanuwat, Mikel Bober-Irizar, Asanobu Kitamoto, Alex Lamb, Kazuaki Yamamoto, and David
  Ha. Deep learning for classical japanese literature. ArXiv, abs/1812.01718, 2018.

Benoit Dherin, Micheal Munn, and David GT Barrett. The geometric occam’s razor implicit in deep
  learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2111.15090, 2021.

Laurent Dinh, Razvan Pascanu, Samy Bengio, and Yoshua Bengio. Sharp minima can generalize
  for deep nets. In Doina Precup and Yee Whye Teh (eds.), Proceedings of the 34th International
  Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), volume 70 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Re-
  search, pp. 1019–1028. PMLR, 2017. URL http://proceedings.mlr.press/v70/
  dinh17b.html.

Carl Doersch, Abhinav Gupta, and Alexei A. Efros. Unsupervised visual representation learning by
  context prediction. In 2015 IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision, ICCV, pp. 1422–
  1430. IEEE Computer Society, 2015. URL https://doi.org/10.1109/ICCV.2015.
  167.

Gintare Karolina Dziugaite and Daniel M. Roy. Computing nonvacuous generalization bounds for
  deep (stochastic) neural networks with many more parameters than training data. In Gal Eli-
  dan, Kristian Kersting, and Alexander T. Ihler (eds.), Proceedings of the Thirty-Third Conference
  on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, UAI. AUAI Press, 2017. URL http://auai.org/
  uai2017/proceedings/papers/173.pdf.

Charles Fefferman, Sanjoy Mitter, and Hariharan Narayanan. Testing the manifold hypothesis.
  Journal of the American Mathematical Society, 29(4):983–1049, 2016.

Li Fei-Fei, Rob Fergus, and Pietro Perona. Learning generative visual models from few training ex-
  amples: An incremental bayesian approach tested on 101 object categories. In CVPR Workshops,
  2004.


                                                 10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Spyros Gidaris, Praveer Singh, and Nikos Komodakis. Unsupervised representation learning by
  predicting image rotations. In 6th International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR.
  OpenReview.net, 2018. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=S1v4N2l0-.
Ian Goodfellow, Yoshua Bengio, and Aaron Courville. Deep learning. MIT press, 2016.
Ian J. Goodfellow, Jonathon Shlens, and Christian Szegedy. Explaining and harnessing adversarial
  examples. In Yoshua Bengio and Yann LeCun (eds.), 3rd International Conference on Learning
  Representations, ICLR, 2015. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1412.6572.
Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image
  recognition. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition
  (CVPR), pp. 770–778, 2016. URL https://doi.org/10.1109/CVPR.2016.90.
Kaiming He, Haoqi Fan, Yuxin Wu, Saining Xie, and Ross B. Girshick. Momentum contrast for
  unsupervised visual representation learning. In IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
  Pattern Recognition CVPR, pp. 9726–9735. Computer Vision Foundation / IEEE, 2020. URL
  https://doi.org/10.1109/CVPR42600.2020.00975.
Sepp Hochreiter and Jürgen Schmidhuber. Flat Minima. Neural Computation, 9(1):1–42, 1997.
  ISSN 0899-7667. doi: 10.1162/neco.1997.9.1.1. URL https://doi.org/10.1162/
  neco.1997.9.1.1.
Judy Hoffman, Daniel A. Roberts, and Sho Yaida. Robust learning with jacobian regularization.
  ArXiv, abs/1908.02729, 2019.
Yiding Jiang, Behnam Neyshabur, Hossein Mobahi, Dilip Krishnan, and Samy Bengio. Fantastic
  generalization measures and where to find them. 2020. URL https://openreview.net/
  forum?id=SJgIPJBFvH.
Diederik P. Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. In 3rd Interna-
  tional Conference on Learning Representations, (ICLR), 2015. URL http://arxiv.org/
  abs/1412.6980.
Simon Kornblith, Mohammad Norouzi, Honglak Lee, and Geoffrey E. Hinton. Similarity of neu-
  ral network representations revisited. In Kamalika Chaudhuri and Ruslan Salakhutdinov (eds.),
  Proceedings of the 36th International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML).
Nikolaus Kriegeskorte, Marieke Mur, and Peter A Bandettini. Representational similarity analysis-
  connecting the branches of systems neuroscience. Frontiers in systems neuroscience, 2:4, 2008.
Alex Krizhevsky et al. Learning multiple layers of features from tiny images. Technical report.
  2009.
Aarre Laakso and Garrison Cottrell. Content and cluster analysis: assessing representational simi-
  larity in neural systems. Philosophical psychology, 13(1):47–76, 2000.
Brenden M Lake, Ruslan Salakhutdinov, and Joshua B Tenenbaum. Human-level concept learning
  through probabilistic program induction. Science, 350(6266):1332–1338, 2015.
Phuc H. Le-Khac, Graham Healy, and Alan F. Smeaton. Contrastive representation learning: A
  framework and review. IEEE Access, 8:193907–193934, 2020. URL https://doi.org/
  10.1109/ACCESS.2020.3031549.
Yann LeCun, Léon Bottou, Yoshua Bengio, and Patrick Haffner. Gradient-based learning applied to
  document recognition. volume 86, pp. 2278–2324. Ieee, 1998.
Xiujun Li, Xi Yin, Chunyuan Li, Pengchuan Zhang, Xiaowei Hu, Lei Zhang, Lijuan Wang, Houdong
  Hu, Li Dong, Furu Wei, et al. Oscar: Object-semantics aligned pre-training for vision-language
  tasks. In European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV), pp. 121–137. Springer, 2020.
Yixuan Li, Jason Yosinski, Jeff Clune, Hod Lipson, and John E. Hopcroft. Convergent learning:
  Do different neural networks learn the same representations? In 4th International Conference on
  Learning Representations, ICLR, 2016. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1511.07543.

                                               11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Daizong Liu, Xiaoye Qu, Yinzhen Wang, Xing Di, Kai Zou, Yu Cheng, Zichuan Xu, and Pan
  Zhou. Unsupervised temporal video grounding with deep semantic clustering. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2201.05307, 2022.
Aleksander Madry, Aleksandar Makelov, Ludwig Schmidt, Dimitris Tsipras, and Adrian Vladu.
  Towards deep learning models resistant to adversarial attacks. In 6th International Conference
  on Learning Representations, ICLR, 2018. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=
  rJzIBfZAb.
Leland McInnes, John Healy, and James Melville. Umap: Uniform manifold approximation and
  projection for dimension reduction. arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.03426, 2018.
Aaron van den Oord, Yazhe Li, and Oriol Vinyals. Representation learning with contrastive predic-
  tive coding. arXiv preprint arXiv:1807.03748, 2018.
Henning Petzka, Michael Kamp, Linara Adilova, Cristian Sminchisescu, and Mario Boley. Relative
  flatness and generalization. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34, 2021.
Florian Schroff, Dmitry Kalenichenko, and James Philbin. Facenet: A unified embedding for face
  recognition and clustering. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pat-
  tern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 815–823, 2015. URL https://doi.org/10.1109/CVPR.
  2015.7298682.
Hang Shao, Abhishek Kumar, and P. Thomas Fletcher. The riemannian geometry of deep generative
  models. In 2018 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Workshops,
  CVPR Workshops 2018, Salt Lake City, UT, USA, June 18-22, 2018, pp. 315–323. Computer
  Vision Foundation / IEEE Computer Society, 2018.
Kihyuk Sohn. Improved deep metric learning with multi-class n-pair loss objective. In Daniel D.
  Lee, Masashi Sugiyama, Ulrike von Luxburg, Isabelle Guyon, and Roman Garnett (eds.), Ad-
  vances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pp. 1849–1857, 2016.
Ilya Sutskever, James Martens, George Dahl, and Geoffrey Hinton. On the importance of initial-
   ization and momentum in deep learning. In Proceedings of the 30th International Conference
   on Machine Learning (ICML), pp. 1139–1147, 2013. URL https://proceedings.mlr.
   press/v28/sutskever13.html.
Joshua B Tenenbaum, Vin De Silva, and John C Langford. A global geometric framework for
  nonlinear dimensionality reduction. science, 290(5500):2319–2323, 2000.
Laurens Van der Maaten and Geoffrey Hinton. Visualizing data using t-sne. Journal of machine
  learning research, 9(11), 2008.
Ruan van der Merwe. Triplet entropy loss: Improving the generalisation of short speech language
  identification systems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2012.03775, 2020.
Liwei Wang, Lunjia Hu, Jiayuan Gu, Zhiqiang Hu, Yue Wu, Kun He, and John E. Hopcroft. Towards
  understanding learning representations: To what extent do different neural networks learn the
  same representation. pp. 9607–9616, 2018.
Kilian Q Weinberger, John Blitzer, and Lawrence Saul.         Distance metric learning
  for large margin nearest neighbor classification.  In Y. Weiss, B. Schölkopf, and
  J. Platt (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 18. MIT
  Press, 2006.      URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2005/file/
  a7f592cef8b130a6967a90617db5681b-Paper.pdf.
Daniel LK Yamins, Ha Hong, Charles F Cadieu, Ethan A Solomon, Darren Seibert, and James J
  DiCarlo. Performance-optimized hierarchical models predict neural responses in higher visual
  cortex. Proceedings of the national academy of sciences, 111(23):8619–8624, 2014.
Richard Zhang, Phillip Isola, and Alexei A. Efros. Colorful image colorization. In Bastian Leibe,
  Jiri Matas, Nicu Sebe, and Max Welling (eds.), Computer Vision - ECCV 2016 - 14th European
  Conference, series = Lecture Notes in Computer Science, volume = 9907, pages = 649–666,
  publisher = Springer, year = 2016,.


                                               12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Sharon Zhou, Eric Zelikman, Fred Lu, Andrew Y. Ng, Gunnar E. Carlsson, and Stefano Ermon.
  Evaluating the disentanglement of deep generative models through manifold topology. In 9th
  International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR. OpenReview.net, 2021. URL
  https://openreview.net/forum?id=djwS0m4Ft_A.


                                             13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A    RMQM A BLATION S TUDY

To find which features of the RMQM formula contribute the most to predicting the overall down-
stream task performance, we performed an ablation study where we compared different combina-
tions of inputs to the RMQM formula described in eq. (5).
When the eq. (5) consists only of the average distance moved, D, there is a very low correlation
of only 0.27 to downstream task performance. We then looked at when only spikes are considered,
DRC and PRC , and found that the correlation was now 0.72, just below the reported 0.75 when
everything is combined. We also measured all the remaining combinations and found that the cor-
relation ranged between 0.71 and 0.74. This indicates that even though the spikes can be used to
measure performance, adding the average distance increases the performance of the RMQM score.
Finally, we optimised the weights associated with each variable we found that the following combi-
nation, shown in Equation (6), maximises the correlation at 0.784.

                       RM QM = ln 1 + 0.95D + 0.74DP−1C + 0.11PP−1

                                                                 C                                 (6)

These results show that one can not only look at distance moved on its own and that having small
spikes contribute significantly to generalisation. Nevertheless, spikes must be considered along with
distance for the best predictive capability.
These results indicate that previous work on model robustness still holds, as D contributes less than
spikes. However, robustness and RMQM complement each other in predicting the generalisation of
neural networks.


B    I NTUITIVE E XPLANATION OF RMQM C ONCLUSIONS

To help better understand these perhaps unintuitive results, consider the case when we calculate the
RMQM using white noise alterations. Take the MNIST encoders as an example, and consider a
specific MNIST image (any digit). When applied to this digit, a random vector exists that will trans-
form it into one of the Omniglot characters, given a large enough alteration. In general, the variants
of this Omniglot character will differ from that digit image by similar noise vectors. Thus when
we encode this Omniglot character image and its variants using a self-supervised trained encoder,
the KNN models can accurately identify new images because, from the perspective of the RM, these
new characters correspond to the noise-altered version of our original MNIST digit. On the RM, this
new character and its variants are projected with a similar step size away from the original MNIST
digit. Due to the similar noise vector added, these projections are also in a similar direction. These
projected characters are also close because there are few chasms or bumps a projection can land on,
allowing a nearest neighbour search to perform well.


C    D ETAILS ON T RAINING M ETHODS

The first method we investigate employs encoders trained with vanilla supervised learning with
Cross-Entropy loss, where we then take the second to last layer output as the representations.
We also use the SimCLR method introduced in Chen et al. (2020). This method compares two
augmented versions of the same image and brings their representations closer together using the
Normalised Temperature-scaled Cross-Entropy (NT-XENT) Loss (Sohn, 2016). Along with this,
we trained encoders using two different implementations of Triplet-Loss (Weinberger et al., 2006;
Schroff et al., 2015). We believe these techniques represent the major families of training techniques
and provide enough information on how different techniques learn different RM structures. In a fu-
ture paper, we propose that a full-scale investigation be performed on most training techniques found
in current literature.
We mine the triplets in a supervised manner for the first implementation using the image labels. We
apply the SimCLR method for the second implementation, replacing NT-XENT with Triplet loss.
We refer to the former method as Triplet-Supervised going forward and the latter as Triplet-SS. We
do this to see the effect of the indirect supervised signal on the method. Lastly, to see the effect of


                                                  14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


directly combing a contrastive signal with a supervised signal, we combine Triplet-Loss with Cross-
Entropy loss, as was also done in van der Merwe (2020). Here the second to last layer’s outputs are
fed into the Triplet-Loss function, where the triplets are mined using the same labels used for the
Cross-Entropy loss, which takes as input the logits produced by the last layer.
We apply these methods to an altered version of the LeNet-5 architecture introduced in LeCun et al.
(1998), trained on the MNIST dataset (LeCun et al., 1998) and a Resnet-18 (He et al., 2016) trained
on the CIFAR-10 dataset (Krizhevsky et al., 2009). We train our encoders with six different embed-
ding sizes, ranging from 16 to 512 in powers of two. We also train with two different optimisers,
namely Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) with Nesterov Momentum (Sutskever et al., 2013) and
Adam (Kingma & Ba, 2015).
For SGD with Nesterov momentum, we set the learning rate to 0.001 and momentum to 0.9. Our
learning rate is also 0.001 with the default PyTorch hyperparameters for Adam. We train the CIFAR-
10 encoders for 100 epochs and the MNIST encoders for seven epochs.


                                                15
