Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


O N THE E XPRESSIVE P OWER OF
G EOMETRIC G RAPH N EURAL N ETWORKS
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT

         The expressive power of Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) has been studied ex-
         tensively through the lens of the Weisfeiler-Leman (WL) graph isomorphism test.
         Yet, many graphs in scientific and engineering applications come embedded in Eu-
         clidean space with an additional notion of geometric isomorphism, which is not
         covered by the WL framework. In this work, we propose a geometric version of
         the WL test (GWL) for discriminating geometric graphs while respecting the un-
         derlying physical symmetries: permutations, rotation, reflection, and translation.
         We use GWL to characterise the expressive power of GNNs that are invariant or
         equivariant to physical symmetries in terms of the classes of geometric graphs they
         can distinguish. This allows us to formalise the advantages of equivariant GNNs
         over invariant GNNs: equivariant layers have greater expressive power as they en-
         able propagating geometric information beyond local neighbourhoods, while in-
         variant layers cannot distinguish graphs that are locally similar, highlighting their
         inability to compute global geometric quantities. Finally, we prove the equiva-
         lence between the universal approximation properties of geometric GNNs and our
         more granular discrimination-based perspective.


1   I NTRODUCTION
Systems in biochemistry (Jamasb et al., 2022), material science (Chanussot et al., 2021), physical
simulations (Sanchez-Gonzalez et al., 2020), and multiagent robotics (Li et al., 2020) contain both
geometry and relational structure. Such systems can be modelled via geometric graphs embedded
in Euclidean space. For example, molecules are represented as a set of nodes which contain infor-
mation about each atom and its 3D spatial coordinates as well as other geometric quantities such
as velocity or acceleration. Notably, the geometric attributes transform along with Euclidean trans-
formations of the system, i.e. they are equivariant to symmetry groups of rotations, reflections, and
translation. Standard Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) which do not take spatial symmetries into
account are ill-suited for geometric graphs, as the geometric attributes would no longer retain their
physical meaning and transformation behaviour (Bogatskiy et al., 2022; Bronstein et al., 2021).            Addressed
                                                                                                           R1.2, R4.1
GNNs specialised for geometric graphs follow the message passing paradigm (Gilmer et al., 2017)
where node features are updated in a permutation equivariant manner by aggregating features from
local neighbourhoods. Crucially, in addition to permutations, the geometric attributes of the nodes
transform along with Euclidean transformations of the system, i.e. they are equivariant to the Lie
group of rotations (SO(d)) or rotations and reflections (O(d)). We use G as a generic symbol for
these Lie groups. We consider two classes of GNNs for geometric graphs: (1) G-equivariant mod-             Addresses
els, where the intermediate features and propagated messages are equivariant geometric quantities          R2.1
such as vectors or tensors (Thomas et al., 2018; Anderson et al., 2019; Jing et al., 2020; Satorras
et al., 2021; Brandstetter et al., 2022); and (2) G-invariant models, which only propagate local
invariant scalar features such as distances and angles (Schütt et al., 2018; Xie & Grossman, 2018;
Gasteiger et al., 2020). Despite promising empirical results for both classes of architectures, key the-
oretical questions remain unanswered: (1) How to characterise the expressive power of geometric
GNNs? And (2) what is the tradeoff between G-equivariant and G-invariant GNNs?
The graph isomorphism problem (Read & Corneil, 1977) and the Weisfeiler-Leman (WL) (Weis-
feiler & Leman, 1968) test for distinguishing non-isomorphic graphs have become a powerful tool
for analysing the expressive power of non-geometric GNNs (Xu et al., 2019; Morris et al., 2019).


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 1: Geometric Weisfeiler-Leman Test. GWL distinguishes non-isomorphic geometric
graphs G1 and G2 by injectively assigning colours to distinct neighbourhood patterns, up to global
symmetries (here G = O(d)). Each iteration expands the neighbourhood from which geometric
information can be gathered (shaded for node i). Example inspired by Schütt et al. (2021).


The WL framework has been a major driver of progress in graph representation learning (Chen et al.,
2019; Maron et al., 2019; Dwivedi et al., 2020; Bodnar et al., 2021b;a). However, the WL frame-
work does not directly apply to geometric graphs as they exhibit a stronger notion of isomorphism
that also takes spatial symmetries into account.
Contributions. In this work, we study the expressive power of geometric GNNs from the perspec-
tive of discriminating non-isomorphic geometric graphs:

       • In Section 3, we propose a geometric version of the Weisfeiler-Leman graph isomorphism
         test, termed GWL. We use GWL to formally characterise classes of graphs that can and
         cannot be distinguished by G-invariant and G-equivariant GNNs. We show how invariant
         models have limited expressive power as they cannot distinguish graphs where one-hop
         local neighbourhoods are similar, while equivariant models distinguish a larger class of
         graphs by propagating geometric vector quantities beyond local neighbourhoods.
       • In Section 4, we study the design space of geometric GNNs using GWL, highlighting their
         theoretical limitations in terms of depth and body order, as well as discussing practical im-
         plications. We show that G-invariant models cannot compute global geometric properties
         such as volume, area, centroid, etc. Synthetic experiments in Appendix C supplement our
         theory and highlight practical challenges in building geometric GNNs.                           Addresses
       • In Section 5, we follow Chen et al. (2019) and prove an equivalence between a model’s abil-     R1.4, R2.5,
         ity to discriminate geometric graphs and its ability to universally approximate G-invariant     R3.1, R4.1
         functions. While universality is binary, GWL’s discrimination-based perspective provides
         a more granular and practically insightful lens to study geoemtric GNNs.


2   BACKGROUND
Graph Isomorphism and Weisfeiler-Leman. An attributed graph G = (A, S) with a node set V
of size n consists of an n × n adjacency matrix A and a matrix of scalar features S ∈ Rn×f . Two
attributed graphs G, H are isomorphic if there exists an edge-preserving bijection b : V(G) → V(H)
            (G)    (H)
such that si = sb(i) , where the subscripts index rows and columns in the corresponding matrices.
The Weisfeiler-Leman test (WL) is an algorithm for testing whether two (attributed) graphs are
                                                                                              (0)
isomorphic (Weisfeiler & Leman, 1968). At iteration zero the algorithm assigns a colour ci ∈ C
from a countable space of colours C to each node i. Nodes are coloured the same if their features are
the same, otherwise, they are coloured differently. In subsequent iterations t, WL iteratively updates
                                          (t)
the node colouring by producing a new ci ∈ C:

                             (t)              (t−1)      (t−1)
                            ci := H ASH ci          , {{cj     | j ∈ Ni }} ,                       (1)


                                                  2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


where H ASH is an injective map (i.e. a perfect hash map) that assigns a unique colour to each input
and {{·}} denotes a multiset – a set that allows for repeated elements. The test terminates when the
partition of the nodes induced by the colours becomes stable. Given two graphs G and H, if there
                                      (t)                    (t)
exists some iteration t for which {{ci | i ∈ V(G)}} ̸= {{ci | i ∈ V(H)}}, then the graphs are not
isomorphic. Otherwise, the WL test is inconclusive, and we say it cannot distinguish the two graphs.
Group Theory. We assume basic familiarity with group theory, see Zee (2016) for an overview. We
denote the action of the group G on a space X by g · x. If G acts on spaces X and Y , we say a
function f : X → Y is G-equivariant if f (g · x) = g · f (x). A function f : X → Y is G-invariant
if f (g · x) = f (x). The G-orbit of x ∈ X is OG (x) = {g · x | g ∈ G} ⊆ X. When x and x′ are
part of the same orbit, we write x ≃ x′ . We say a function f : X → Y is G-orbit injective if we
have f (x1 ) = f (x2 ) if and only if x1 ≃ x2 for any x1 , x2 ∈ X. Necessarily, such a function is
G-invariant, since f (g · x) = f (x). We work with the permutation group over n elements Sn and
the Lie groups G = SO(d) or G = O(d). Invariance to the translation group T (d) is conventionally
handled using relative positions. Given one of the standard groups above, for an element g we denote
by Mg (or another capital letter) its standard matrix representation.                                             Addresses
                                                                                                                  R2.1
Geometric graphs. A geometric graph G = (A, S, V             ⃗ , X)
                                                                  ⃗ with a node set V is an attributed
graph that is also decorated with geometric attributes: node coordinates X        ⃗ ∈ Rn×d and (op-
tionally) vector features V ⃗ ∈ R     n×d
                                            (e.g. velocity, acceleration). The geometric attributes
transform as follows under the action of the relevant groups: (1) Sn acts on the graph via
Pσ G := (Pσ APσ⊤ , Pσ S, Pσ V    ⃗ , Pσ X);
                                         ⃗ (2) Orthogonal transformations Qg ∈ G act on V           ⃗ ,X⃗
     ⃗      ⃗                            ⃗                                 ⃗
via V Qg , XQg ; and (3) Translations t ∈ T (d) act on the coordinates X via x          ⃗
                                                                                  ⃗ i + t for all nodes i.
Without loss of generality, we work with a single vector feature per node. Our results generalise to
multiple vector features or higher-order tensors, in which case we would replace the matrix group
representation Qg with a more generic ρ(g). Two geometric graphs G and H are geometrically iso-                   Addresses
morphic (denoted G ≃ H) if there exists an attributed graph isomorphism b such that the geometric                 R2.2
attributes are equivalent, up to global group actions Qg ∈ G and ⃗t ∈ T (d):

                (G)  (G)   (G)          (H)        (H)          (H)
              si , v⃗i , x
                         ⃗i      = sb(i) , Qg v               xb(i) + ⃗t)
                                                 ⃗ b(i) , Qg (⃗            for all i ∈ V(G).           (2)
Geometric graph isomorphism and distinguishing (sub-)graph geometries has important practical
implications for representation learning. For e.g., in molecular systems, an ideal architecture should
map distinct local structural environments around atoms to distinct embeddings in representation
space (Bartók et al., 2013; Pozdnyakov et al., 2020).
Geometric Graph Neural Networks. We consider two broad classes of geometric GNN archi-
tectures. G-equivariant GNN layers update scalar and vector features from iteration t to t + 1 via
learnable aggregate and update functions, AGG and U PD, respectively:

        (t+1)    (t+1)
       si      ⃗i
              ,v       := U PD (s(t)
                                 i   , ⃗
                                       v
                                         (t)
                                         i   ) , A GG   {
                                                        {(s
                                                           (t) (t)
                                                           i  , sj , ⃗
                                                                     v
                                                                       (t)
                                                                       i   , ⃗
                                                                             v
                                                                               (t)
                                                                               j   , ⃗
                                                                                     x ij ) | j ∈ Ni }
                                                                                                     }    . (3)
where x      ⃗i −x
      ⃗ ij = x     ⃗ j denote relative position vectors. Alternatively, G-invariant GNN layers do not             Addresses
update vector features and only aggregate scalar quantities from local neighbourhoods:                            R4.2

                (t+1)
               si      := U PD s(t)
                                  i   , A GG   {
                                               {(s
                                                   (t) (t)
                                                   i  , sj , ⃗
                                                             v i , ⃗
                                                                   v j , ⃗
                                                                         x ij ) | j ∈ Ni }
                                                                                         }    .   (4)
For both models, the scalar features at the final iteration are mapped to graph-level predictions via
                                                      ′
a permutation-invariant readout f : Rn×f → Rf . See Appendix B for concrete examples of
geometric GNNs covered by our framework.                                                                          Addresses
                                                                                                                  R2.2, R4.3
3    T HE G EOMETRIC W EISFEILER -L EMAN T EST
Assumptions. Analogous to the WL test, the geometric and scalar features the nodes are equipped
with come from countable subsets C ⊂ Rd and C ′ ⊂ R, respectively. As a result, when we require
functions to be injective, we require them to be injective over the countable set of G-orbits that are
obtained by acting with G on the dataset.
Intuition. For an intuition of how to generalise WL to geometric graphs, we note that WL uses
a local, node-centric, procedure to update the colour of each node i using the colours of its the 1-
hop neighbourhood Ni . In the geometric setting, Ni is an attributed point cloud around the central


                                                      3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


node i. As a result, each neighbourhood carries two types of information: (1) neighbourhood type
(invariant to G) and (2) neighbourhood geometric orientation (equivariant to G). From an axiomatic
point of view, our generalisation of the WL aggregation procedure must meet two properties:
Property 1: Orbit injectivity of colours. If two neighbourhoods are the same up to an action of G
(e.g. rotation), then the colours of the corresponding central nodes should be the same. Thus, the
colouring must be G-orbit injective – which also makes it G-invariant – over the countable set of all
orbits of neighbourhoods in our dataset.
Property 2: Preservation of local geometry. A key property of WL is that the aggregation is
injective. A G-invariant colouring procedure that purely satisfies Property 1 is not sufficient because,
by definition, it loses spatial properties of each neighbourhood such as the relative pose or orientation
(Hinton et al., 2011). Thus, we must additionally update auxiliary geometric information variables
in a way that is G-equivariant and injective.
Geometric Weisfeiler-Leman (GWL). These intuitions motivate the following definition of the
GWL test. At initialisation, we assign to each node i ∈ V a scalar node colour ci ∈ C ′ and an
auxiliary object gi containing the geometric information associated to it:

                               (0)                  (0)      (0)
                              ci := H ASH(si ), gi := ci , v      ⃗i ,                     (5)
where H ASH denotes an injective map over the scalar attributes si of node i. To define the inductive
step, assume we have the colours of the nodes and the associated geometric objects at iteration t − 1.
Then, we can aggregate the geometric information around node i into a new object as follows:

                   (t)       (t−1)    (t−1)         (t−1)    (t−1)
                 gi := (ci         , gi     ) , {{(cj     , gj      ⃗ ij ) | j ∈ Ni }} ,
                                                                   ,x                              (6)
Importantly, the group G can act on the geometric objects above inductively by acting on the geo-
metric information inside it. This amounts to rotating (or reflecting) the entire t-hop neighbourhood
contained inside:

      (0)    (0)                 (t)    (t−1)        (t−1)        (t−1)        (t−1)
 g · gi := ci , Qg v ⃗ i , g · gi := (ci      , g · gi     ), {{(cj     , g · gj          ⃗ ij ) | j ∈ Ni }}
                                                                                     , Qg x
Clearly, the aggregation building gi for any time-step t is injective and G-equivariant. Finally, we
can compute the node colours at iteration t for all i ∈ V by aggregating the geometric information
in the neighbourhood around node i:

                                      (t)                  (t)
                                    ci := I-H ASH(t) gi ,                                         (7)
by using a G-orbit injective and G-invariant function that we denote by I-H ASH. That is for any
geometric objects g, g ′ , I-H ASH(g) = I-H ASH(g ′ ) if and only if there exists g ∈ G such that
g = g · g ′ . Note that I-H ASH is an idealised G-orbit injective function, similar to the H ASH function
used in WL, which is not necessarily continuous.                                                                Addresses
                                     (t)                                                                        R4.4
Overview. With each iteration, gi aggregates geometric information in progressively larger t-hop
                               (t)
subgraph neighbourhoods Ni around the node i. The node colours summarise the structure of
these t-hops via the G-invariant aggregation performed by I-H ASH. The procedure terminates when
the partitions of the nodes induced by the colours do not change from the previous iteration. Finally,
                                                                                  (t)
given two geometric graphs G and H, if there exists some iteration t for which {{ci | i ∈ V(G)}} =  ̸
   (t)
{{ci | i ∈ V(H)}}, then GWL deems the two graphs as being geometrically non-isomorphic.
Otherwise, we say the test cannot distinguish the two graphs.
Invariant GWL. Since we are interested in understanding the role of G-equivariance, we also
consider a more restrictive Invariant GWL (IGWL) that only updates node colours using the G-orbit
injective I-H ASH function and does not propagate geometric information:

                   (t)                 (t−1)              (t−1)
                  ci := I-H ASH (ci           ⃗ i ) , {{(cj
                                             ,v                       ⃗ ij ) | j ∈ Ni }} .
                                                                 ⃗j , x
                                                                ,v                            (8)

IGWL with k-body scalars. In order to further analyse the construction of the node colouring
function I-H ASH, we consider IGWL(k) based on the maximum number of nodes involved in the
computation of G-invariant scalars (also known as the ‘body order’ (Batatia et al., 2022a)):

                (t)                    (t−1)              (t−1)
               ci := I-H ASH(k) (ci           ⃗ i ) , {{(cj
                                             ,v                       ⃗ ij ) | j ∈ Ni }} ,
                                                                 ⃗j , x
                                                                ,v                           (9)


                                                     4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 2: Invariant GWL Test. IGWL cannot distinguish G1 and G2 as they are 1-hop identical:
The G-orbit of the 1-hop neighbourhood around each node is the same, and IGWL cannot propagate
geometric orientation information beyond 1-hop (here G = O(d)).

and I-H ASH(k+1) is defined as:

                      (t−1)             (t−1)                           (t−1)
 H ASH {{I-H ASH (ci         ⃗ i ), {{(cj1 , v
                            ,v                ⃗ j1 , x
                                                     ⃗ ij1 ), . . . , (cjk , v       ⃗ ijk )}} | j ∈ (Ni )k }} ,
                                                                              ⃗ jk , x
where j = [j1 , . . . , jk ] are all possible k-tuples formed of elements of Ni . Therefore, IGWL(k) is
now constrained to extract information only from all the possible k-sized tuples of nodes (including
the central node) in a neighbourhood. For instance, I-H ASH(2) can identify neighbourhoods only
up to pairwise distances among the central node and any of its neighbours (i.e. a 2-body scalar),
while I-H ASH(3) up to distances and angles formed by any two edges (i.e. a 3-body scalar). No-                    Addresses
tably, distances and angles alone are incomplete descriptors of local geometry (Bartók et al., 2013;              R4.4
Pozdnyakov et al., 2020). Therefore, I-H ASH(k) with lower k makes the colouring weaker.

3.1   W HAT G EOMETRIC G RAPHS CAN GWL AND IGWL D ISTINGUISH ?

In order to formalise the expressive power of GWL and IGWL, let us consider what geometric
graphs can and cannot be distinguished by the tests. As a simple first observation, we note that when
all coordinates and vectors are set equal to zero GWL coincides with the standard WL. In this edge
case, GWL has the same expressive power as WL.
                                                                                              ⃗1 , X
Next, let us consider consider the simplified setting of two geometric graphs G1 = (A1 , S1 , V    ⃗ 1)
                     ⃗   ⃗
and G2 = (A2 , S2 , V2 , X2 ) such that the underlying attributed graphs (A1 , S1 ) and (A2 , S2 ) are
isomorphic. This case frequently occurs in chemistry, where molecules occur in different conforma-
tions, but with the same graph topology given by the covalent bonding structure. Recall that each
                                                         (k)
iteration of GWL aggregates geometric information gi from progressively larger neighbourhoods
   (k)
Ni around the node i, and distinguishes (sub-)graphs via comparing G-orbit injective colouring
     (k)
of gi . We say G1 and G2 are k-hop distinct if for all graph isomorphisms b, there is some node
                                                                     (k)       (k)
i ∈ V1 , b(i) ∈ V2 such that the corresponding k-hop subgraphs Ni and Nb(i) are distinct. Other-
                                                           (k)         (k)
wise, we say G1 and G2 are k-hop identical if all Ni             and Nb(i) are identical up to group actions.      Addresses
                                                                                                                   R2.3
We can now formalise what geometric graphs can and cannot be distinguished by GWL. Proofs are
available in Appendix D.
Proposition 1. GWL can distinguish any k-hop distinct geometric graphs G1 and G2 where the
underlying attributed graphs are isomorphic, and k iterations are sufficient.
Proposition 2. Up to k iterations, GWL cannot distinguish any k-hop identical geometric graphs
G1 and G2 where the underlying attributed graphs are isomorphic.
Additionally, we can state the following results about the more constrained IGWL.
Proposition 3. IGWL can distinguish any 1-hop distinct geometric graphs G1 and G2 where the
underlying attributed graphs are isomorphic, and 1 iteration is sufficient.


                                                       5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Proposition 4. Any number of iterations of IGWL cannot distinguish any 1-hop identical geometric
graphs G1 and G2 where the underlying attributed graphs are isomorphic.

An example illustrating Propositions 1 and 4 is shown in Figures 1 and 2, respectively.
We can now consider the more general case where the underlying attributed graphs for G1 =
           ⃗1 , X
(A1 , S1 , V    ⃗ 1 ) and G2 = (A2 , S2 , V
                                          ⃗2 , X
                                               ⃗ 2 ) are non-isomorphic and constructed from point
clouds using radial cutoffs, as conventional for biochemistry and material science applications.
Proposition 5. Assuming geometric graphs are constructed from point clouds using radial cutoffs,
GWL can distinguish any geometric graphs G1 and G2 where the underlying attributed graphs are
non-isomorphic. At most kMax iterations are sufficient, where kMax is the maximum graph diameter
among G1 and G2 .

These results enable us to compare the expressive powers of GWL and IGWL.
Theorem 6. GWL is strictly more powerful than IGWL.

This statement formalises the advantage of G-equivariant intermediate layers for graphs and ge-
ometric data, as prescribed in the Geometric Deep Learning blueprint (Bronstein et al., 2021), in
addition to echoing similar intuitions in the computer vision community. As remarked by Hinton
et al. (2011), translation invariant models do not understand the relationship between the various
parts of an image (colloquially called the “Picasso problem”). Similarly, our results point to IGWL
failing to understand how the various 1-hops of a graph are stitched together. Finally, we identify a
setting where this distinction between the two approaches disappears.
Proposition 7. IGWL has the same expressive power as GWL for fully connected geometric graphs.

3.2   C HARACTERISING THE E XPRESSIVE P OWER OF G EOMETRIC GNN S

We would like to characterise the maximum expressive power of geometric GNNs based on the
GWL test. Firstly, we show that any message passing G-equivariant GNN can be at most as powerful
as GWL in distinguishing non-isomorphic geometric graphs. Proofs are available in Appendix E.
Theorem 8. Any pair of geometric graphs distinguishable by a G-equivariant GNN is also distin-
guishable by GWL.

With a sufficient number of iterations, the output of G-equivariant GNNs can be equivalent to GWL
if certain conditions are met regarding the aggregate, update and readout functions.
Proposition 9. G-equivariant GNNs have the same expressive power as GWL if the following condi-
tions hold: (1) The aggregation AGG is an injective, G-equivariant multiset function. (2) The scalar
part of the update U PDs is a G-orbit injective, G-invariant multiset function. (3) The vector part of
the update U PDv is an injective, G-equivariant multiset function. (4) The graph-level readout f is
an injective multiset function.

Similar statements can be made for G-invariant GNNs and IGWL. Thus, we can directly transfer              Addresses
our results about GWL and IGWL to the class of GNNs bounded by the respective tests. This has             R1.3
several interesting practical implications, discussed subsequently.



4     U NDERSTANDING THE D ESIGN S PACE OF G EOMETRIC GNN S VIA GWL
Overview. We now use the GWL framework to better understand key design choices for building
geometric GNNs (Batatia et al., 2022a): (1) Depth or number of layers; and (2) Body order of in-
variant scalars. In doing so, we formalise theoretical limitations of current architectures and provide
practical implications. Proofs are available in Appendix F.
4.1   ROLE OF D EPTH : P ROPAGATING G EOMETRIC I NFORMATION

Each iteration of GWL expands the neighbourhood from which geoemtric information can be gath-
ered. We leveraged this construction in Section 3.1 to formalise the number of GWL iterations
required to distinguish classes of geometric graphs.


                                                  6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 3: Geometric Computation Trees for GWL and IGWL. Unlike GWL, geometric orienta-
tion information cannot flow from the leaves to the root in IGWL, restricting its expressive power.
IGWL cannot distinguish G1 and G2 as all 1-hop neighbourhoods are computationally identical.


Consequently, stacking multiple G-equivariant GNN layers enables the computation of composi-
tional geometric features. This can be understood via a geometric version of computation trees
                                                 (t)
(Garg et al., 2020). A computation tree Ti represents the maximum information contained in
GWL/IGWL colours or GNN features at iteration t by an ‘unrolling’ of the message passing proce-
                                                                         (0)
dure. Geometric computation trees are constructed recursively: Ti = (si , v          ⃗ i ) for all i ∈ V. For
                                                                       (t−1)
                                       ⃗ i ) and add a child subtree Tj
t > 0, we start with a root node (si , v                                     for all j ∈ Ni along with the
                  ⃗ ij along the edge, as shown in Figure 3. To obtain the root node’s embedding or
relative position x
colour, both scalar and geometric information is propagated from the leaves up to the root. Thus, if
two nodes have identical geometric computation trees, they will be mapped to the same node embed-
ding or colour. Critically, geometric orientation information cannot flow from one level to another
in the computation trees for IGWL and G-invariant GNNs, as they only update scalar information.
In the recursive construction procedure, we must insert a connector node (sj , v     ⃗ j ) before adding the
                (t−1)
child subtree Tj       for all j ∈ Ni and prevent geometric information propagation between them.               Addresses
                                                                                                                R2.3
As a result, even the most powerful G-invariant GNNs are restricted in their ability to compute
global and non-local geometric properties.
Proposition 10. IGWL and G-invariant GNNs cannot decide several geometric graph properties:
(1) perimeter, surface area, and volume of the bounding box/sphere enclosing the geometric graph;
(2) distance from the centroid or centre of mass; and (3) dihedral angles.

Practical Implications. Proposition 10, together with Propositions 1 and 4, highlight critical
theoretical limitations of G-invariant GNNs. Our results suggest that G-equivariant GNNs should
be preferred when working with large geometric graphs such as macromolecules with thousands of
nodes, where message passing is restricted to local radial neighbourhoods around each node.
Motivated by these limitations, two straightforward approaches to improving G-invariant GNNs may
be: (1) pre-computing non-local geometric properties as input features, e.g. models such as GemNet
(Gasteiger et al., 2021) and GearNet (Zhang et al., 2022) already use two-hop dihedral angles. And
(2) working with fully connected geometric graphs, as Proposition 7 suggests that G-equivariant and
G-invariant GNNs can be made equally powerful when performing all-to-all message passing. This
is supported by the empirical success of recent G-invariant ‘Graph Transformers’ (Joshi, 2020; Shi
et al., 2022) for small molecules with tens of nodes, where working with full graphs is tractable.

4.2   ROLE OF B ODY O RDER : D ISTINGUISHING G-O RBITS

At each iteration of GWL and IGWL, the I-H ASH function assigns a G-invariant colouring to dis-
tinct geometric neighbourhood patterns. I-H ASH is an idealised G-orbit injective function which is
not necessarily continous. In geometric GNNs, this corresponds to scalarising local geometric infor-
mation when updating the scalar features; examples are shown in equation 11 and equation 12. We
can analyse the construction of the I-H ASH function and the scalarisation step in geometric GNNs
via the k-body variations IGWL(k) .


                                                     7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Firstly, we formalise the relationship between the injectivity of I-H ASH(k) and the maximum cardi-
nality of local neighbourhoods in a given dataset.
Proposition 11. I-H ASH(m) is G-orbit injective for m = max({|Ni | | i ∈ V}), the maximum
cardinality of all local neighbourhoods Ni in a given dataset.

Practical Implications. While building provably injective I-HASH(k) functions may require in-
tractably high k, the hierarchy of IGWL(k) tests enable us to study the expressive power of practical
G-invariant aggregators used in current geometric GNN layers, e.g. SchNet (Schütt et al., 2018),              Addresses
E-GNN (Satorras et al., 2021), and TFN (Thomas et al., 2018) use distances; DimeNet (Gasteiger                 R2.7
et al., 2020) uses distances and angles. Notably, MACE (Batatia et al., 2022b) constructs a com-
plete basis of scalars up to arbitrary body order k via Atomic Cluster Expansion (Dusson et al.,
2019), which can be G-orbit injective if the conditions in Proposition 11 are met. We can state the            Addresses
following about the IGWL(k) hierarchy and the corresponding GNNs.                                              R4.4
Proposition 12. IGWL(k) is at least as powerful as IGWL(k−1) . For k ≤ 5, IGWL(k) is strictly
more powerful than IGWL(k−1) .

Finally, we show that IGWL(2) is equivalent to WL when all the pairwise distances between the
nodes are the same. A similar observation was recently made by Pozdnyakov & Ceriotti (2022).
Proposition 13. Let G1 = (A1 , S1 , X ⃗ 1 ) and G2 = (A2 , S2 , X
                                                                ⃗ 2 ) be two geometric graphs with the
property that all edges have equal length. Then, IGWL(2) distinguishes the two graphs if and only if
WL can distinguish the attributed graphs (A1 , S1 ) and (A1 , S1 ).

This equivalence points to limitations of distance-based G-invariant models like SchNet (Schütt
et al., 2018). These models suffer from all well-known failure cases of WL, e.g. they cannot distin-
guish two equilateral triangles from the regular hexagon (Gasteiger et al., 2020).
Synthetic Experiments. Appendix C contains additional synthetic experiments supplementing our
results and highlighting practical challenges in building powerful geometric GNNs, s.a. oversmooth-
ing and oversquashing with increased depth, as well as designing efficient higher order aggregators.           Addresses
                                                                                                               R1.4, R2.5,
                                                                                                               R3.1, R4.1
5    D ISCRIMINATION AND U NIVERSALITY

Overview. Following Chen et al. (2019), we study the equivalence between the universal approx-
imation capabilities of geometric GNN models (Dym & Maron, 2020) and perspective of discrimi-
nating geometric graphs introduced by GWL, generalising their results to any isomorphism induced
by a compact Lie group G. We further study the number of invariant aggregators that are required
in a continuous setting to distinguish any two neighbourhoods. Proofs are available in Appendix G.
In the interest of generality, we use a general space X acted upon by a compact group G and we are
interested in the capacity of G-invariant functions over X to separate points in Y . The restriction
to a smaller subset Y is useful because we would like to separately consider the case when Y is
countable due to the use of countable features. Therefore, in general, the action of G on Y might
not be strictly defined since it might yield elements outside Y . For our setting, the reader could take       Addresses
X = (Rd ×Rf )n×n to be the space of n×n geometric graphs and Y = X n×n , where X ⊆ Rd ×Rf .                    R2.4
Definition 14. Let G be a compact group and C a collection of G-invariant functions from a set X
to R. For a subset Y ⊆ X, we say the C is pairwise YG discriminating if for any y1 , y2 ∈ Y such
that y1 ̸≃ y2 , there exists a function h ∈ C such that h(y1 ) ̸= h(y2 ).

We note here that h is not necessarily injective, i.e. there might be y1′ , y2′ for which h(y1′ ) = h(y1′ ).
Therefore, pairwise discrimination is a weaker notion of discrimination than the one GWL uses.                 Addresses
Definition 15. Let G be a compact group and C a collection of G-invariant functions from X to R.               R2.4
For Y ⊆ X, we say the C is universally approximating over Y if for all G-invariant functions f from
X to R and for all ϵ > 0, there exists hε,f ∈ C such that ∥f − hε,f ∥Y := supy∈Y |f (y) − h(y)| < ε.

Countable Features. We first focus on the countable feature setting, which is also the setting
where the GWL test operates. Therefore, we will assume that Y is a countable subset of X.
Theorem 16. If C is universally approximating over Y , then C is also pairwise YG discriminating.


                                                     8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


This result further motivates the interest in discriminating geometric graphs, since a model that can-
not distinguish two non-isomorphic geometric graphs is not universal. By further assuming that Y is
finite, we obtain a result in the opposite direction. Given a collection of functions C, we define like
in Chen et al. (2019) the class C +L given by all the functions of the form MLP([f1 (x), . . . , fk (x)])
with fi ∈ C and finite k, where the MLP has L layers with ReLU hidden activations.
Theorem 17. If C is pairwise YG discriminating, then C +2 is universally approximating over Y .
Continous Features. The symmetries characterising geometric graphs are naturally continuous
(e.g. rotations). Therefore, it is natural to ask how the results above translate to continuous G-
invariant functions over a continuous subspace Y . Therefore, for the rest of this section, we assume
that (X, d) is a metric space, Y is a compact subset of X and G acts continuously on X.                     Addresses
Theorem 18. If C can universally approximate any continuous G-invariant functions on Y , then C             R2.4
is also pairwise YG discriminating.
With the additional assumption that X = Y , we can also prove the converse.
Theorem 19. If C, a class of functions over Y , is pairwise YG discriminating, then C +2 can also
universally approximate any continuous function over Y .
We now produce an estimate for the number of aggregators needed to learn continous orbit-space
injective functions on a manifold X based on results from differential geometry (Lee, 2013). A              Addresses
group G acts freely on X if gx = x implies g = eG , where eG is the identity element in G.                  R2.6
Theorem 20. Let X be a smooth n-dim manifold and G an m-dim compact Lie group acting con-
tinuously on X. Suppose there exists a smooth submanifold Y of X of the same dimension such that
G acts freely on it. Then, any G-orbit injective function f : X → Rd requires that d ≥ n − m.
We now apply this theorem to the local aggregation operation performed by geometric GNNs. Let
X = Rn×d and G = Sn × O(d) or Sn × SO(d). Let Pg and Qg be the permutation matrix and
the orthogonal matrix associated with the group element g ∈ G. Then g acts on matrices X ∈ X
continuously via Pg XQ⊤   g . Then, G orbit-space injective functions on X are functions on point
clouds of size n that can distinguish any two different point clouds.
Theorem 21. For n ≥ d − 1 > 0 or n = d = 1, any continuous Sn × SO(d) orbit-space injective
function f : Rn×d → Rq requires that q ≥ nd − d(d − 1)/2.
We can also generalise this to O(d), with the slightly stronger assumption that n ≥ d.
Theorem 22. For n ≥ d > 0, any continuous Sn ×O(d) orbit-space injective function f : Rn×d →
Rq requires that q ≥ nd − d(d − 1)/2.
Overall, these results show that when working with point clouds in R3 as is common in molecular
or physical applications, at least q = 3(n − 1) aggregators are required. This result argues why a
bigger representational width can help distinguish neighbourhoods. Finally, in the particular case
of the zero-dimensional subgroup Sn × {eSO(d) } ≃ Sn we obtain a statement holding for all n and
generalising a result from PNA Corso et al. (2020) regarding the aggregators for non-geometric
GNNs. The original PNA result considers the case d = 1 and here we extend it to arbitrary d.
Proposition 23. Any Sn -invariant injective function f : Rn×d → Rq requires q ≥ nd.

6   D ISCUSSION
This work proposes a geometric version of the Weisfeiler-Leman graph isomorphism test (GWL) for
discriminating geometric graphs while respecting the underlying spatial symmetries. We use GWL
to characterise the expressive power of geometric GNNs and connect the universal approximation
properties of these models to discriminating geometric graphs.
GWL provides an abstraction to study the limits of geometric GNNs. In practice it is challenging
to build maximally powerful GNNs that satisfy the conditions of Proposition 9 as GWL relies on
perfect colouring and aggregation functions to identify distinct neighbourhoods and propogate their
geometric orientiation information, respectively. Based on the intuitions gained from GWL, future
work will explore building provably powerful, practical geometric GNNs for applications in bio-
chemistry, material science, and multiagent robotics, and better characterise the trade-offs related to
practical implementation choices.


                                                   9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


R EFERENCES
Uri Alon and Eran Yahav. On the bottleneck of graph neural networks and its practical implications.
  In ICLR, 2021.
Brandon Anderson, Truong Son Hy, and Risi Kondor. Cormorant: Covariant molecular neural
  networks. NeurIPS, 2019.
Albert P Bartók, Risi Kondor, and Gábor Csányi. On representing chemical environments. Physical
  Review B, 2013.
Ilyes Batatia, Simon Batzner, Dávid Péter Kovács, Albert Musaelian, Gregor NC Simm, Ralf Drautz,
   Christoph Ortner, Boris Kozinsky, and Gábor Csányi. The design space of e (3)-equivariant atom-
   centered interatomic potentials. arXiv preprint, 2022a.
Ilyes Batatia, Dávid Péter Kovács, Gregor NC Simm, Christoph Ortner, and Gábor Csányi. Mace:
   Higher order equivariant message passing neural networks for fast and accurate force fields. arXiv
   preprint, 2022b.
Simon Batzner, Albert Musaelian, Lixin Sun, Mario Geiger, Jonathan P Mailoa, Mordechai Ko-
  rnbluth, Nicola Molinari, Tess E Smidt, and Boris Kozinsky. E (3)-equivariant graph neural
  networks for data-efficient and accurate interatomic potentials. Nature communications, 2022.
Cristian Bodnar, Fabrizio Frasca, Nina Otter, Yuguang Wang, Pietro Lio, Guido F Montufar, and
  Michael Bronstein. Weisfeiler and lehman go cellular: Cw networks. NeurIPS, 2021a.
Cristian Bodnar, Fabrizio Frasca, Yuguang Wang, Nina Otter, Guido F Montufar, Pietro Lio, and
  Michael Bronstein. Weisfeiler and lehman go topological: Message passing simplicial networks.
  In ICML, 2021b.
Alexander Bogatskiy, Sanmay Ganguly, Thomas Kipf, Risi Kondor, David W Miller, Daniel Mur-
  nane, Jan T Offermann, Mariel Pettee, Phiala Shanahan, Chase Shimmin, et al. Symmetry group
  equivariant architectures for physics. arXiv preprint, 2022.
Johannes Brandstetter, Rob Hesselink, Elise van der Pol, Erik J Bekkers, and Max Welling. Geo-
  metric and physical quantities improve e(3) equivariant message passing. In ICLR, 2022.
Glen E Bredon. Introduction to compact transformation groups. Academic press, 1972.
Glen E Bredon. Topology and geometry, volume 139. Springer Science & Business Media, 2013.
Michael M Bronstein, Joan Bruna, Taco Cohen, and Petar Veličković. Geometric deep learning:
 Grids, groups, graphs, geodesics, and gauges. arXiv preprint, 2021.
Lowik Chanussot, Abhishek Das, Siddharth Goyal, Thibaut Lavril, Muhammed Shuaibi, Morgane
  Riviere, Kevin Tran, Javier Heras-Domingo, Caleb Ho, Weihua Hu, Aini Palizhati, Anuroop Sri-
  ram, Brandon Wood, Junwoong Yoon, Devi Parikh, C. Lawrence Zitnick, and Zachary Ulissi.
  Open catalyst 2020 (oc20) dataset and community challenges. ACS Catalysis, 2021.
Zhengdao Chen, Soledad Villar, Lei Chen, and Joan Bruna. On the equivalence between graph
  isomorphism testing and function approximation with gnns. NeurIPS, 2019.
Gabriele Corso, Luca Cavalleri, Dominique Beaini, Pietro Liò, and Petar Veličković. Principal
  neighbourhood aggregation for graph nets. NeurIPS, 33:13260–13271, 2020.
Justas Dauparas, Ivan Anishchenko, Nathaniel Bennett, Hua Bai, Robert J Ragotte, Lukas F Milles,
  Basile IM Wicky, Alexis Courbet, Rob J de Haas, Neville Bethel, et al. Robust deep learning
  based protein sequence design using proteinmpnn. bioRxiv, 2022.
Ralf Drautz. Atomic cluster expansion for accurate and transferable interatomic potentials. Physical
  Review B, 2019.
Genevieve Dusson, Markus Bachmayr, Gabor Csanyi, Ralf Drautz, Simon Etter, Cas van der Oord,
  and Christoph Ortner. Atomic cluster expansion: Completeness, efficiency and stability. arXiv
  preprint, 2019.


                                                 10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Vijay Prakash Dwivedi, Chaitanya K Joshi, Thomas Laurent, Yoshua Bengio, and Xavier Bresson.
  Benchmarking graph neural networks. arXiv preprint, 2020.
Nadav Dym and Haggai Maron. On the universality of rotation equivariant point cloud networks. In
  ICLR, 2020.
Matthias Fey and Jan E. Lenssen. Fast graph representation learning with PyTorch Geometric. In
 ICLR Workshop, 2019.
Vikas Garg, Stefanie Jegelka, and Tommi Jaakkola. Generalization and representational limits of
  graph neural networks. In ICML, 2020.
Johannes Gasteiger, Janek Groß, and Stephan Günnemann. Directional message passing for molec-
  ular graphs. In ICLR, 2020.
Johannes Gasteiger, Florian Becker, and Stephan Günnemann. Gemnet: Universal directional graph
  neural networks for molecules. In NeurIPS, 2021.
Mario Geiger and Tess Smidt. e3nn: Euclidean neural networks. arXiv preprint, 2022.
Justin Gilmer, Samuel S Schoenholz, Patrick F Riley, Oriol Vinyals, and George E Dahl. Neural
  message passing for quantum chemistry. In ICML, 2017.
Geoffrey Hinton, Alex Krizhevsky, and Sida D Wang. Transforming auto-encoders. In ICANN,
  2011.
Arian Rokkum Jamasb, Ramon Viñas Torné, Eric J Ma, Yuanqi Du, Charles Harris, Kexin Huang,
  Dominic Hall, Pietro Lio, and Tom Leon Blundell. Graphein - a python library for geometric deep
  learning and network analysis on biomolecular structures and interaction networks. In NeurIPS,
  2022.
Bowen Jing, Stephan Eismann, Patricia Suriana, Raphael John Lamarre Townshend, and Ron Dror.
  Learning from protein structure with geometric vector perceptrons. In ICLR, 2020.
Chaitanya Joshi. Transformers are graph neural networks. The Gradient, 2020.
John M Lee. Smooth manifolds. In Introduction to smooth manifolds, pp. 540–555. Springer, 2013.
Dov Levine and Paul Joseph Steinhardt. Quasicrystals: a new class of ordered structures. Physical
  review letters, 1984.
Qingbiao Li, Fernando Gama, Alejandro Ribeiro, and Amanda Prorok. Graph neural networks for
  decentralized multi-robot path planning. In IROS, 2020.
Haggai Maron, Heli Ben-Hamu, Hadar Serviansky, and Yaron Lipman. Provably powerful graph
  networks. NeurIPS, 2019.
Christopher Morris, Martin Ritzert, Matthias Fey, William L Hamilton, Jan Eric Lenssen, Gaurav
  Rattan, and Martin Grohe. Weisfeiler and leman go neural: Higher-order graph neural networks.
  In AAAI, 2019.
Hoang Nt and Takanori Maehara. Revisiting graph neural networks: All we have is low-pass filters.
  arXiv preprint, 2019.
Sergey N Pozdnyakov and Michele Ceriotti. Incompleteness of graph convolutional neural networks
  for points clouds in three dimensions. arXiv preprint, 2022.
Sergey N Pozdnyakov, Michael J Willatt, Albert P Bartók, Christoph Ortner, Gábor Csányi, and
  Michele Ceriotti. Incompleteness of atomic structure representations. Physical Review Letters,
  2020.
Ronald C Read and Derek G Corneil. The graph isomorphism disease. Journal of graph theory,
  1977.


                                               11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Alvaro Sanchez-Gonzalez, Jonathan Godwin, Tobias Pfaff, Rex Ying, Jure Leskovec, and Peter
  Battaglia. Learning to simulate complex physics with graph networks. In ICML, 2020.
Victor Garcia Satorras, Emiel Hoogeboom, and Max Welling. E (n) equivariant graph neural net-
  works. In ICML, 2021.
Kristof Schütt, Oliver Unke, and Michael Gastegger. Equivariant message passing for the prediction
  of tensorial properties and molecular spectra. In ICML, 2021.
Kristof T Schütt, Huziel E Sauceda, P-J Kindermans, Alexandre Tkatchenko, and K-R Müller.
  Schnet–a deep learning architecture for molecules and materials. The Journal of Chemical
  Physics, 148(24):241722, 2018.
Alexander V Shapeev. Moment tensor potentials: A class of systematically improvable interatomic
  potentials. Multiscale Modeling & Simulation, 2016.
Yu Shi, Shuxin Zheng, Guolin Ke, Yifei Shen, Jiacheng You, Jiyan He, Shengjie Luo, Chang Liu,
  Di He, and Tie-Yan Liu. Benchmarking graphormer on large-scale molecular modeling datasets.
  arXiv preprint, 2022.
Nathaniel Thomas, Tess Smidt, Steven Kearnes, Lusann Yang, Li Li, Kai Kohlhoff, and Patrick
  Riley. Tensor field networks: Rotation-and translation-equivariant neural networks for 3d point
  clouds. arXiv preprint, 2018.
Jake Topping, Francesco Di Giovanni, Benjamin Paul Chamberlain, Xiaowen Dong, and Michael M.
  Bronstein. Understanding over-squashing and bottlenecks on graphs via curvature. In ICLR, 2022.
Soledad Villar, David W Hogg, Kate Storey-Fisher, Weichi Yao, and Ben Blum-Smith. Scalars are
  universal: Equivariant machine learning, structured like classical physics. NeurIPS, 2021.
Maurice Weiler, Mario Geiger, Max Welling, Wouter Boomsma, and Taco S Cohen. 3d steerable
 cnns: Learning rotationally equivariant features in volumetric data. NeurIPS, 31, 2018.
Boris Weisfeiler and Andrei Leman. The reduction of a graph to canonical form and the algebra
  which appears therein. NTI, Series, 1968.
Tian Xie and Jeffrey C. Grossman. Crystal graph convolutional neural networks for an accurate and
  interpretable prediction of material properties. Phys. Rev. Lett., 2018.
Keyulu Xu, Weihua Hu, Jure Leskovec, and Stefanie Jegelka. How powerful are graph neural
  networks? In ICLR, 2019.
Anthony Zee. Group theory in a nutshell for physicists. Princeton University Press, 2016.
Zuobai Zhang, Minghao Xu, Arian Jamasb, Vijil Chenthamarakshan, Aurelie Lozano, Payel Das,
  and Jian Tang. Protein representation learning by geometric structure pretraining. arXiv preprint,
  2022.


A    R ELATED W ORK
Literature on the completeness of atom-centred interatomic potentials has focused on distinguishing
1-hop local neighbourhoods (point clouds) around atoms by building spanning sets for continu-
ous, G-equivariant multiset functions (Shapeev, 2016; Drautz, 2019; Dusson et al., 2019; Pozd-
nyakov et al., 2020). Recent theoretical work on geometric GNNs and their universality has shown
that architectures such as TFN, GemNet and GVP-GNN (Dym & Maron, 2020; Villar et al., 2021;
Gasteiger et al., 2021; Jing et al., 2020) can be universal approximators of continuous, G-equivariant
or G-invariant multiset functions over point clouds, i.e. fully connected graphs. In contrast, the
GWL framework studies the expressive power of geometric GNNs operating on sparse graphs from
the perspective of discriminating geometric graphs and the graph isomorphism problem. The dis-
crimination lens is potentially more granular and practically insightful than universality. A model
may either be universal or not. On the other hand, there could be multiple degrees of discrimination
depending on the classes of geometric graphs that can and cannot be distinguished, which our work
aims to formalise.                                                                                       Addresses
                                                                                                         R2.4


                                                 12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


B    A DDITIONAL BACKGROUND ON G EOMETRIC GNN S
The GWL framework can be used to characterise the expressive power and theoretical limitations of
two broad classes of geometric GNNs.
G-invariant GNNs. G-invariant GNN layers aggregate scalar quantities from local neighbourhoods
via scalarising the geometric information. Scalar features are update from iteration t to t + 1 via
learnable aggregate and update functions, AGG and U PD, respectively:

                 (t+1)
               si      := U PD s(t)
                                 i  , A GG   {
                                             {(s
                                                (t) (t)
                                                i  , sj , ⃗
                                                          v i , ⃗
                                                                v j , ⃗
                                                                      x ij ) | j ∈ Ni }
                                                                                      }    .   (10)

For e.g., SchNet (Schütt et al., 2018) uses relative distances ∥⃗
                                                                 xij ∥ to scalarise local geometric in-
formation, while DimeNet (Gasteiger et al., 2020) uses both distances as well as angles x    ⃗ ij · x
                                                                                                    ⃗ ik
among triplets, as follows:                                                                                   Addresses
                      X   (t)                                                                                 R4.3
     (t+1)
   si      := s(t)
               i +        f1 sj , ∥⃗  xij ∥                                            (SchNet) (11)
                        j∈Ni

     (t+1)                 (t)  (t)                   (t)  (t)
                X                       X
    si     :=          f1 si , sj ,               f2 sj , sk , ∥⃗
                                                                xij ∥, x
                                                                       ⃗ ij · x
                                                                              ⃗ ik      (DimeNet)     (12)
                j∈Ni                  k∈Ni \{j}


G-equivariant GNNs. G-equivariant GNN layers update both scalar and vector features by prop-
                                               (t)           (t)
agating scalar as well as vector messages, mi and m        ⃗ i , respectively:

            (t)    (t)              (t) (t)    (t)     (t)
         mi , m  ⃗ i := AGG {{(si , sj , v    ⃗i , v ⃗j , x ⃗ ij ) | j ∈ Ni }}   (Aggregate) (13)

       (t+1)    (t+1)
      si     ,v⃗i      := U PD (s(t)
                                  i ,v
                                        (t)        (t)
                                      ⃗ i ) , (mi , m
                                                            (t)
                                                         ⃗i )                      (Update)  (14)

For e.g., PaiNN (Schütt et al., 2021) interaction layers aggregate scalar and vector features via learnt
filters conditioned on the relative distance:
               (t)    (t)
                             X   (t)
            mi := si +             f1 sj , ∥⃗ xij ∥                                                  (15)
                               j∈Ni
                                                             X   (t)
             (t)    (t)                   (t)            (t)
                               X
           ⃗ i := v
           m      ⃗i +                f2 sj , ∥⃗
                                               xij ∥ ⊙ v
                                                       ⃗j +   f3 sj , ∥⃗
                                                                       xij ∥ ⊙ x
                                                                               ⃗ ij                   (16)
                               j∈Ni                                j∈Ni

 E-GNN (Satorras et al., 2021) and GVP-GNN (Jing et al., 2020) use similar operations. The update
step applies a gated non-linearity (Weiler et al., 2018) on the vector features, which learns to scale
their magnitude using their norm concatenated with the scalar features:

   (t+1)
  si     := m(t)
               i   + f 4   m
                             (t)
                             i   , ∥m⃗
                                       (t)
                                       i   ∥  , ⃗
                                                v
                                                  (t+1)
                                                  i     := ⃗
                                                           m
                                                             (t)
                                                             i   + f 5   m
                                                                           (t)
                                                                           i   , ∥m⃗
                                                                                     (t)
                                                                                     i   ∥  ⊙m
                                                                                               (t)
                                                                                             ⃗ i . (17)

The updated scalar features are both G-invariant and T (d)-invariant as the only geometric informa-
tion used is the relative distances, while the updated vector features are G-equivariant and T (d)-
invariant as they aggregate G-equivariant, T (d)-invariant vector quantities from the neighbours.             Addresses
                                                                                                              R4.3
Another example of G-equivariant GNNs is the e3nn framework (Geiger & Smidt, 2022), which
can be used to instantiate Tensor Field Network (Thomas et al., 2018), Cormorant (Anderson et al.,
2019), SEGNN (Brandstetter et al., 2022), and MACE (Batatia et al., 2022b). These models use
higher order spherical tensors h̃i,l ∈ R2l+1×f as node feature, starting from order l = 0 up to
arbitrary l = L. The first two orders correspond to scalar and vector features, respectively. The             Addresses
higher order tensors h̃i are updated via tensor products of neighbourhood features h̃j for all j ∈ Ni         R2.2
                                                                                         x⃗
with the higher order spherical harmonic representations Y of the relative displacement ∥⃗xij
                                                                                            ij ∥
                                                                                                 = x̂ij :
                                 (t+1)
                                       := h̃(t)                     (t)
                                                  X
                               h̃i          i +      Y (x̂ij ) ⊗w h̃j ,                            (18)
                                                      j∈Ni

where the weights w of the tensor product are computed via a learnt radial basis function of the
                                xij ∥). To obtain the entry m3 ∈ {−l3 , . . . , +l3 } for the order-l3 part
relative distance, i.e. w = f (∥⃗


                                                        13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                              (t+1)
of the updated higher order tensors h̃i               , we can expand the tensor product in equation 18 as:
                                      lX
                                       3 m3
          (t+1)       (t)                                                                                     (t)
                                                                    X
        h̃i,l3 m3 := h̃i,l3 m3 +                  Cll13m
                                                       m3
                                                         1 ,l2 m2
                                                                                       xij ∥) Ylm
                                                                           fl1 l2 l3 (∥⃗        1
                                                                                                  1
                                                                                                    (x̂ij ) h̃j,l2 m2 ,   (19)
                                   l1 m1 ,l2 m2                     j∈Ni

where Cll13m
           m3
            1 ,l2 m2
                     are the Clebsch-Gordan coefficients ensuring that the updated features are equiv-
ariant. Notably, when restricting the tensor product to only scalars (l = 0) and vectors (l = 1), we
obtain updates of the form similar to equation 15, equation 16 and equation 17.
Applications. Systems in biochemistry, material science, physical simulations, and multiagent
robotics can be modelled using geometric GNNs. Invariant GNNs have shown strong performance
for protein design (Zhang et al., 2022; Dauparas et al., 2022) and electrocatalysis (Gasteiger et al.,
2021; Shi et al., 2022), while equivariant GNNs are being used within learnt interatomic potentials
for molecular dynamics (Schütt et al., 2021; Batzner et al., 2022; Batatia et al., 2022b).                                      Addressed
                                                                                                                                 R4.1

C    S YNTHETIC E XPERIMENTS FOR G EOMETRIC GNN D ESIGN S PACE
                                                                                                                                 Addresses
                                                                                                                                 R1.4, R2.5,
We perform three simple synthetic experiments to highlight the practical challenges of building
                                                                                                                                 R3.1, R4.1
maximally powerful geometric GNNs. We hope that our synthetic experiments and associated code
can be a pedagogical tool for exploring the geometric GNN design space in future work.
Setup and Hyperparameters. We experiment with the following models: (1) SchNet (Schütt
et al., 2018) and DimeNet (Gasteiger et al., 2020) as representative G-invariant GNNs; (2) E-GNN
(Satorras et al., 2021) and GVP-GNN (Jing et al., 2020) as representative G-equivariant GNNs which
use scalars and vectors in R3 ; and (3) TFN (Thomas et al., 2018) and MACE (Batatia et al., 2022b)
to study higher order G-equivariant GNNs using spherical tensors. For SchNet and DimeNet, we
use the implementation from PyTorch Geometric (Fey & Lenssen, 2019). For E-GNN, GVP-GNN,
and MACE, we adapt implementations from the respective authors. Our TFN implementation is
based on e3nn (Geiger & Smidt, 2022), and we also re-implement MACE by incorporating the
EquivariantProductBasisBlock from its authors into our TFN layer. We set scalar feature
channels to 128 for SchNet, DimeNet, and EGNN. We set scalar/vector/tensor feature channels to
64 for GVP, TFN, MACE. TFN and MACE use order L = 2 tensors by default. MACE uses local
body order 4 by default. We train all models for 100 epochs using the Adam optimiser, with an
initial learning rate 1e − 4, which we reduce by a factor of 0.9 and a patience of 25 epochs when the
performance plateaus. All results are averaged across 10 random seeds.
Identifying neighbourhood fingerprints: counterexamples from Pozdnyakov et al. (2020).
GWL uses a node colouring function I-H ASH for distinguishing G-orbits of neighbourhoods, i.e.
a neighbourhood fingerprint. In geometric GNNs, this corresponds to a scalarisation step where lo-
cal geometric information from subsets of neighbours is aggregated to compute G-invariant scalars
(termed the body order).                                                                                                         Addresses
                                                                                                                                 R2.3, R4.4
To demonstrate the practical implications of scalarisation body order, we evaluate current geomet-
ric GNN layers on their ability to discriminate counterexamples from Pozdnyakov et al. (2020).
Each counterexample consists of a pair of local neighbourhoods that are indistinguishable when
comparing their set of k-body scalars, i.e. I-H ASH(k) and geometric GNN layers with body order
k cannot distinguish the neighbourhoods. The 3-body counterexample corresponds to Fig.1(b) in
(Pozdnyakov et al., 2020), 4-body chiral to Fig.2(e), and 4-body non-chiral to Fig.2(f); the 2-body
counterexample is based on the two local neighbourhoods in our running example.
In Table 1, we train single layer geometric GNNs to distinguish the counterexamples using updated
scalar features. Unsurprisingly, we find that most layers computiong 2 or 3 body scalarisations fail
the task. Notably, training higher body order MACE layers to distinguish the chiral and non-chiral
4-body counterexamples should be theoretically possible, but proved challenging in practice. This
highlights the difficulty of designing as well as optimising continuous, high body order neighbour-
hood fingerprints.
Identifying neighbourhood orientation: rotationally symmetric structures. GWL is able to
perfectly aggregate G-equivariant geometric information without losing neighbourhood orientation
by making use of an auxiliary nested geometric object gi . On the other hand, G-equivariant GNNs


                                                             14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                    Counterexample from Pozdnyakov et al. (2020)
                                                2-body      3-body     4-body non-chiral 4-body chiral
                               GNN Layer
                                                           (Fig.1(b))      (Fig.2(f))       (Fig.2(e))
                               SchNet2-body    50.0 ± 0.0       50.0 ± 0.0        50.0 ± 0.0      50.0 ± 0.0
      Inv.
                               DimeNet3-body   100.0 ± 0.0      50.0 ± 0.0        50.0 ± 0.0      50.0 ± 0.0
                               E-GNN2-body     50.0 ± 0.0       50.0 ± 0.0        50.0 ± 0.0      50.0 ± 0.0
     O(3)-Equiv.


                               GVP-GNN3-body   100.0 ± 0.0      50.0 ± 0.0        50.0 ± 0.0      50.0 ± 0.0
                               TFN2-body       50.0 ± 0.0       50.0 ± 0.0        50.0 ± 0.0      50.0 ± 0.0
                               MACE3-body      100.0 ± 0.0      50.0 ± 0.0        50.0 ± 0.0      50.0 ± 0.0
                               MACE4-body      100.0 ± 0.0      100.0 ± 0.0       50.0 ± 0.0      50.0 ± 0.0
                               MACE5-body      100.0 ± 0.0      100.0 ± 0.0       50.0 ± 0.0      50.0 ± 0.0
     SO(3)-Eq.


                               TFN2-body       50.0 ± 0.0       50.0 ± 0.0        50.0 ± 0.0      50.0 ± 0.0
                               MACE3-body      100.0 ± 0.0      50.0 ± 0.0        50.0 ± 0.0      50.0 ± 0.0
                               MACE4-body      100.0 ± 0.0      100.0 ± 0.0       50.0 ± 0.0      50.0 ± 0.0
                               MACE5-body      100.0 ± 0.0      100.0 ± 0.0       50.0 ± 0.0      50.0 ± 0.0

Table 1: Counterexamples from Pozdnyakov et al. (2020). We train single layer geometric GNNs
to distinguish each counterexample pair of local neighbourhoods that are indistinguishable using
k-body scalarisation. Most current geometric GNN layers are restricted to body order 2 or 3 and fail
the tasks. Distinguishing the 4-body counterexamples should be theoretically possible with higher
body order MACE layers, but proved challenging in practice. This highlights the difficulty of
designing as well as optimising high body order neighbourhood fingerprints beyond simple
distances and angles. Anomolous results are marked in red and expected results in green .


                                                                       Rotational symmetry
                                 GNN Layer           2 fold            3 fold        5 fold      10 fold
                                 E-GNNL=1          50.0 ± 0.0       50.0 ± 0.0     50.0 ± 0.0   50.0 ± 0.0
                    Cart.


                                 GVP-GNNL=1        50.0 ± 0.0       50.0 ± 0.0     50.0 ± 0.0   50.0 ± 0.0
                                 TFN/MACEL=1       50.0 ± 0.0      50.0 ± 0.0     50.0 ± 0.0    50.0 ± 0.0
                   Spherical


                                 TFN/MACEL=2      100.0 ± 0.0      50.0 ± 0.0     50.0 ± 0.0    50.0 ± 0.0
                                 TFN/MACEL=3      100.0 ± 0.0      100.0 ± 0.0    50.0 ± 0.0    50.0 ± 0.0
                                 TFN/MACEL=5      100.0 ± 0.0      100.0 ± 0.0    100.0 ± 0.0   50.0 ± 0.0
                                 TFN/MACEL=10     100.0 ± 0.0      100.0 ± 0.0    100.0 ± 0.0   100.0 ± 0.0

Table 2: Rotationally symmetric structures. We train single layer G-equivariant GNNs to distinguish
two distinct rotated versions of each L-fold symmetric structure. We find that layers using order
L tensors are unable to identify the orientation of structures with rotation symmetry higher
than L-fold. This issue is particularly prevalent for E-GNN and GVP-GNN (tensor order 1).


aggregate geometric information via summing neighbourhood features in fixed dimensional spaces
using either cartesian vectors or higher order spherical tensors, which come with tradeoffs between
tractability and empirical performance.
In Table 2, we study how rotational symmetries interact with tensor order in G-equivariant GNNs.
We evaluate current G-equivariant layers on their ability to distinguish the orientation of structures
with rotational symmetry. An L-fold symmetric structure does not change when rotated by an angle
2π
 L around a point (in 2D) or axis (3D). We consider two distinct rotated versions of each L-fold
symmetric structure and train single layer G-equivariant GNNs to classify the two orientations us-
ing the updated geometric features. We find that layers using order L tensors are unable to identify
the orientation of structures with rotation symmetry higher than L-fold. This observation can be


                                                                  15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


          (k = 4-chains)                              Number of layers
          GNN Layer           ⌊ k2 ⌋     ⌊ k2 ⌋ + 1 = 3  ⌊ k2 ⌋ + 2    ⌊ k2 ⌋ + 3          ⌊ k2 ⌋ + 4
          IGWL                50%            50%             50%             50%             50%
 Inv.


          SchNet           50.0 ± 0.00    50.0 ± 0.00     50.0 ± 0.00     50.0 ± 0.00     50.0 ± 0.00
          DimeNet          50.0 ± 0.00    50.0 ± 0.00     50.0 ± 0.00     50.0 ± 0.00     50.0 ± 0.00
          GWL                50%            100%             100%           100%            100%
          E-GNN            50.0 ± 0.0      50.0 ± 0.0       50.0 ± 0.0     50.0 ± 0.0     100.0 ± 0.0
 Equiv.


          GVP-GNN          50.0 ± 0.0     100.0 ± 0.0      100.0 ± 0.0    100.0 ± 0.0     100.0 ± 0.0
          TFN              50.0 ± 0.0      50.0 ± 0.0       50.0 ± 0.0    80.0 ± 24.5     85.0 ± 22.9
          MACE             50.0 ± 0.0     90.0 ± 20.0      90.0 ± 20.0    95.0 ± 15.0     95.0 ± 15.0

Table 3: k-chain geometric graphs. k-chains are (⌊ k2 ⌋ + 1)-hop distinguishable and (⌊ k2 ⌋ + 1)
GWL iterations are theoretically sufficient to distinguish them. We train geometric GNNs with an
increasing number of layers to distinguish k = 4-chains. G-equivariant GNNs may require more
iterations that prescribed by GWL, pointing to preliminary evidence of oversmoothing and
oversquashing when geometric information is propogated across multiple layers using fixed
dimensional feature spaces. IGWL and G-invariant GNNs are unable to distinguish k-chains for
any k ≥ 2 and G = O(3).



attributed to the spherical harmonics which exhibits rotational symmetry themselves and are used as
the underlying basis. Layers such as E-GNN and GVP-GNN using cartesian vectors (correspond-
ing to tensor order 1) are popular as working with higher order tensors can be computationally
intractable for many applications. However, E-GNN and GVP-GNN are particularly poor at discim-
inating orientation of rotationally symmetric structures. This may have implications for modelling
of periodic materials which naturally exhibit such symmetries (Levine & Steinhardt, 1984).
Propogating geometric information: k-chains. In addition to perfect aggregation, GWL also
assumes perfect propogation of G-equivariant geometric information, which implies that the test can
be run for any number of iterations without loss of information. In geometric GNNs, G-equivariant          Addresses
information is propogated via summing features from multiple layers in fixed dimensional spaces,           R1.4
which may lead to distortion or loss of information from distant nodes.
To study the practical implications of depth in propagating geometric information beyond local
neighbourhoods, we consider k-chain geometric graphs which generalise the examples from Schütt
et al. (2021). Each pair of k-chains consists of k + 2 nodes with k nodes arranged in a line and
differentiated by the orientation of the 2 end points. Thus, k-chain graphs are (⌊ k2 ⌋ + 1)-hop distin-
guishable, and (⌊ k2 ⌋ + 1) GWL iterations are theoretically sufficient to distinguish them. In Table 3,
we train G-equivariant and G-invariant GNNs with an increasing number of layers to distinguish
k-chains. Despite the supposed simplicity of the task, especially for small chain lengths, we find
that popular G-equivariant GNNs such as E-GNN and TFN may require more iterations that pre-
scribed by GWL. Notably, as the length of the chain gets larger than k = 4, all G-equivariant GNNs
tended to lose performance and required more than (⌊ k2 ⌋ + 1) iterations to solve the task. IGWL and
G-invariant GNNs are unable to distinguish k-chains.
Table 3, together with Table 2, points to preliminary evidence of the oversmoothing and oversquash-
ing phenomenon (Nt & Maehara, 2019; Alon & Yahav, 2021; Topping et al., 2022) for geometric
GNNs. These issues are most evident for E-GNN, which uses a single vector feature to aggregate             Addresses
and propogate geometric information. This may have implications in modelling macromolecules                R1.4
where long-range interactions often play important roles. Studying both these issues are exciting
avenues for future work towards building provably powerful, practical geometric GNNs.


                                                  16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


D      P ROOFS FOR W HAT GWL AND IGWL CAN D ISTINGUISH

The following results are a consequence of the construction of GWL as well as the definitions of
k-hop distinct and k-hop identical geometric graphs. Note that k-hop distinct geometric graphs are
also (k + 1)-hop distinct. Similarly, k-hop identical geometric graphs are also (k − 1)-hop identical,
but not necessarily (k + 1)-hop distinct.
Given two distinct neighbourhoods N1 and N2 , the G-orbits of the corresponding geometric multi-
sets g1 and g2 are mutually exclusive, i.e. OG (g1 ) ∩ OG (g2 ) ≡ ∅. By the properties of I-H ASH this
implies c1 ̸= c2 . Conversely, if N1 and N2 were identical up to group actions, their G-orbits would
overlap, i.e. g1 = g g2 for some g ∈ G and OG (g1 ) = OG (g2 ) ⇒ c1 = c2 .
Proposition 1. GWL can distinguish any k-hop distinct geometric graphs G1 and G2 where the
underlying attributed graphs are isomorphic, and k iterations are sufficient.

Proof of Proposition 1. The k-th iteration of GWL identifies the G-orbit of the k-hop subgraph
  (k)                                           (k)
Ni at each node i via the geometric multiset gi . G1 and G2 being k-hop distinct implies that
there exists some bijection b and some node i ∈ V1 , b(i) ∈ V2 such that the corresponding k-hop
              (k)      (k)
subgraphs Ni and Nb(i) are distinct. Thus, the G-orbits of the corresponding geometric multisets
 (k)       (k)                                       (k)          (k)                (k)       (k)
gi and gb(i) are mutually exclusive, i.e. OG (gi ) ∩ OG (gb(i) ) ≡ ∅ ⇒ ci                  ̸= cb(i) . Thus, k
iterations of GWL are sufficient to distinguish G1 and G2 .

Proposition 2. Up to k iterations, GWL cannot distinguish any k-hop identical geometric graphs
G1 and G2 where the underlying attributed graphs are isomorphic.

                                                                                                           (k)
Proof of Proposition 2. The k-th iteration of GWL identifies the G-orbit of the k-hop subgraph Ni
                                              (k)
at each node i via the geometric multiset gi . G1 and G2 being k-hop identical implies that for all
                                                                                    (k)      (k)
bijections b and all nodes i ∈ V1 , b(i) ∈ V2 , the corresponding k-hop subgraphs Ni and Nb(i) are
                                                                                                     (k)
identical up to group actions. Thus, the G-orbits of the corresponding geometric multisets gi and
  (k)                    (k)          (k)       (k)     (k)
gb(i) overlap, i.e. OG (gi ) = OG (gb(i) ) ⇒ ci = cb(i) . Thus, up to k iterations of GWL cannot
distinguish G1 and G2 .

Proposition 3. IGWL can distinguish any 1-hop distinct geometric graphs G1 and G2 where the
underlying attributed graphs are isomorphic, and 1 iteration is sufficient.

Proof of Proposition 3. Each iteration of IGWL identifies the G-orbit of the 1-hop local neighbour-
        (k=1)
hood Ni       at each node i. G1 and G2 being 1-hop distinct implies that there exists some bijection
                                                                                                   (1)
b and some node i ∈ V1 , b(i) ∈ V2 such that the corresponding 1-hop local neighbourhoods Ni
       (1)                                                                               (1)      (1)
and Nb(i) are distinct. Thus, the G-orbits of the corresponding geometric multisets gi and gb(i)
                                  (1)          (1)               (1)      (1)
are mutually exclusive, i.e. OG (gi ) ∩ OG (gb(i) ) ≡ ∅ ⇒ ci           ̸= cb(i) . Thus, 1 iteration of IGWL
is sufficient to distinguish G1 and G2 .

Proposition 4. Any number of iterations of IGWL cannot distinguish any 1-hop identical geometric
graphs G1 and G2 where the underlying attributed graphs are isomorphic.

Proof of Proposition 4. Each iteration of IGWL identifies the G-orbit of the 1-hop local neighbour-
        (k=1)
hood Ni       at each node i, but cannot identify G-orbits beyond 1-hop by the construction of IGWL
as no geometric information is propagated. G1 and G2 being 1-hop identical implies that for all bi-
                                                                                              (k)
jections b and all nodes i ∈ V1 , b(i) ∈ V2 , the corresponding 1-hop local neighbourhoods Ni and
   (k)
Nb(i) are identical up to group actions. Thus, the G-orbits of the corresponding geometric multisets
 (1)      (1)                     (1)           (1)        (k)          (k)
gi and gb(i) overlap, i.e. OG (gi ) = OG (gb(i) ) ⇒ ci           = cb(i) . Thus, any number of IGWL
iterations cannot distinguish G1 and G2 .


                                                 17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Proposition 5. Assuming geometric graphs are constructed from point clouds using radial cutoffs,
GWL can distinguish any geometric graphs G1 and G2 where the underlying attributed graphs are
non-isomorphic. At most kMax iterations are sufficient, where kMax is the maximum graph diameter
among G1 and G2 .

Proof of Proposition 5. We assume that a geometric graph G = (A, S, V  ⃗ , X)
                                                                           ⃗ is constructed from a
                ⃗   ⃗
point cloud (S, V , X) using a predetermined radial cutoff r. Thus, the adjacency matrix is defined
as aij = 1 if ∥⃗
               xi − x⃗ j ∥2 ≤ r, or 0 otherwise, for all aij ∈ A. Such construction procedures are
conventional for geometric graphs in biochemistry and material science.
Given geometric graphs G1 and G2 where the underlying attributed graphs are non-isomorphic,
identify kMax the maximum of the graph diameters of G1 and G2 , and chose any arbitrary nodes
                                                          (k )      (k )
i ∈ V1 , j ∈ V2 . We can define the kMax -hop subgraphs Ni Max and Nj Max at i and j, respectively.
              (k     )                                            (k        )
Thus, Ni Max = V1 for all i ∈ V1 , and Nj Max = V2 for all j ∈ V2 . Due to the assumed construc-
                                                             (k        )               (k   )                                       (k   )
tion procedure of geometric graphs, Ni Max and Nj Max must be distinct. Otherwise, if Ni Max
       (k )                                                   ⃗1 , X
                                                                   ⃗ 1 ) and (S2 , V
                                                                                   ⃗2 , X
                                                                                        ⃗ 2 ) would have
and Nj Max were identical up to group actions, the sets (S1 , V
yielded isomorphic graphs.
                                                                                                                       (k   )
The kMax -th iteration of GWL identifies the G-orbit of the kMax -hop subgraph Ni Max at each node
                              (k )         (k )         (k )
i via the geometric multiset gi Max . As Ni Max and Nj Max are distinct for any arbitrary nodes i ∈
                                                                                                         (k     )      (k   )
V1 , j ∈ V2 , the G-orbits of the corresponding geometric multisets gi Max and gj Max are mutually
                               (k    )             (k        )                        (k    )   (k   )
exclusive, i.e. OG (gi Max ) ∩ OG (gj Max ) ≡ ∅ ⇒ ci Max ̸= cj Max . Thus, kMax iterations of GWL
are sufficient to distinguish G1 and G2 .
Theorem 6. GWL is strictly more powerful than IGWL.

Proof of Theorem 6. Firstly, we can show that the GWL class contains IGWL if GWL can learn the
                                               (t)  (t−1)    (0)
identity when updating gi for all i ∈ V, i.e. gi = gi     = gi ≡ (si , v
                                                                       ⃗ i ). Thus, GWL is at least
as powerful as IGWL, which does not update gi .
Secondly, to show that GWL is strictly more powerful than IGWL, it suffices to show that there
exist a pair of geometric graphs that can be distinguished by GWL but not by IGWL. We may
consider any k-hop distinct geometric graphs for k > 1, where the underlying attributed graphs are
isomorphic. Proposition 1 states that GWL can distinguish any such graphs, while Proposition 4
states that IGWL cannot distinguish them. An example is the pair of graphs in Figures 1 and 2.
Proposition 7. IGWL has the same expressive power as GWL for fully connected geometric graphs.

Proof of Proposition 7. We will prove by contradiction. Assume that there exist a pair of fully
connected geometric graphs G1 and G2 which GWL can distinguish, but IGWL cannot.
If the underlying attributed graphs of G1 and G2 are isomorphic, by Proposition 1 and Proposition
4, G1 and G2 are 1-hop identical but k-hop distinct for some k > 1. For all bijections b and all
                                                      (1)     (1)
nodes i ∈ V1 , b(i) ∈ V2 , the local neighbourhoods Ni and Nb(i) are identical up to group actions,
                   (1)               (1)               (1)                 (1)
and OG (gi ) = OG (gb(i) ) ⇒ ci                                  = cb(i) . Additionally, there exists some bijection b and
                                                                                                         (k)         (k)
some nodes i ∈ V1 , b(i) ∈ V2 such that the k-hop subgraphs Ni                                                 and Nb(i) are distinct, and
        (k)                  (k)                 (k)             (k)
OG (gi ) ∩ OG (gb(i) ) ≡ ∅ ⇒ ci                        ̸= cb(i) . However, as G1 and G2 are fully connected, for any k,
  (1)              (k)         (1)         (k)                                                                        (1)          (k)
Ni      = Ni             and Nb(i) = Nb(i) are identical up to group actions. Thus, OG (gi ) = OG (gi ) =
        (1)                   (k)          (1)         (k)             (k)            (k)
OG (gb(i) ) = OG (gb(i) ) ⇒ ci                   = ci        = cb(i) = cb(i) . This is a contradiction.
If G1 and G2 are non-isomorphic and fully connected, for any arbitrary i ∈ V1 , j ∈ V2 and any k-hop
                                (1)      (k)      (1)      (k)
neighbourhood, we know that Ni = Ni and Nj = Nj . Thus, a single iteration of GWL and
                                                                                                                     (1)          (k)
IGWL identify the same G-orbits and assign the same node colours, i.e. OG (gi ) = OG (gi ) ⇒
 (1)  (k)           (1)          (k)       (1)    (k)
ci = ci and OG (gj ) = OG (gj ) ⇒ cj = cj . This is a contradiction.


                                                                                 18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


E    P ROOFS FOR EQUIVALENCE BETWEEN GWL AND G EOMETRIC GNN S
Our proofs adapt the techniques used in (Xu et al., 2019; Morris et al., 2019) for connecting WL
with GNNs. Note that we omit including the relative position vectors x  ⃗ ij in GWL and geometric
GNN updates for brevity, as relative positions vectors can be merged into the vector features.
Theorem 8. Any pair of geometric graphs distinguishable by a G-equivariant GNN is also distin-
guishable by GWL.

Proof of Theorem 8. Consider two geometric graphs G and H. The theorem implies that if the
GNN graph-level readout outputs f (G) ̸= f (H), then the GWL test will always determine G and H
to be non-isomorphic, i.e. G ̸= H.
We will prove by contradiction. Suppose after T iterations, a GNN graph-level readout outputs
f (G) ̸= f (H), but the GWL test cannot decide G and H are non-isomorphic, i.e. G and H always
have the same collection of node colours for iterations 0 to T . Thus, for iteration t and t + 1
                                                                               (t)
for any t = 0 . . . T − 1, G and H have the same collection
                                                       n of node colours {ci } as well aso the
                                                                (t)     (t)     (t)    (t)
same collection of neighbourhood geometric multisets (ci , gi ) , {{(cj , gj ) | j ∈ Ni }} up
to group actions. Otherwise, the GWL test would have produced different node colours at iteration
t + 1 for G and H as different geometric multisets get unique new colours.
                                                                  (t)    (t)     (t)         (t)
We will show that on the same graph for nodes i and k, if (ci , gi ) = (ck , g · gk ), we always
                        (t)    (t)       (t)       (t)
have GNN features (si , v   ⃗ i ) = (sk , Qg v   ⃗ k ) for any iteration t. This holds for t = 0 because
GWL and the GNN start with the same initialisation. Suppose this holds for iteration t. At iteration
                             (t+1)    (t+1)        (t+1)        (t+1)
t + 1, if for any i and k, (ci     , gi     ) = (ck      , g · gk     ), then:
   n                                          o n                                               o
        (t)   (t)      (t)   (t)                       (t)        (t)        (t)  (t)
     (ci , gi ) , {{(cj , gj ) | j ∈ Ni }} = (ck , g · gk ) , {{(cj , g · gj ) | j ∈ Nk }}          (20)

By our assumption on iteration t,
  n                                       o n                                              o
     (t)   (t)       (t)   (t)                 (t)      (t)       (t)      (t)
         ⃗ i ) , {{(sj , v
   (si , v               ⃗ j ) | j ∈ Ni }} = (sk , Qg v
                                                      ⃗ k ) , {{(sj , Qg v
                                                                         ⃗ j ) | j ∈ Nk }}   (21)

As the same aggregate and update operations are applied at each node within the GNN, the same
                                                                                         (t+1)    (t+1)
inputs, i.e. neighbourhood features, are mapped to the same output. Thus, (si                   ⃗i
                                                                                               ,v       ) =
  (t+1)         (t+1)                       (t)  (t)      (t)     (t)
(sk           ⃗k
         , Qg v       ). By induction, if (ci , gi ) = (ck , g·gk ), we always have GNN node features
  (t)    (t)        (t)      (t)                                                                      (t)
(si , v⃗ i ) = (sk , Qg v  ⃗ k ) for any iteration t. This creates valid mappings ϕs , ϕv such that si =
     (t)         (t)         (t)  (t)
ϕs (ci ) and v ⃗ i = ϕv (ci , gi ) for any i ∈ V.
Thus, if G and H have the same collection of node colours and geometric multisets, then G and H
also have the same collection of GNN neighbourhood features
n                                        o n                                                                    o
    (t)   (t)       (t)   (t)                     (t)       (t)  (t)            (t)       (t)  (t)
        ⃗ i ) , {{(sj , v
  (si , v               ⃗ j ) | j ∈ Ni }} = (ϕs (ci ), ϕv (ci , gi )) , {{(ϕs (cj ), ϕv (ci , gi )) | j ∈ Ni }}

                                                                               (T )
Thus, the GNN will output the same collection of node scalar features {si } for G and H and the
permutation-invariant graph-level readout will output f (G) = f (H). This is a contradiction.

Similarly, G-invariant GNNs of the form in Equation 4 can be at most as powerful as IGWL.
Theorem 24. Any pair of geometric graphs distinguishable by a G-invariant GNN is also distin-
guishable by IGWL.

Proof. The proof follows similarly to the proof for Theorem 8.
Proposition 9. G-equivariant GNNs have the same expressive power as GWL if the following condi-
tions hold: (1) The aggregation AGG is an injective, G-equivariant multiset function. (2) The scalar
part of the update U PDs is a G-orbit injective, G-invariant multiset function. (3) The vector part of
the update U PDv is an injective, G-equivariant multiset function. (4) The graph-level readout f is
an injective multiset function.


                                                    19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Proof of Theorem 9. Consider a GNN where the conditions hold. We will show that, with a suffi-
cient number of iterations t, the output of this GNN is equivalent to GWL, i.e. s(t) ≡ c(t) .
Let G and H be any geometric graphs which the GWL test decides as non-isomorphic at iteration
T . Because the graph-level readout function is injective, i.e. it maps distinct multiset of node scalar
features into unique embeddings, it suffices to show that the GNN’s neighbourhood aggregation
process, with sufficient iterations, embeds G and H into different multisets of node features.
For this proof, we replace G-orbit injective functions with injective functions over the equivalence
class generated by the actions of G. Thus, all elements belonging to the same G-orbit will first be
mapped to the same representative of the equivalence class, denoted by the square brackets [. . . ],
followed by an injective map. The result is G-orbit injective.
Let us assume the GNN updates node scalar and vector features as:
                 h                                                                           i
     (t)            (t−1)    (t−1)              (t−1) (t−1)    (t−1)    (t−1)
   si = U PDs (si          ⃗i
                          ,v       ) , AGG {{(si      , sj   ⃗i
                                                            ,v        ⃗j
                                                                     ,v       ) | j ∈ Ni }}        (22)

     (t)           (t−1)    (t−1)             (t−1) (t−1)     (t−1)    (t−1)
  v⃗ i = U PDv (si        ⃗i
                         ,v       ) , AGG {{(si     , sj    ⃗i
                                                           ,v        ⃗j
                                                                    ,v       ) | j ∈ Ni }}         (23)
with the aggregation function AGG being G-equivariant and injective, the scalar update function
U PDs being G-invariant and injective, and the vector update function U PDv being G-equivariant
and injective.
                                          (t)                          (t)
The GWL test updates the node colour ci and geometric multiset gi as:
                           h                                                       i
                 (t)           (t−1)    (t−1)          (t−1)    (t−1)
                ci = hs (ci          , gi     ) , {{(cj      , gj     ) | j ∈ Ni }} ,              (24)

                 (t)         (t−1)     (t−1)         (t−1)     (t−1)
                gi = hv (ci        , gi      ) , {{(cj     , gj      ) | j ∈ Ni }} ,               (25)
where hs is a G-invariant and injective map, and hv is a G-equivariant and injective operation (e.g.
in equation 6, expanding the geometric multiset by copying).
We will show by induction that at any iteration t, there always exist injective functions φs and φv
            (t)        (t)       (t)         (t)  (t)
such that si = φs (ci ) and v  ⃗ i = φv (ci , gi ). This holds for t = 0 because the initial node
                                            (0)     (0)     (0)      (0)     (0)
features are the same for GWL and GNN, ci ≡ si and gi ≡ (si , v            ⃗ i ) for all i ∈ V(G), V(H).
                                                                      (t)               (t)       (t)
Suppose this holds for iteration t. At iteration t + 1, substituting si with φs (ci ), and v    ⃗ i with
     (t)  (t)
φv (ci , gi ) gives us
                   h                                                                                               i
  (t+1)                   (t)      (t)  (t)                   (t)       (t)         (t)     (t)     (t)  (t)
si      = U PDs (φs (ci ), φv (ci , gi )) , AGG {{(φs (ci ), φs (cj ), φv (ci , gi ), φv (cj , gj )) | j ∈ Ni }}

  (t+1)                  (t)      (t)  (t)                   (t)       (t)        (t)     (t)      (t)  (t)
⃗i
v       = U PDv (φs (ci ), φv (ci , gi )) , AGG {{(φs (ci ), φs (cj ), φv (ci , gi ), φv (cj , gj )) | j ∈ Ni }}
The composition of multiple injective functions is injective. Therefore, there exist some injective
functions gs and gv such that:
                                   h                                     i
                        (t+1)         (t)  (t)       (t)   (t)
                      si      = gs (ci , gi ) , {{(cj , gj ) | j ∈ Ni }} ,                     (26)

                        (t+1)        (t)  (t)       (t)   (t)
                      ⃗i
                      v       = gv (ci , gi ) , {{(cj , gj ) | j ∈ Ni }} ,                     (27)
We can then consider:                  h                                     i
                   (t+1)                  (t)  (t)       (t)  (t)
                  si       = gs ◦ h−1
                                   s hs (ci , gi ) , {{(cj , gj ) | j ∈ Ni }} ,                    (28)

                    (t+1)                (t)  (t)       (t)  (t)
                  ⃗i
                  v       = gv ◦ h−1
                                  v hv (ci , gi ) , {{(cj , gj ) | j ∈ Ni }} ,                     (29)
Then, we can denote φs = gs ◦h−1                      −1
                                  s and φv = gv ◦hv as injective functions because the composition
of injective functions is injective.
                                  Hence,                     t + 1, there exist
                                           for any iteration                    injective functions φs
                    (t+1)          (t+1)        (t+1)        (t+1)    (t+1)
and φv such that si       = φs ci             ⃗i
                                          and v       = φv ci      , gi       .

At the T -th iteration, the GWL test decides that G and H are non-isomorphic, which means the
                              (T )
multisets of node colours {ci } are different for G and H. The GNN’s node scalar features
  (T )           (T )
{si } = {φs (ci )} must also be different for G and H because of the injectivity of φs .



                                                  20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A weaker set of conditions is sufficient for a G-invariant GNN to be at least as expressive as IGWL.

Proposition 25. G-invariant GNNs have the same expressive power as IGWL if the following condi-
tions hold: (1) The aggregation ψ and update ϕ are G-orbit injective, G-invariant multiset functions.
(2) The graph-level readout f is an injective multiset function.

Proof. The proof follows similarly to the proof for Theorem 9.

F       G EOMETRIC GNN D ESIGN S PACE P ROOFS

Proposition 10. IGWL and G-invariant GNNs cannot decide several geometric graph properties:
(1) perimeter, surface area, and volume of the bounding box/sphere enclosing the geometric graph;
(2) distance from the centroid or centre of mass; and (3) dihedral angles.

Proof of Proposition 10. Following Garg et al. (2020), we say that a class of models decides a geo-
metric graph property if there exists a model belonging to this class such that for any two geometric
graphs that differ in the property, the model is able to distinguish the two geometric graphs.
In Figure 4 we provide an example of two geometric graphs that demonstrate the proposition. G1
and G2 differ in the following geometric graph properties:

           • Perimeter, surface area, and volume of the bounding box enclosing the geometric graph1 :
             (32 units, 40 units2 , 16 units3 ) vs. (28 units, 24 units2 , 8 units3 ).
           • Multiset of distances from the centroid or centre of mass: {0.00, 1.00, 1.00, 2.45, 2.45} vs.
             {0.40, 1.08, 1.08, 2.32, 2.32}.
                                               (⃗
                                                x   ×⃗
                                                     x )·(⃗
                                                          x   ×⃗
                                                               x    )
           • Dihedral angles: ∠(ljkm) = |⃗xjk
                                            jk ×⃗
                                                 lj
                                                xlj ||⃗
                                                        jk   mk
                                                           xmk | are clearly different for the two graphs.
                                                      xjk ×⃗


However, according to Proposition 4 and Theorem 24, both IGWL and G-invariant GNNs cannot
distinguish these two geometric graphs, and therefore, cannot decide all these properties.


Figure 4: Two geometric graphs for which IGWL and G-invariant GNNs cannot distinguish their
perimeter, surface area, volume of the bounding box/sphere, distance from the centroid, and dihedral
angles. The centroid is denoted by a red point and distances from it are denoted by dotted red lines.
The bounding box enclosing the geometric graph is denoted by the dotted green lines.

We can also show this by constructing geometric computation trees for any number of IGWL or
G-invariant GNN iterations, as illustrated in Figure 3. We observe that the geometric computation
trees of any pair of isomorphic nodes are identical, as all 1-hop neighbourhoods are computationally
identical. Therefore, the set of node colours or node scalar features will also be identical, which
implies that G1 and G2 cannot be distinguished.

Proposition 11. I-H ASH(m) is G-orbit injective for m = max({|Ni | | i ∈ V}), the maximum
cardinality of all local neighbourhoods Ni in a given dataset.
    1
        The same result applies for the bounding sphere, not shown in the figure.


                                                         21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Proof of Proposition 11. As m is the maximum cardinality of all local neighbourhoods Ni under
consideration, any distinct neighbourhoods N1 and N2 must have distinct multisets of m-body
scalars. As I-H ASH(m) computes scalars involving up to m nodes, it will be able to distinguish
any such N1 and N2 . Thus, I-H ASH(m) is G-orbit injective.
Proposition 12. IGWL(k) is at least as powerful as IGWL(k−1) . For k ≤ 5, IGWL(k) is strictly
more powerful than IGWL(k−1) .

Proof of Proposition 12. By construction, I-H ASH(k) computes G-invariant scalars from all possi-
ble tuples of up to k nodes formed by the elements of a neighbourhood and the central node. Thus,
the I-H ASH(k) class contains I-H ASH(k−1) , and I-H ASH(k) is at least as powerful as I-H ASH(k−1) .
Thus, the corresponding test IGWL(k) is at least as powerful as IGWL(k−1) .
Secondly, to show that IGWL(k) is strictly more powerful than IGWL(k−1) for k ≤ 5, it suffices to
show that there exist a pair of geometric neighbourhoods that can be distinguished by IGWL(k) but
not by IGWL(k−1) :

       • For k = 3 and G = O(3) or SO(3), for the local neighbourhood from Figure 1 in Schütt
         et al. (2021), two configurations with different angles between the neighbouring nodes can
         be distinguished by IGWL(3) but not by IGWL(2) .

       • For k = 4 and G = O(3) or SO(3), the pair of local neighbourhoods from Figure 1 in
         Pozdnyakov et al. (2020) can be distinguished by IGWL(4) but not by IGWL(3) .

       • For k = 5 and G = O(3), the pair of local neighbourhoods from Figure 2(e) in Pozdnyakov
         et al. (2020) can be distinguished by IGWL(5) but not by IGWL(4) .

       • For k = 5 and G = SO(3), the pair of local neighbourhoods from Figure 2(f) in Pozd-
         nyakov et al. (2020) can be distinguished by IGWL(5) but not by IGWL(4) .



Proposition 13. Let G1 = (A1 , S1 , X ⃗ 1 ) and G2 = (A2 , S2 , X
                                                                ⃗ 2 ) be two geometric graphs with the
property that all edges have equal length. Then, IGWL(2) distinguishes the two graphs if and only if
WL can distinguish the attributed graphs (A1 , S1 ) and (A1 , S1 ).

Proof of Proposition 13. Let c and k the colours produced by IGWL(2) and WL, respectively, and
let i and j be two nodes belonging to any two graphs like in the statement of the result. We prove
the statement inductively.
          (0)      (0)                        (0)      (0)                   (0)      (0)
Clearly, ci     = ki     for all nodes i and ci     = cj     if and only if ki     = kj . Now, assume that the
                                           (t)   (t)                 (t)     (t)
statement holds for iteration t. That is ci = cj if and only if ki       = kj holds for all i. Note that
 (t+1)      (t+1)                 (t)  (t)         (t)                             (t)
ci     = cj       if and only if ci = cj and {{(cp , ∥⃗ xip ∥) | p ∈ Ni }} = {{(cp , ∥⃗xjp ∥) | p ∈ Nj }},
since the norm of the relative vectors is the only injective invariant that IGWL(2) can compute (up to
                                                                                                (t)    (t)
a scaling). Since all the norms are equal, by the induction hypothesis, this is equivalent to ki = kj
        (t)                                                                      (t+1)    (t+1)
and {{kp | p ∈ Ni }} = {{k (t) | p ∈ Nj }}. Therefore, this is equivalent to ki        = kj

G     U NIVERSALITY AND D ISCRIMINATION PROOFS
G.1    E QUIVALENCE BETWEEN UNIVERSALITY AND DISCRIMINATION

The results in this subsection use the proofs from Chen et al. (2019) with minor adaptations.
Theorem 16. If C is universally approximating over Y , then C is also pairwise YG discriminating.

Proof. Given any y ∈ Y , we can construct the G-invariant function over X, δy (x) = 0 if y ≃ x and
1 otherwise. Therefore, δy can be approximated with some ϵ < 0.5 over Y by some function h ∈ C.
Hence, h(y) ̸= h(y ′ ) for any y, y ′ ∈ Y and C is pairwise YG discriminating.


                                                       22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


The following two Lemmas follow from Chen et al. (2019) with minor adaptations.
Lemma 26. If C is pairwise YG discriminating, then for all y ∈ Y , there exists a function δy ∈ C +1
such that for all y ′ , δy (y ′ ) = 0 if and only if y ≃ y ′ .

Proof. For any y1 , y2 ∈ Y such that y1 ̸≃ y2 , let δy1 ,y2 be the function that distinguishes y1 , y2 .
That is δy1 ,y2 (y1 ) ̸= δy1 ,y2 (y2 ). Then, we can define a function δ y,y′ ∈ C:
                                                                 = 0 if x ≃ y
                                                                 

                          δ y,y′ (x) = |δy,y′ (x) − δy,y′ (y)| → > 0 if x ≃ y ′                  (30)
                                                                 
                                                                   ≥ 0 otherwise
This function is already similar to the δy function whose existence we want to prove. To obtain a
function that is strictly positive over all the x ∈ Y with x ̸≃ y, we can construct δy as a sum over all
the δ y,y′ :
                                                     = 0 if x ≃ y
                                                     
                               X
               δy (x) =                  δ y,y′ (x) → > 0 if x ̸≃ y and x ∈ OG (Y ) ⊇ Y            (31)
                                                     
                          y ′ ∈Y,y ′ ̸≃y               ≥ 0 otherwise
Given the finite set of functions {δy,y′ }, notice that

               δ y,y′ (x) = ReLU δy,y′ (x) − δy,y′ (y) + ReLU δy,y′ (y) − δy,y′ (x) .
Then δy is obtained by summing all these functions over y ′ ∈ Y with y ′ ̸≃ y, so δy ∈ C +1 .
Lemma 27. Let C is a class of G-invariant functions from X → R such that for any y, y ′ ∈ Y ⊆ X,
where Y is finite, there is a δy ∈ C with the property δy (y ′ ) = 0 if and only if y ≃ y ′ . Then C +1 is
universally approximating over Y .

Proof. For y ∈ Y , define ry := 21 miny′ ∈Y,y′ ̸≃y δy (y ′ ). Define the bump function with radius r > 0,
br : R → R as br (s) = ψ( rs ), where
                         ψ(z) = ReLU(z + 1) + ReLU(1 − z) − 2ReLU(z).
Define ky := |Y ∩ OG (y)|−1 . Since Y is finite and the intersection with the orbit of y contains y,
ky is finite and well-defined. We can define the G-invariant function h from X to R as:
                                            X
                                   h(x) =       ky f (y)bry (δy (x))                            (32)
                                               y∈Y
                                    +1
Notice that h|Y = f |Y and h ∈ C         . Therefore, C +1 is universally approximating.
Theorem 17. If C is pairwise YG discriminating, then C +2 is universally approximating over Y .

Proof. Result follows directly from the two Lemmas above.
Lemma 28. Let X, Y be topological spaces and h : X × Y → R a continuous function. Then, if Y
is compact, f (x) = inf y∈Y h(x, y) is continuous.

Proof. The open sets (−∞, a) and (b, ∞) form a basis for the topology of R. Thus, we show
that their preimage under f is open. First, notice x ∈ f −1 ((−∞, a)) if and only if (x, y) ∈
h−1 ((−∞, a)) for some y ∈ Y . Therefore, f −1 ((−∞, a)) = pX (h−1 ((−∞, a))), where
pX : X × Y → X is the function projecting in the first argument. Since pX is continuous and
open, it follows pX (h−1 ((−∞, a))) is open.
When x ∈ f −1 ((b, ∞)), it implies that for all y ∈ Y, h(x, y) > b. This means that for all x ∈
f −1 ((b, ∞)) and y ∈ Y , we have (x, y) ∈ h−1 ((b, ∞)). Since h−1 ((b, ∞) is open, then there
                                                                                              exists
an open box Ux,y ×Vx,y ⊆ h−1 ((b, ∞) containing (x, y). Then, the union ∪y∈Y U        ×V
                                                                                   x,y x,y covers
                                                              Kx
{x} × Y . Since Y is compact, there exists a finite subcover ∪yk Ux,yk × Vx,yk of size Kx . Then
                                                                                        −1
notice that the open set Ax := ∩K
                                yk Ux,yk is a neighbourhood around x and Ax × Y ⊆ h
                                  x
                                                                                           ((b, ∞)).
                    −1                           −1                                   −1
Therefore, Ax ⊆ f ((b, ∞)) and since x ∈ f ((b, ∞)) was chosen arbitrarily, f ((b, ∞)) is
open.


                                                     23
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Theorem 18. If C can universally approximate any continuous G-invariant functions on Y , then C
is also pairwise YG discriminating.

Proof. Consider y, y ′ ∈ Y such that y ̸≃ y ′ . Then, the function δy (x) = inf g∈G d(y, gx) =
ming∈G d(y, gx) > 0, where the second equality follows from the compactness of G. This function
is G-invariant. To show that it is continuous, notice that the function h(x, g) = d(y, gx) is given by
the composition dy ◦ a, where a : X × G → X is the continuous group action and dy : X → R is
given by dy (x) = d(y, x), which is also continuous. Since composition of continuous functions is
continuous and δy (x) = inf g∈G h(x, G), it follows from Lemma 28 that δy is a continuous function.
Given a universally approximating class of functions C, we can find a function f approximating δy
                   δ (y ′ )
with precision ϵ < y 2 and, therefore, f (y) ̸= f (y ′ ).
Definition 29. Let C be a class of functions X → R and Y ⊆ X. We say that C can locate every
orbit over Y if for any y ∈ Y and any ε > 0 there exists δy ∈ C such that:

      1. For all y ′ ∈ Y, δy (y ′ ) ≥ 0.
      2. For all y ′ ∈ Y , if y ≃ y ′ , then δy (y ′ ) = 0.
      3. There exists ry > 0 such that if δy (y ′ ) < ry for any y ′ ∈ Y , then there is a g ∈ G such that
         d(y ′ , g · y) < ε.

Notice that since δy ∈ C, it is G-invariant and then for any y ∗ ∈ OG (y ′ ), δy (y ′ ) = δy (y ∗ ) and
there exists g ∈ G such that d(y ∗ , g · y) < ε. Therefore, intuitively one should see δy as some sort
of “distance function” measuring how far all y ∗ ∈ OG (y ′ ) are from the orbit of y. In other words,
when δy (y ∗ ) is low, it means that the entire orbit of y ∗ is close to the orbit of y.
Lemma 30. If C is a collection of continuous G-invariant functions from X → R that is pairwise
YG -discriminating, then C +1 is able to locate every orbit over Y .

Proof. Select an arbitrary y ∈ Y . For y ′ ̸≃ y, let δy,y′ be the function in C separating y and y ′ .
Consider the radius ry,y′ := 21 |δy,y′ (y) − δy,y′ (y ′ )| > 0 and define the set
                                       −1              ′                  ′
                               Ay′ := δy,y ′ (δy,y ′ (y ) − ry , δy,y ′ (y ) + ry )


                                                     ′
Since δy,y′ is continuous, Ay′ is open.     S If y ≃ y, then we define Ay = B(y, ε), the open ball in X
centred at y with radius ε. Clearly, y′ ∈Y Ay′ forms a cover for Y . Since Y is compact, then there
                                                                           S
exists a finite subcover given by a finite subset Y0 ⊆ Y such that y′ ∈Y0 Ay′ .
We construct the function δy (y ′ ) over X as δy (y ′ ) := y′ ∈Y0 \OG (y∗ ) δ̄y,y′ (y ∗ ), where δ̄y,y′ (y ∗ ) :=
                                                                 P

max( 34 ry,y′ − |δy,y′ (y ∗ ) − δy,y′ (y ′ )|, 0). Since δy,y′ is continuous and G-invariant, so is δy . Finally,
it can be shown that δy can indeed locate the orbit of y over Y .

      1. Clearly, δy (x) ≥ 0 for any x ∈ X.
      2. For any y ∗ ∈ Y , if y ≃ y ∗ , then because δy,y′ is G-invariant, we have δy,y′ (y ∗ ) = δy,y′ (y),
         so δy (y ∗ ) = 0.
         First, consider y ∗ ∈ Y such that ∀g ∈ G, d(g · y ∗ , y) ≥ ε. Then, y ∗ ∈ Y \
      3. S
                                                        ′                                ∗
            y ′ ∈OG (y) Ay . Then, there must be a y ∈ Y0 \ OG (y), such that y ∈ Ay . There-
                            ′                                                                      ′

         fore, |δy,y′ (y ) − δy,y′ (y )| < ry,y′ < 3 ry,y′ . Then, we have 3 ry,y′ − |δy,y′ (y ∗ ) −
                          ∗             ′                4                            4

         δy,y′ (y ′ )| > 43 ry,y′ − ry,y′ = 31 ry,y′ > 0 ⇒ δ̄y,y′ (y ∗ ) > 31 ry,y′ . Therefore, we can set
         ry := 13 miny′ ∈Y0 \OG (y) ry,y′ > 0. If δy (y ∗ ) < ry it follows that for all y ′ ∈ Y0 \ OG (y ∗ ),
         δ̄y,y′ (y ∗ ) < 31 ry,y′ , which implies y ∗ ∈ g∈G B(g · y, ε). Finally, this proves there is a
                                                       S

         g ∈ G such that d(y ∗ , g · y) < ε.

Since the absolute value function can be realised using ReLU activations, it is easy to see that
δy ∈ C +1 .


                                                       24
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Lemma 31. If C, a class of functions over a compact set Y , can locate every isomorphism class,
then C +2 is universal approximating over Y .

Proof. Consider any continuous and G-invariant function on X. Since Y ⊆ X is compact, then f
is uniformly continuous when restricted to Y . In other words, for all ε > 0, there exists r > 0, such
that for all y1 , y2 ∈ Y , if d(y1 , y2 ) < r, then |f (y1 ) − f (y2 )| < ε.
Let y ∈ Y and define BG (y, r) := y′ ∈OG (y) B(y ′ , r) to be the union of all the open balls of
                                            S

radius r on the orbit of y. Using the function δy from Definition 29, there exists ry such that
δy−1 ([0, ry )) ⊆ BG (y, r) for any y ∈ Y . Since δy is continuous, δy−1 ([0, ry )) is open. Therefore,
{δy−1 ([0, ry ))}y∈Y is an open cover for Y . Since Y is compact, we can find a finite subcover
{δy−1 ([0, ry ))}y∈Y0 , where Y0 is a finite subset of Y .
We can now use the functions δy to construct a set of continuous G-invariant functions that forms a
                                          For y0 ∈ Y0 we construct the function ϕy0 (y ′ ) = max(ry0 −
partition of unity for this finite cover. P
δy0 (y ), 0) and the function ϕ(y ) = y∗ ∈Y0 ϕy∗ (y ′ ), both of which are continuous. Noticing that
        ′                           ′

supp(ϕy0 ) = δy−1 0
                    ([0, ry0 )) and that ϕy∗ (y ′ ) > 0 for any y ′ ∈ Y , the set of functions ψy0 (y ′ ) =
       ′
ϕy0 (y )                                  P              ′               ′
 ϕ(y ′ ) form a partition of unity with     y0 ∈Y0 ψy0 (y ) = 1 for all y ∈ Y .

Notice that we can write any G-invariant function f as:
                                    X                   X
                f (y ′ ) = f (y ′ )   ψy0 (y ′ ) =                                     f (y ′ )ψy0 (y ′ )        (33)
                                 y0 ∈Y0                y0 ∈Y0 : y ′ ∈δy−1 ([0,ry0 ))
                                                                        0


The intuition is that because f is continuous, we can approximate f (y ′ ) in the expression above by
              (y0 ) since y ′ is in the neighbourhood of some y0 . Thus, the function that approximates
the value of fP
f is h(y ) = y0 ∈Y0 f (y0 )ψy0 (y ′ ). We now show that h can approximate f with arbitrary accuracy.
        ′


If y ′ ∈ δy−1
            0
               ([0, ry0 )), then there exists g ∈ G such that d(y ′ , g · y0 ) < r. Using the fact that f is
continous, this implies |f (y ′ ) − f (g · y0 )| < ε. Because f is invariant, f (y0 ) = f (g · y0 ), which
implies |f (y ′ ) − f (y0 )| < ε. Then we have:
                     X                                        X
        f (y ′ ) −         f (y0 )ψy0 (y ′ ) = f (y ′ ) −                      f (y0 )ψy0 (y ′ )        (34)
                y0 ∈Y0                                 y0 ∈Y0 : y ′ ∈δy−1 ([0,ry0 ))
                                                                        0
                                                       X
                                       =                                   |f (y ′ ) − f (y0 )| ψy0 (y ′ ) < ε   (35)
                                           y0 ∈Y0 : y ′ ∈δy−1
                                                            0
                                                              ([0,ry0 ))

Finally, to see that h is in C + 2, we can use an MLP with one hidden layer to approximate ψy0
followed by one final layer to compute the linear combination of the ψy0 .

Theorem 19. If C, a class of functions over Y , is pairwise YG discriminating, then C +2 can also
universally approximate any continuous function over Y .

Proof. The proof follows from the two Lemmas above.

G.2    N UMBER OF AGGREGATORS IN CONTINOUS SETTING

Theorem 20. Let X be a smooth n-dim manifold and G an m-dim compact Lie group acting con-
tinuously on X. Suppose there exists a smooth submanifold Y of X of the same dimension such that
G acts freely on it. Then, any G-orbit injective function f : X → Rd requires that d ≥ n − m.

Proof. Suppose for the sake of contradiction that there exists an orbit-space injective and continuous
function f : X → Rm , with m < d. Since Y is a submanifold of the same dimension as X, then f
must also be injective over Y . By the Quotient Manifold Theorem (Lee, 2013), Y /G is a topological
manifold of dimension d = dim X − dim G. The map f induces an injective function g : Y /G →                             Addresses
Rm . This map is also continuous because for an open set V ∈ Rm , g −1 (V ) = πY (f −1 (V )).                           R2.6
Because f is continuous and πY is an open map, this set is open.


                                                       25
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                 Y
                                                          f
                                                     πY
                                         ψ −1             g
                                    Rd          Y /G          Rm

Because Y /G is a manifold, there exist an open set U ⊆ Y /G and a homeomorphism ψ : U →
Rd . Then the composition h = g ◦ ψ −1 is a continuous and injective map from ψ(U ) ⊆ Rm to
Rm . By the Invariance of Domain Theorem (Bredon, 2013, Corollary 19.9), h is open and it is a
homeomorphism onto its image h(ψ(U )) ⊆ Rm . By the Invariance of Dimension Theorem (Bredon,
2013, Corollary 19.10), d = m.
Theorem 21. For n ≥ d − 1 > 0 or n = d = 1, any continuous Sn × SO(d) orbit-space injective
function f : Rn×d → Rq requires that q ≥ nd − d(d − 1)/2.

Proof. We now consider the case when G = Sn × SO(d). First, notice that the proof above also
holds for this group since it is a subgroup of Sn × O(d). However, we can obtain a stronger result
and show the result holds for n ≥ d − 1. In what follows, we reuse the notation from the proof
above.
We define the set
     Z ′ = {X ∈ X | ∃ 1 ≤ i1 < . . . < id−1 ≤ n s.t xi1 , . . . , xid−1 are linearly independent },
containing d − 1 row-vectors that are linearly independent. Define MX to be the set of all (d −
1) × (d − 1) minors of the matrix X. Then, we can construct a continuous function h(X) =
maxm∈MX |m| and notice that Z ′ coincides with the open set h−1 ((0, ∞)). Then, the set V =
Y ∩ Z ′ is also open and non-empty. Therefore, V is a submanifold of X of the same dimension and
the action of G is well-defined and continuous on W . We can show again this action is free.
As in the proof above, we have that Pg = In , so it remains to inspect the case X = XQg . Any
non-trivial rotation Qg must rotate at least a two-dimensional subspace of Rd . Since the rows of
the matrix X span a (d − 1)-dimensional subspace of Rd , then Qg cannot leave X invariant unless
Qg = Id . Applying Theorem 20 again yields the result.
For n = d = 1, ∥·∥ : R1×d → R is, as before, G orbit-space injective.
Theorem 22. For n ≥ d > 0, any continuous Sn ×O(d) orbit-space injective function f : Rn×d →
Rq requires that q ≥ nd − d(d − 1)/2.

Proof. First, suppose that n ≥ d > 1. Consider the subspace Y = {X ∈ X | ∥xi ∥ =       ̸ ∥xj ∥, ∀i <
j}, where the norm is just the standard Euclidean norm. Consider the function g : X → R given
by g(X) = mini<j |∥xi ∥ − ∥xj ∥|. By standard analysis, this function is continuous and notice that
Y = g −1 ((0, ∞)), which means that Y is open in X. We also define the set
                  Z = {X ∈ X | ∃ i1 < . . . < id < n, |det(xi1 , . . . , xid )| > 0},
containing row-vectors that span Rd . As above, this set is the preimage of the absolute determinant
over (0, ∞), which makes Z open in X. Then, the set W = Y ∩ Z is also open and non-empty.
Therefore, W is a submanifold of X of the same dimension and the action of G is well-defined and
continuous on W . We can show this action is free.
We investigate the solutions of the equation Pg XQ⊤     g = X ⇐⇒ Pg X = XQg for X ∈ W .
Since orthogonal transformations preserve norms and the rows of X have different norms, it follows
that Pg = In ⇒ X = XQg . We know that a subset of the rows of X span the whole of Rd . Define
the sub-matrix of X containing these rows by X ∗ ∈ Rd×d . Then, we have X ∗ Qg = X ∗ ⇒ Qg =
(X ∗ )−1 X ∗ = Id . This proves that the action is free and applying Theorem 20, yields the result.
For the trivial case when n = 1, notice that ∥·∥ : R1×d → R is G orbit-space injective.
Proposition 23. Any Sn -invariant injective function f : Rn×d → Rq requires q ≥ nd.

Proof. Reusing the notation from above, notice that for all n ≥ 1, Sn acts freely on the sub-manifold
Y as shown above. Seeing Sn as a zero-dimensional Lie group and applying Theorem 20 yields the
result.


                                                 26
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


H    A LTERNATIVE GWL FORMULATION FOR SO(2)
The version of GWL presented in the main text makes use of a geometric neighbourhood object g
that keeps increasing in size at each iteration. A natural question to ask is whether a more compact
encoding of the orientation of a neighbourhood can be achieved. In this section, we show this
is possible for SO(2), which has some particularly convenient properties: it is commutative and
its (discrete) subgroups are particularly simple. First, we point out why when working with the
standard representation of SO(d) acting on vectors in Rd , the orientation of a neighbourhood cannot
be (injectively) encoded into another vector obtained from permutation invariant aggregation.
Definition 32 (Representation). A representation of a group G on a vector space V over is a group
homomorphism from G to GL(V ), the general linear group on V . That is, a representation is a map
ρ : G → GL(V ), such that ρ(g1 g2 ) = ρ(g1 )ρ(g2 ).

Denote by ρ0 the usual representation of O(d) on Rd . Let X ⊂ Rd be a countable feature space,
X = {x1 , . . . , xn } ⊂ X a multi-set of features and associated representations ρ1 , . . . , ρn : G →
SO(d). Furthermore assume that G acts on Rn×d via gX := [ρ1 (x1 ), . . . , ρn (xn )]. We want to
find a multi-set function f : X n → Rd that is O(d)-equivariant and injective over the orbit of X,
denoted by OG (X). A first observation is that if O(d) acts (faithfully) via ρ0 on Rd , then there is no
such function due to the presence of discrete rotational symmetries in certain sets of input vectors
(i.e. snowflake like structures).
Proposition 33 (The Discrete Symmetry Problem). Let X ∈ Rn×2 be a point cloud with n points
having (discrete) rotational symmetry, i.e. there exists π ∈ Sn and g ̸= id ∈ O(2) s.t. πX = gX.
Then, any permutation-invariant and O(d)-equivariant function f : Rn×2 → R2 has the property
that f (X) = f (gX) = 0 for all g.

Proof. πX = gX =⇒ f (πX) = f (gX) =⇒ f (X) = ρ0 (g)f (X) =⇒ f (X) = 0

This result easily extends to any dimension d by finding such a set of vectors that span a two dimen-
sional plane and performing a rotation in that plane. The proposition above shows that we need to
find an alternative representation ρ. We show that this is possible for G = SO(2) and for the rest of
this section assume d = 2.
Theorem 34. There exists a representation ρ : G → SO(R2 ) and a multi-set function H ASHv
sending X to R2 \ {0} that is unique for each multi-set X ⊂ X of bounded size and H ASHv (gX) =
ρ(g)H ASHv (X). Furthermore, for any two X1 , X2 ⊂ X we have that ∥H ASHv (X1 )∥ =
∥H ASHv (X2 )∥ iff there is g ∈ G such that gX1 = X2 .

Proof. Let OG (X) be an orbit of X generated by the action of the group G = SO(2) acting on
Rn×d /Sn (i.e. the space of multi-sets of 2D vectors) as in the statement of Theorem 34. Then,
SO(2) acts transitively on OG (X) by construction.

                             ϕX                        η              ωu
                  OG (X)           SO(2)/G(X)              SO(R2 )          S 1 ⊂ R2
                                                  ρ        σu
                                        π

                                       SO(2)

Denoting by G(X) its isotropy/stabilizer group of X, the function ϕX : O(X) → SO(2)/G(X)
given by ϕX (Y ) = ϕX (gX) = G(X) with g ∈ SO(2) is well-defined and, moreover, it is an
equivariant homeomorphism of G-spaces (e.g. see Proposition 4.1 in Bredon (1972)).
Notice that because SO(2) is abelian, G(X) is a normal subgroup and SO(2)/G(X) is not only a
manifold, but also a (Lie) group. We will show that we can find a faithful orthogonal representation
of this quotient group. Because we are working with finite neighbourhoods, the group G(X) is a
finite cyclic subgroup (standard result) if X ̸= 0. Otherwise, G(X) = SO(2).
Therefore, let us denote by α(gG(X)) the smallest angle of a rotation in the equivalence
class gG(X). If G(X) is a finite cyclic subgroup generated by rotations of an angle θ, then
α(SO(2)/G(X)) = [0, θ). If G(X) = SO(2), then α(SO(2)/G(X)) = 0. Thus, we can


                                                  27
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


construct the orthogonal representation η : SO(2)/G(X) → SO(Rd ) given by η(gG(X)) =
Rα(SO(2)/G(X))2π/θ if G(X) is finite and η(gG(X)) = I, otherwise. It can be checked that in
either case, η is an injective group homomorphism and, therefore, a faithful representation of the
group.
Given u = [1, 0] ∈ S 1 ⊂ R2 , we can define a map ωu : SO(Rd ) → S 1 given by ωu (Rα ) = Rα u,
which is another homeomorphism. Thus, the composition is ψ = ωu ◦ η ◦ ϕX : OG (X) → R2
is an injective function. Moreover, because the quotient map π : SO(2) → SO(2)/G(X) is a
group homomorphism, we can compose it with η to lift the representation of SO(2)/G(X) to a
representation ρ = η ◦ π of SO(2). Therefore, it follows that ψ is also equivariant with respect to
this representation of SO(2).
Finally, we can extend ψ to a function that is injective for any multi-set by constructing a ψOG (X)
for each orbit OG (X), where X is a representative of the orbit, by using a map ωOG (X) where u =
[I-H ASH(X), 0] (i.e. the norm encodes the orbit).

Alternative SO(2) Geometric Weisfeiler-Leman Test. Given a geometric graph (G, X, H), the
SO(2)-GWL algorithm consists of three steps:

     1. For each node v ∈ G and u ∈ N (v), initialise:
                                                                     H ASHv (xv − xu )
                    m0v,u := H ASH(hv , hu , ∥H ASHv (xv − xu )∥)
                                                                    ∥H ASHv (xv − xu )∥
                      m0v := H ASHv (m0v,u1 , . . . , m0v,ud(v) )

     2. For each node v ∈ G, update ml+1
                                     v   := H ASHv (mlu1 , . . . , mlud(v) ).
     3. Go back to step 2 until the partition induced by {{∥mlv ∥ : v ∈ G}} becomes stable.
     4. Return the colours of the nodes {{∥mL
                                            v ∥ : v ∈ G}} at the last iteration L.


                                                   28
