Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


D OES DATASET L OTTERY T ICKET H YPOTHESIS E X -
IST ?

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                                A BSTRACT
          Tuning hyperparameters and exploring the suitable training schemes for the self-
          supervised models are usually expensive and resource-consuming, especially on
          large-scale datasets like ImageNet-1K. Critically, this means only a few establish-
          ments (e.g., Google, Meta, etc.) have the ability to afford the heavy experiments
          on this task, which seriously hinders more engagement and better development in
          this area. An ideal situation is that there exists a subset from the full large-scale
          dataset, the subset can correctly reflect the performance distinction1 when per-
          forming different training frameworks, hyper-parameters, etc. This new training
          manner can substantially decrease resource requirements and improve the com-
          putational performance of ablations without compromising accuracy using subset
          discovered configuration to the full dataset. We formulate this interesting problem
          as the dataset lottery ticket hypothesis and the target subsets as the winning tickets.
          In this work, we analyze this problem through finding out partial empirical data on
          the class dimension that has a consistent Empirical Risk Trend as the full observed
          dataset. We also examine multiple solutions, including (i) a uniform selection
          scheme that has been widely used in literature; (ii) subsets by involving prior
          knowledge, for instance, using the sorted per-class performance of the strong su-
          pervised model to identify the desired subset, WordNet Tree on hierarchical se-
          mantic classes, etc., for generating the target winning tickets.
          We verify this hypothesis on the self-supervised learning task across a variety of
          recent mainstream methods, such as MAE, DINO, MoCo-V1/V2, etc., with differ-
          ent backbones like ResNet and Vision Transformers. The supervised classification
          task is also examined as an extension. We conduct extensive experiments for train-
          ing more than 2K self-supervised models on the large-scale ImageNet-1K and its
          subsets by 1.5M GPU hours, to scrupulously deliver our discoveries and demon-
          strate our conclusions. According to our experimental results, the winning tickets
          (subsets) that we find behave consistently to the original dataset, which generally
          can benefit many experimental studies and ablations, saving 10× of training time
          and resources for the hyperparameter tuning and other ablation studies.


1    I NTRODUCTION
In the recent years, large deep neural networks, such as Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) (Le-
cun & Bengio, 1995; He et al., 2016) and Transformers (Vaswani et al., 2017) have achieved break-
throughs in the fields of supervised learning (Tan & Le, 2019; Dosovitskiy et al., 2020) and self-
supervised learning (Kenton & Toutanova, 2019; Brown et al., 2020; Caron et al., 2021; 2020; He
et al., 2022) empowered by the large-scale datasets. Naturally, the computational resources required
for training these models on the large data are increasing accordingly. A dilemma is that many
researchers do not have such resources to conduct experiments on the large datasets directly, espe-
cially on the expensive self-supervised learning by tuning the hyperparameters and exploring the
proper training settings and frameworks. A commonly-used practice in the vision domain is to con-
duct ablations on relatively smaller datasets like CIFAR (Krizhevsky, 2009) and MNIST (Lecun
et al., 1998), and then transfer the tuned optimal configurations to the large datasets like ImageNet-
1K (Deng et al., 2009). While in many cases, it is observed that the models’ behaviors and properties
   1
     In this work, we focus on the performance trend or relative accuracy trend trained on the subset and full
data across different train/eval configurations. The absolute accuracy on the individual subset is not necessary.


                                                       1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                     RS-0                      RS-1


         Full (oracle)
                                                                                      Winning ticket



                                     RS-2                     RS-3

Figure 1: Illustration of the loss curves from self-supervised pre-training on full data, random subsets
and winning ticket subset. ViT-Small and ViT-Base models are used as the backbone networks.


on the small datasets are quite different from the ones learned on the large dataset, making it im-
proper to directly transfer hyperparameters found on small data to the large one. Considering that
self-supervised learning does not use human-annotated labels for training models, another popu-
lar solution emerged by randomly choosing a subset from the full dataset, for example, randomly
selecting 100 classes among 1,000 in ImageNet-1K for self-supervised ablations and exploring ex-
periments (Tian et al., 2020; Kalantidis et al., 2020; Ermolov et al., 2021). Such a scheme has shown
great advantages in lower resource demand of costly learning frameworks for fast hyperparameter
tuning and model exploration with large backbone architectures.
However, according to the learning rule of Empirical Risk Minimization (ERM) (Vapnik, 1991;
1999) principle, the training convergence of ERM is guaranteed when the number of parameters of
the neural networks scales linearly with the number of training examples. Under this principle, it
is challenging to only leverage a subset of data to model the properties of the full larger number
of training data, since in both of the settings, models are trained to minimize their average error
over the current training samples. Moreover, ERM is unable to provide generalization on unseen
distributions from the subset to the whole, making this strategy full of uncertainty. Consequently,
a natural concern has been raised in this work: What kind of subset is qualified for evaluating self-
supervised/supervised methods on full data?
Goal of Dataset Lottery Ticket Hypothesis (DLTH): The goal of DLTH is to find out a subset as
the winning ticket from a large-scale dataset, this subset has the same or similar empirical behaviors
and performance trends as the original full dataset when performing different training approaches
and hyper-parameters on it, meaning that it can truly reflect the performance changes according
to different training settings. Different from (i) data pruning (Zhang et al., 2021; Sorscher et al.,
2022) that removes low-contribution and forgetting data to replace the full dataset, (ii) dataset dis-
tillation (Wang et al., 2018; Cazenavette et al., 2022) and condensation (Zhao et al., 2020) that will
generate a new compressed data, the proposed DLTH will not predict the accuracy of full data but
select a proper subset from the original data and the models trained on the subset under various con-
figurations have a consistent performance trend to the models trained on the full data. Thus, we can
further use this subset for fast hyper-parameter tuning, frameworks exploration or time-consuming
tasks. More detailed discussions with the related tasks are provided in Appendix G.
Overfitting Issue on the Subset: The key observed issue of using subset data is that the self-
supervised pre-training on the smaller training data (subset) will frailly suffer from overfitting. To
reveal this, we visualize the pre-training losses in Fig. 1. Following DINO protocol (Caron et al.,
2021), we train with 400 epochs for ViT-Base and 800 epochs for ViT-Small. On the full data,
the evolution of training loss first drops rapidly, then slowly rises a little bit, and finally continues
to descend on both small and base models. While on the randomly selected subsets (RS-ID), the
losses of base and small models are dropping constantly with a plateau. It is interesting to see on
our identified winning ticket, the rebounding phenomenon on loss has emerged again at around 400
epoch of blue curve and the magnitude of loss value is generally larger than those on the random
subsets, which is also more aligned to the trend of the full data.


                                                   2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Identifying Winning Tickets (Subsets). The most common practice is to randomly select sub
classes among the full data’s categories as the subset (Tian et al., 2020), however, it is natural that
a randomly selected subset is not guaranteed for reflecting the true accuracy change on the full data
when imposing different training settings. To this end, we propose to fix the learned hypothesis or
models on the full observed dataset, and identify the winning ticket which has the approximating
distribution as the full observed data empirical distribution. We argue that the subset categories
should have the consistency on performance similar to that of the full dataset. For instance, the
overall linear probing performance of DINO (Caron et al., 2021) is better than MAE (He et al.,
2022) with the same ViT-B/16 backbone, while on the specific class such as toy poodle, MAE has the
better accuracy than DINO, meaning that this class has an inconsistency on the two self-supervised
models and will not be selected. The consistency indicates that the individual per-class accuracy
should match the global accuracy across different frameworks2 . We also empirically examine other
policies on determining the proper winning ticket subsets, including: (i) randomly generated lists as
the baselines; (ii) incorporating prior knowledge (e.g., performance-driven scheme according to the
pre-trained supervised models, semantic hierarchy on WordNet Tree, etc.).
The practice of randomly selecting a subset to evaluate different methods is more popular in self-
supervised learning task. Thus, it is more crucial to clarify and understand this manner in self-
supervised domain. While, supervised learning is also eligible to explore the dataset lottery ticket
hypothesis and we provide the results on supervised learning in Appendix due to the limited space.
All of our models are trained on large-scale ImageNet-1K and its subsets instead of MNIST, CIFAR,
etc., with 3 runs for each, to avoid potential mis-observations and deliver more reliable conclusions.
Contributions:
• Our experimental results indicate that a randomly selected subset without any prior knowledge is
  unstable and generally not qualified for reflecting the properties of self-supervised models on the
  full data, and might further deliver misleading observations and conclusions. This is fairly risky
  if the studies rely heavily on such a kind of subset, instead of the original full dataset.
• We propose the Dataset Lottery Ticket Hypothesis (DLTH), a novel problem that studies the pos-
  sibility of identifying the subset which can reflect the performance consistency with the full data.
  Moreover, we propose the policies of Empirical Risk Trend and incorporating prior knowledge to
  generate the winning tickets. To our best knowledge, this is the first work to study the feasibility
  of dataset lottery ticket hypothesis, and it can be a starting point for exploration on this problem.
• We provide comprehensive experiments on ImageNet-1K and its subsets with a variety of ad-
  vanced self-supervised frameworks, such as DINO (Caron et al., 2021), MAE (He et al., 2022),
  MoCo series (He et al., 2020; Chen et al., 2020b). to verify the effectiveness and superiority
  of our proposed dataset winning ticket policies. We will make our found winning ticket subset
  publicly available to benefit other research in this field.


2    F ROM E MPIRICAL R ISK M INIMIZATION TO DATASET L OTTERY T ICKET
     H YPOTHESIS
In the learning problem, a model is used to learn a conditional probability distribution or decision
function. The hypothetical or mapping space of the model contains all the conditional probability
distributions or decision functions. The goal of learning is to find an ideal hypothesis or mapping
function h ∈ H with its parameter θ by observing the properties of the hypothesis space. Assume
the input X and target Y of the model are random variables, which follow the joint probability
distribution P (X, Y ), we define a loss function L that measures the differences between predictions
h(x) and corresponding targets y, i.e.,(x, y) ∼ P . Usually, the smaller the value of the loss
function L on validation set, the better the model learned by the optimization. The expectation of
the loss function is formulated as:                Z
                Rexp (h) = EP [L(h(x; θ), y)] =                   L(h(x; θ), y)P (x, y)dxdy                    (1)
                                                            X×Y
The learning perspective usually treats the optimization problem as simply minimizing the expected
loss or called risk function. The distribution P is unknown in most practical situations. Instead, we
   2
     As shown in Fig. 3, on the linear probing evaluation, it is intriguing to see that DINO has the better overall
accuracy, while MAE is more stable on individual accuracy across different categories.


                                                        3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                                    Observed model performance
                                                                                           on full dataset

                                                               Optimization
             Model                                               method


                                  Full Data

                                         Can we find a winning ticket on dataset?                  Trend
                       Prior knowledge                                                           Consistency
                                          X X        X         X X X

               Model                                     Optimization
                                                           method
                                  Sub Data

                                                                                    Observed model performance
                    Suggested hyperparameters, optimizers, etc.                          on winning ticket
                        Tuning hyperparameters on                    Transfer tuned hyperparameters from
                              winning ticket                           winning ticket to the full dataset

Figure 2: Illustration of the motivation on the proposed DLTH. We aim to identify a subset from
the original data through leveraging prior knowledge as the dataset winning ticket, meanwhile, the
subset should have the property that the observed model performance on it is consistent with the
performance on full data across different training frameworks, settings and hyperparameter choices.

have access to a set of training data D = {(xi , yi )} (i = 1, 2, . . . , m), we can leverage the empirical
distribution P̂ (X, Y ) on the available training data D to approximate the true distribution P . Thus,
we further can approximate the expected risk according to the empirical risk:
                                                          m
                                                    1 X
                                   Remp (h) =             L (h (xi ; θ) , yi )                                   (2)
                                                    m i=1

Through a proper optimizer, a set of parameters is found on the training set so that the function can
approximate the real mapping relationship. The next step is to learn such a function h∗ (i.e., finding
the learnable parameters θ ∗ ) that the empirical risk (ER) is minimal:
                                           h∗ = arg min Remp (h)                                                 (3)
                                                      h∈H

According to the learning process of empirical risk, in this paper, we study the problem of whether
there exist smaller available subsets as the winning tickets for training self-supervised models with
similar performance trends to the full data. Training on the subsets is faster since the data size is
significantly smaller than of the original data. Fig. 2 shows the motivation that we aim to identify a
winning ticket on the dataset dimension. Here, we formally state the dataset lottery ticket hypothesis.
Definition 1 (Dataset Lottery Ticket Hypothesis). A large-scale, naturally-collected dataset con-
tains a subset that has the same or similar empirical behaviors and performance trends as the
original full dataset when performing different training approaches and hyper-parameters on it.

Formally, in our Dataset Lottery Ticket Hypothesis setting, we have the learned risk function h∗
(such as MAE (He et al., 2022), DINO (Caron et al., 2021), SwAV (Caron et al., 2020), etc.) together
with their parameters θ ∗ (trained models) from the full training data, our goal is to identify a subset
of training data Ds = {(xi , yi )}i∈T as a winning ticket that the ER is minimal and consistent to
different risk functions. We can leverage the subset data’s empirical distribution P̂s (X, Y ) as the
available empirical risk:
                                 Ds          1 X
                               Remp (h) =          L (h∗ (xi ; θ ∗ ) , yi )                          (4)
                                           |T |
                                                         i∈T
Where T is the sample index of dataset winning ticket. Different from the usual learning goal that is
to find an optimal function h∗ , identifying the winning ticket on the dataset is an ill-formed problem


                                                           4
  Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


  Linear Probing Acc.
                        100
                                                                                           Winning Ticket Class ID
                                                                                           DINO B/16 avg: 78.2%
                         50                                                                MoCo-V3 B/16 avg: 76.7%
                                                                                           MAE B/16 avg: 67.8%

                              0   200     400               600      800           1000
                                                 Class ID
  Linear Probing Acc.


                        100                                                                Winning Ticket Class ID
                                                                                           DINO B/8 avg: 80.1%
                                                                                           DINO B/16 avg: 78.2%
                         50                                                                MoCo-V3 B/16 avg: 76.7%
                                                                                           MAE B/16 avg: 67.8%
                              0   200     400               600      800           1000
                                                 Class ID
Linear Probing Acc.


                      100                                                                 Winning Ticket Class ID
                                                                                          DINO B/8 avg: 80.1%
                                                                                          DINO B/16 avg: 78.2%
                        50                                                                MoCo-V3 B/16 avg: 76.7%
                                                                                          SwAV ResNet50 avg: 75.3%
                                                                                          MAE B/16 avg: 67.8%
                              0   200     400               600     800           1000
                                                Class ID
  Figure 3: Illustration of per-class Top-1 accuracy of different trained models on full ImageNet-1K
  validation set. In each subfigure, the black lines above the bubbles are the winning classes. From
  top to bottom subfigures, there are 367, 155 and 44 classes with particular distribution density that
  meet the conditions of accuracy trend on different frameworks. The specific names of targeted class
  IDs are provided in Appendix. More details are in Sec. 3.1.

  with uncertainty and randomness, our idea is to make it inevitable by considering that the individual
  selected class (ticket) should have the consistent performance behaviors as it on the full data. Note
  that the pre-trained parameters θ ∗ are always fixed during this procedure. Thus, we identify the
  targeting class according to the consistency on the individual class empirical risk, we can find out
  the winning classes by maximizing the consistency metric which is defined as follows:
                                        Ds∗ = arg max Ccons ([Remp
                                                               Ds
                                                                   (h∗j )]j∈P )                                 (5)
                                                 Ds ∈D

  where Ccons is the consistency policies for discovering dataset winning tickets. P is the set of
  hypothesis functions, i.e., the learning methods. Eq. 5 indicates that when given the learned models
  (hypothesis functions and their parameters) on the observed full dataset D, the dataset lottery ticket
  hypothesis is to find a subset Ds as the winning ticket that meets the consistency relationship among
  different hypothesis functions. So that we can use this subset for different usages, such as fast
  tuning hyperparameters. We also examined the generalizability of the winning ticket for assessing
  new learning functions.
                                                   Algorithm 1 Per-class Empirical Consistency
  After acquiring the desired dataset winning
                                                   Input: {hj (j ∈ P)} is the pre-trained model pool
  ticket (subset), we can tune the hyperpa-
                                                   with linear probing classifiers to identify the desired
  rameters and re-train the model following:
                             X                     classes based on the consistency of per-class empiri-
  min L(θ, Ds∗ ) = min              ℓ (h(x, θ), y) cal accuracy, C is the number of classes in the dataset,
    θ                 θ                            Sc is the validation samples in class c. T is the thresh-
                          (x,y)∈Ds∗
                                             (6) old if the identified size of winning ticket is too large.
  We also provide a brief explanation from Mtarget is the desired size of winning ticket after a ran-
  the theory perspective in Appendix F.1.          dom selection operation.
                                                   Output: Selected winning ticket µ∗
                                                    1: for c = 1 : P  C do
  3 W INNING T ICKETS P OLICIES                     2:         c
                                                           if Ccons ([ i∈Sc Remp (hj (xi , θ))]j∈P ) is True
                                                           then
  3.1 P ER - CLASS                                  3:        µ.append(c)
  E MPIRICAL R ISK C ONSISTENCY                     4:     end if
                                                    5: end for
  In this section, we introduce the policy of 6: if len(µ)> T then
  identifying the winning ticket by leverag- 7:            µ∗ = Random Selection(µ, Mtarget )
  ing the per-class empirical risk consistency. 8: end if
                                                    9: return µ∗
                                                       5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


The procedure is as follows:
(i) Train standard self-supervised backbone models P on the original full data.
(ii) Train supervised linear probing classifiers or finetune above trained backbones on the full dataset.
(iii) Calculate per-class prediction using the above classifiers and test the models on the validation
set to match the result on the full data across frameworks. This is to identify that the particular class
has the same accuracy trend as that on the full data, i.e., consistency condition between per-class
accuracy and global accuracy on different models.
Specifically, there exists a well learned model/hypothesis pool P, the criterion of consistency follows
their empirical risk on the full dataset. For instance, if we consider three self-supervised methods:
DINO, MAE and MoCo V3 with ViT-B/16 as the backbone network under linear probing evaluation,
the consistency metric Ccons will be True only if it meets the following condition (the higher of the
model accuracy, the lower Remp ):
             Ccons = [Remp (hDINOViT-B/16 ) < Remp (hMoCo V3ViT-B/16 ) < Remp (hMAEViT-B/16 )]             (7)
                 c
For class c, if Ccons is True, we will select it as one class of the winning ticket. We formulate it as:
         X                                 X                                  X
 c
Ccons =[      Remp (hDINOViT-B/16 (xi )) <    Remp (hMoCo V3ViT-B/16 (xi )) <   Remp (hMAEViT-B/16 (xi ))](8)
         i∈Sc                            i∈Sc                               i∈Sc

The results on linear probing eval of the per-class empirical risk consistency is shown in Fig. 3.
In practice, we use per-class validation accuracy as the consistency indicator. We examine three
pre-trained model pools: (1) RDINOViT-B/16 – RMoCo V3ViT-B/16 – RMAEViT-B/16 as in Fig. 3 (upper sub-
figure). The black lines above the bubbles are the targeted winning classes, it is observed that 367
classes meet the requirement in ImageNet-1K; (2) RDINOViT-B/8 – RDINOViT-B/16 – RMoCo V3ViT-B/16
– RMAEViT-B/16 as in Fig. 3 (middle subfigure); (3) RDINOViT-B/8 – RDINOViT-B/16 – RMoCo V3ViT-B/16 –
RSwAVResNet50 – RMAEViT-B/16 as in Fig. 3 (bottom subfigure). The full lists of classes are provided in
the Appendix.

3.2   U NIFORM S AMPLING
                                                           90                        DINO_Base/16_Linear
                                                Acc. (Top-1)


Uniform sampling, a.k.a. random sam-                                             DINO_Small/16_Linear
pling, is an ordinary baseline to gener-       80                                MoCoV2_ResNet50_Linear
                                                                                 MAE_Base/16_Linear
ate the subsets. Previous literature has                                         MAE_Base/16_Finetuning
been following this scheme to generate the     70
subset with a uniform probability density         0   2     4     6   8 10
                                                             RS ID
function, e.g., randomly sample N classes
                                             Figure 4: Illustration of accuracy comparison on differ-
from the 1000 classes on ImageNet-1K. In
                                             ent RS subsets. Each model is trained by three trials on
Fig. 4, we exhibit the results of RS-ID
                                             both pre-training and linear probing/finetuning stages.
from different self-supervised methods,
and derive the following discoveries: (i) It can be observed that the discriminability of weak and
strong backbones is absent on DINO, as illustrated in Fig. 4 of black curves. (ii) Some trends are
inconsistent, for instance, from subset RS-3 to RS-4, the accuracy increases on DINO ViT-Base/16
while decreases on MAE and MoCo. These unreliabilities are as expected and inevitable since these
subsets are randomly selected without any guidance or restriction.

3.3   P RIOR K NOWLEDGE

There are multiple prior knowledge that can be utilized as the policies to find out the winning tickets:
Performance-Driven: The performance of each class has a significant influence on reflecting the
difficulties of classification, also showing the similarity measure on the latent feature space, so that
it is crucial for leveraging the performance criterion of selecting the potential tickets. As shown in
Fig. 5 (1), we use the pre-trained EfficientNet-L2 (Tan & Le, 2019) to sort the accuracy of per-class
and select with four patterns: PD-Top (easiest), PD-Mid, PD-Bottom (hardest), and
PD-Uniform. Some selected categories of images are shown in the ellipses of Fig. 5.
WordNet Hierarchy: In WordNet, the concepts are linked together in a hierarchy. This makes it
easy to navigate between concepts. For instance, given a concept like motorcar, we can find out the
concepts that are more specific, i.e., the immediate hyponyms. As shown in Fig. 5 (2), since the


                                                                6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                                    root
    Acc. (Top-1)


                     PD-Top


                                                       PD-Bottom
                                       PD-Mid
                                                                       animal         boat                  fruit


                                                                       catamaran   canoe     wreck   yawl           liner

                              (1) Performance Driven                               (2) WordNet Hierarchy

Figure 5: Illustration of the policies for Performance Driven (left) and WordNet Hierarchy (right).
We also visualize images in the selected classes to reflect the difficulty level of the selected subsets.

classes of ImageNet-1K are the leaf nodes in the WordNet tree, we can merge leaf nodes that have a
common parent and repeat this operation until obtaining enough coarse classes as the winning ticket.
Word-embedding Clustering: In this strategy, we aim to obtain the word-level embeddings of
ImageNet-1K human-readable labels3 and perform an unsupervised clustering method on them.
Firstly, a pre-trained CLIP model (Radford et al., 2021) with ViT-L/14 (Dosovitskiy et al., 2020)
backbone4 with the property of context-dependency is employed to represent semantic labels
through word embedding vectors. Next, both k-medoids an kmeans clustering algorithms are tested
to group semantically similar labels in order to reduce the overlapping. Finally, different quality
label features are utilized as the candidates in different clusters, and then the high-ranked semantic
labels are picked out from all clusters to form the winning ticket.
Semantic-embedding Clustering: Instead of using the word-level embeddings of ImageNet-1K
human-readable labels, we use the embedding by taking the average feature from a pre-trained
DINO (Caron et al., 2021) model of ViT-B/8 for all images of that class in the validation set. Other
procedures are the same as the above word-embedding clustering. This strategy is also applicable if
the label is not available in the dataset.
    Policies                                         Subset Pool Abbreviation
    Random Sampling                              {RS-ID} (ID∈ {0, 1, 2, . . . , kRS })
    Empirical Risk Consistency                  {ERC-ID} (ID∈ {0, 1, 2, . . . , kERC })
    Performance Driven                     PD-Top PD-Mid PD-Bottom PD-Uniform
    WordNet Hierarchy                           {WNH-ID} (ID∈ {0, 1, 2, . . . , kWNH })
    Word Embedding Clustering                                   WEC
    Semantic Embedding Clustering                               SEC
    Number Image Reduction                      {NiR-ID} (ID∈ {0, 1, 2, . . . , kNiR })

Table 1: Left column is different policies for identifying the desired dataset winning ticket. Right
column is the abbreviations of the corresponding policies in the main text.

4                  E XAMINING W INNING T ICKETS ON VARIOUS A RCHITECTURES

We employ both Pearson Correlation Coefficient (PCC) (Pearson, 1895) (ρp ) and Spearman’s Rank
Correlation (Spearman, 1961) (ρs ) to examine the correlation of the performance between the full
set and the selected winning ticket. The former metric focuses on the linear correlation of two input
sets of variables, the latter one reflects the monotonic correlation of them. Here, we study the dataset
lottery ticket hypothesis on different architectures and strategies used in practice. Specifically, we
  3
    https://github.com/anishathalye/imagenet-simple-labels/blob/master/
imagenet-simple-labels.json.
  4
    BERT (Kenton & Toutanova, 2019) model is also tested in our ablation experiments.


                                                                   7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                   Training Data                                        Accuracy Trend                       ρp , ρs values (indicators)
                                                                                          83.25
                                                          8078.2 77.0


                                               Acc. (Top-1)
                                                          70                  71.1
                                                                         67.7          65.52
                     Full Set                     60                 60.6
                                                                 e ar ear 0ep 0ep 0ep ear              ing               –
                                                             _lin _lin      20 20 80 Lin            tun
                (frame of reference)
                                                      s e /16 all/16 et50- et50- et5s0e- /16_ _Fine
                                                    a                 N     N    N   a          6
                                                 O_B _Sm -Res -Res -Res E_B                se/1
                                              DIN DINO oCoV1 oCoV2 oCoV2 MA AE_Ba
                                                           M M M                   M

                                                                                                                    ρp = 0.893
        RS ImageNet-100 (Tian et al., 2020)
                                                                                                                    ρs = 0.821


                                                                               CMC
                                                                                                                    ρp = 0.887
                     PD-Top
                                                                                                                    ρs = 0.821
                                                                                                                                        CMC
                                                                                                                                       CMC
                                                                                                                                       CMC



                                                                                                                    ρp = 0.912
                   PD-Uniform
                                                                                                                    ρs = 0.847



                 PD-Bottom                                                                                         ρp = 0.903
          (Our winning ticket-1)                                                                                   ρs = 0.964



                   ERC                                                                                             ρp = 0.944
          (Our winning ticket-2)                                                                                   ρs = 0.964



Table 2: Overview of accuracy trends and correlation values (higher is better) across different frame-
works. The first row represents the accuracy on full data, in other rows, each is corresponding to
one subset. As limited by the pages, more subsets’ results will be provided in the Appendix.

consider the typical deep neural architectures of residual networks (He et al., 2016) and vision
transformers (Dosovitskiy et al., 2020).
ResNet. We examine the dataset lottery ticket hypothesis as applied to the typical ConvNet of
ResNet-50 (He et al., 2016). We use MoCo V1, V2 as the training methods with 200 and 800
epochs. All of our training settings follow their default design, as well as the following vision
transformer models.
Vision Transformer. We assess the dataset lottery ticket hypothesis on ViT models. We use the ViT-
Base and ViT-Small architectures with MAE and DINO frameworks. The MAE model is trained
with 800 epochs and DINO ViT-Base, ViT-Small are trained with 400, 800 epochs, respectively.
Results. As shown in Table 2, PD-Top indicates that we choose the best-performed classes accord-
ing to a pre-trained model, i.e., the easiest categories. Our results show that this subset has the worst
consistency on linear correlation. We can also see the first two subsets have the same ρs , which
means that they enjoy the same property of ranked performance. Moreover, choosing the hardest
classes (PD-Bottom) has good correlations to the full data and is one of our winning tickets. The
correlation among the 7 framework configurations in Table 2 is the most crucial indicator for eval-
uation to reflect the quality of the selected subset, as our goal of this paper is to identify the proper
subset that has the same correlation or performance trend as on the full data. Thus, for some heavy
and costly tasks like ablation study, architecture search, etc., it is more practical and efficient for us
to employ the selected subset instead of the full data to explore the best configuration that we de-
sired. The results of WEC, SEC and WNH are similar to PD-Uniform so they are omitted in Table 2
and given in Appendix.


4.1   C ONSISTENCY

Consistency on Data Augmentation. To assess the consistency of performance on different data
augmentations, we use MoCo V1 and V2 which only contain the difference on data augmentation.
The results are shown in Fig. 6 (1), it is surprising to see that nearly all the subsets are not sensitive


                                                                        8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


to the data augmentation factor, obtaining similar accuracy on MoCo V1 and V2, but are generally
still consistent on performance.
Consistency on Training Budgets. On the self-supervised task, it is known that more training
budget can substantially achieve better performance. In this subsection, we examine whether this
property still exists on the dataset winning ticket. The results are shown in Fig. 6 (2).
Consistency on Evaluation Strategies. To assess the consistency of performance on different eval-
uation strategies, we employ MAE with finetuning and linear probing evaluations. The results are
shown in Fig. 6 (3), it can be observed that the performance on all subsets is consistent.


      (1) Consistency on Data Augmentations           (2) Consistency on Training Budgets       (3) Consistency on Evaluation Strategies

Figure 6: Illustration of the consistency conditions for Data Augmentation (left), Training Budgets
(middle) and Evaluation Strategies (right). In each subfigure, the abscissa axis represents the used
subsets: CMC subset; PD-Top; PD-Mid; PD-Bottom; PD-Uniform; RS-1; RS-2; RS-3; RS-4.

4.2      G ENERALIZABILITY
           MoCoV1-ResNet50-200ep                         MoCoV1-ResNet50-200ep                       MoCoV1-ResNet50-200ep
                       DINO_Small/16_linear                          DINO_Small/16_linear                        DINO_Small/16_linear
 MoCoV2-ResNet50-200ep                    10   MoCoV2-ResNet50-200ep                    10   MoCoV2-ResNet50-200ep                10
                                    6 8                                           6 8                                       6 8
                              2 4                                           2 4                                       2 4
                         RS     DINO_Base/16_linear                    PD     DINO_Base/16_linear             Lottery TicketDINO_Base/16_linear

 MoCoV2-ResNet50-800ep                         MoCoV2-ResNet50-800ep                         MoCoV2-ResNet50-800ep
                      MAE_Base/16_Finetuning                        MAE_Base/16_Finetuning                      MAE_Base/16_Finetuning
             MAE_Base/16_Linear                            MAE_Base/16_Linear                          MAE_Base/16_Linear

Figure 7: Illustration of the polygon radar chart for random sampling, PD-Uniform and our lottery
ticket on several indicator approaches. Our lottery ticket has the best ability across these indicators.

It is interesting to see the generalizability of the identified winning tickets on those training methods
outside the selection policies. Our conducted experiments above actually involved this verification:
The per-class empirical risk consistency does not employ MoCo V1 and V2 but from our results in
Table 2 it seems the winning tickets can still handle them well. Since MoCo V2 performs heavier
data augmentation and maintains the other training settings the same as V1, this result demonstrates
that the winning ticket is still a good indicator and can reflect the performance trend on input dimen-
sion when the transformations are changed. Besides the input transformations, i.e., MoCo V1 to V2,
we also include two more factors: (i) batch size effect, and (ii) stochastic regularization enabled by
DropPath (Huang et al., 2016). We study how these subtle changes could affect the generalizability
on winning ticket of the self-supervised models, the results and discussions are in our Appendix. To
assess the generalizability beyond the visual datasets, we further provide the preliminary results on
the AG’s News Topic Classification Dataset (Zhang et al., 2015) with the comparison between the
random subset and lottery ticker subset in Appendix I.

5      D ISCUSSIONS AND F UTURE W ORK
We have introduced dataset lottery ticket hypothesis (DLTH), an initial study to investigate whether
there exists winning tickets (subsets) that can reflect the consistency on performance when perform-
ing different self-supervised approaches and hyperparameters. Through extensive empirical evalu-
ations, we conclude that the randomly generated subset is not qualified for indicating the training
settings and configurations of full data. We proposed several policies by incorporating prior knowl-
edge to find out the desired winning tickets. In our experiments, the following trends are consistent:
(i) Random subsets are not guaranteed to obtain consistent results, in most cases they are unreliable.
(ii) Prior knowledge (e.g., the difficulties of classes) can substantially improve the quality of the
selected winning tickets which makes the selected ticket more aligned to the full data.


                                                                       9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


(iii) Two drawbacks of subsets are noticed, even on the winning tickets: (1) subsets are not sensitive
to different backbones if the training frameworks are strong, such as DINO; (2) subsets are not much
sensitive to data augmentations, such as the case from MoCo V1 to V2.
Limitations and Future Work. Currently, we only verified our hypothesis on the vision domain
of ImageNet-1K modality, we do not investigate it on more modalities such as video, text, etc.
Considering that different disciplines may have different characteristics or properties, for the future
work, we hope our hypothesis can be proven in other domains such as NLP and speech datasets.

P OTENTIAL E THICAL I MPACT
As machine learning algorithm has been well studied in data-intensive applications, such as the
large-scale ImageNet-1K classification, but is often hampered when the training data is small, this
work leveraging subset of data may have the following potential positive and negative impacts in
the society. For the positive impacts, the proposed dataset lottery ticket scheme can significantly
help save training time, computational resources and energy for tuning hyperparameters of heavy
models, which is highly eco-friendly. However, for the negative impacts, as this work tackles this
problem through involving prior knowledge for identifying dataset winning tickets, the model may
be biased on the training subset if the full data is unbalanced. Thus, we should be cautious on the
result of failure from the system which could cause unreliable conclusions, such as the unbalanced
dataset like medical images and further was misleading in some particular domains.

R EFERENCES
Jordan T Ash, Chicheng Zhang, Akshay Krishnamurthy, John Langford, and Alekh Agarwal.
  Deep batch active learning by diverse, uncertain gradient lower bounds. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1906.03671, 2019. 17
James Bergstra, Rémi Bardenet, Yoshua Bengio, and Balázs Kégl. Algorithms for hyper-parameter
  optimization. Advances in neural information processing systems, 24, 2011. 17
Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
  Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. Language models are
  few-shot learners. In Advances in neural information processing systems, volume 33, pp. 1877–
  1901, 2020. 1, 17
Mathilde Caron, Ishan Misra, Julien Mairal, Priya Goyal, Piotr Bojanowski, and Armand Joulin.
 Unsupervised learning of visual features by contrasting cluster assignments. Advances in Neural
 Information Processing Systems, 33:9912–9924, 2020. 1, 4, 17
Mathilde Caron, Hugo Touvron, Ishan Misra, Hervé Jégou, Julien Mairal, Piotr Bojanowski, and
 Armand Joulin. Emerging properties in self-supervised vision transformers. In ICCV, 2021. 1, 2,
 3, 4, 7, 17, 18
George Cazenavette, Tongzhou Wang, Antonio Torralba, Alexei A Efros, and Jun-Yan Zhu. Dataset
  distillation by matching training trajectories. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
  Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 4750–4759, 2022. 2
Tianlong Chen, Jonathan Frankle, Shiyu Chang, Sijia Liu, Yang Zhang, Zhangyang Wang, and
  Michael Carbin. The lottery ticket hypothesis for pre-trained bert networks. Advances in neural
  information processing systems, 33:15834–15846, 2020a. 17
Xinlei Chen, Haoqi Fan, Ross Girshick, and Kaiming He. Improved baselines with momentum
  contrastive learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.04297, 2020b. 3, 18
Zhengyang Chen, Sanyuan Chen, Yu Wu, Yao Qian, Chengyi Wang, Shujie Liu, Yanmin Qian, and
  Michael Zeng. Large-scale self-supervised speech representation learning for automatic speaker
  verification. In ICASSP 2022-2022 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and
  Signal Processing (ICASSP), pp. 6147–6151. IEEE, 2022. 17
Gui Citovsky, Giulia DeSalvo, Claudio Gentile, Lazaros Karydas, Anand Rajagopalan, Afshin Ros-
  tamizadeh, and Sanjiv Kumar. Batch active learning at scale. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 34:11933–11944, 2021. 17


                                                  10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Jia Deng, Wei Dong, Richard Socher, Li-Jia Li, Kai Li, and Li Fei-Fei. Imagenet: A large-scale hi-
   erarchical image database. In 2009 IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition,
   pp. 248–255. Ieee, 2009. 1
Alexey Dosovitskiy, Lucas Beyer, Alexander Kolesnikov, Dirk Weissenborn, Xiaohua Zhai, Thomas
  Unterthiner, Mostafa Dehghani, Matthias Minderer, Georg Heigold, Sylvain Gelly, et al. An im-
  age is worth 16x16 words: Transformers for image recognition at scale. In International Confer-
  ence on Learning Representations, 2020. 1, 7, 8
Aleksandr Ermolov, Aliaksandr Siarohin, Enver Sangineto, and Nicu Sebe. Whitening for self-
  supervised representation learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 3015–
  3024. PMLR, 2021. 2
Utku Evci, Trevor Gale, Jacob Menick, Pablo Samuel Castro, and Erich Elsen. Rigging the lottery:
  Making all tickets winners. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 2943–2952.
  PMLR, 2020. 17
Jonathan Frankle and Michael Carbin. The lottery ticket hypothesis: Finding sparse, trainable neural
  networks. In ICLR, 2019. 17
Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image recog-
  nition. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp.
  770–778, 2016. 1, 8
Kaiming He, Haoqi Fan, Yuxin Wu, Saining Xie, and Ross Girshick. Momentum contrast for
  unsupervised visual representation learning. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on
  computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 9729–9738, 2020. 3, 18, 19
Kaiming He, Xinlei Chen, Saining Xie, Yanghao Li, Piotr Dollár, and Ross Girshick. Masked
  autoencoders are scalable vision learners. In CVPR, 2022. 1, 3, 4, 17, 19, 20
Wei-Ning Hsu, Benjamin Bolte, Yao-Hung Hubert Tsai, Kushal Lakhotia, Ruslan Salakhutdinov,
 and Abdelrahman Mohamed. Hubert: Self-supervised speech representation learning by masked
 prediction of hidden units. IEEE/ACM Transactions on Audio, Speech, and Language Processing,
 29:3451–3460, 2021. 17
Gao Huang, Yu Sun, Zhuang Liu, Daniel Sedra, and Kilian Q Weinberger. Deep networks with
  stochastic depth. In European conference on computer vision, pp. 646–661. Springer, 2016. 9
Frank Hutter, Lars Kotthoff, and Joaquin Vanschoren. Automated machine learning: methods, sys-
  tems, challenges. Springer Nature, 2019. 17
Yannis Kalantidis, Mert Bulent Sariyildiz, Noe Pion, Philippe Weinzaepfel, and Diane Larlus. Hard
  negative mixing for contrastive learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  33:21798–21809, 2020. 2
Jacob Devlin Ming-Wei Chang Kenton and Lee Kristina Toutanova. Bert: Pre-training of deep
  bidirectional transformers for language understanding. In Proceedings of NAACL-HLT, pp. 4171–
  4186, 2019. 1, 7, 17
Alex Krizhevsky. Learning multiple layers of features from tiny images. Technical report, 2009. 1
Y. Lecun, L. Bottou, Y. Bengio, and P. Haffner. Gradient-based learning applied to document recog-
   nition. Proceedings of the IEEE, 86(11):2278–2324, 1998. doi: 10.1109/5.726791. 1
Yann Lecun and Yoshua Bengio. Convolutional networks for images, speech, and time-series. In
  The handbook of brain theory and neural networks. MIT Press, 1995. 1
Andy T Liu, Shang-Wen Li, and Hung-yi Lee. Tera: Self-supervised learning of transformer encoder
  representation for speech. IEEE/ACM Transactions on Audio, Speech, and Language Processing,
  29:2351–2366, 2021. 17
Yinhan Liu, Myle Ott, Naman Goyal, Jingfei Du, Mandar Joshi, Danqi Chen, Omer Levy, Mike
  Lewis, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Veselin Stoyanov. Roberta: A robustly optimized bert pretraining
  approach. arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.11692, 2019. 17


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Baharan Mirzasoleiman, Jeff Bilmes, and Jure Leskovec. Coresets for data-efficient training of
  machine learning models. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 6950–6960.
  PMLR, 2020. 17

Ari Morcos, Haonan Yu, Michela Paganini, and Yuandong Tian. One ticket to win them all: general-
  izing lottery ticket initializations across datasets and optimizers. Advances in neural information
  processing systems, 32, 2019. 17

Karl Pearson. Vii. note on regression and inheritance in the case of two parents. proceedings of the
  royal society of London, 58(347-352):240–242, 1895. 7

Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal,
  Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al. Learning transferable visual
  models from natural language supervision. In International Conference on Machine Learning,
  pp. 8748–8763. PMLR, 2021. 7, 17

Aditya Ramesh, Mikhail Pavlov, Gabriel Goh, Scott Gray, Chelsea Voss, Alec Radford, Mark Chen,
  and Ilya Sutskever. Zero-shot text-to-image generation. In International Conference on Machine
  Learning, pp. 8821–8831. PMLR, 2021. 17

Aditya Ramesh, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alex Nichol, Casey Chu, and Mark Chen. Hierarchical text-
  conditional image generation with clip latents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.06125, 2022. 17

Pedro Savarese, Hugo Silva, and Michael Maire. Winning the lottery with continuous sparsification.
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:11380–11390, 2020. 17

Burr Settles. Active learning literature survey. 2009. 17

Jasper Snoek, Hugo Larochelle, and Ryan P Adams. Practical bayesian optimization of machine
  learning algorithms. Advances in neural information processing systems, 25, 2012. 17

Ben Sorscher, Robert Geirhos, Shashank Shekhar, Surya Ganguli, and Ari S Morcos. Beyond neural
  scaling laws: beating power law scaling via data pruning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.14486, 2022.
  2, 16, 17

Charles Spearman. The proof and measurement of association between two things. 1961. 7

Mingxing Tan and Quoc Le. Efficientnet: Rethinking model scaling for convolutional neural net-
 works. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 6105–6114. PMLR, 2019. 1, 6

Yonglong Tian, Dilip Krishnan, and Phillip Isola. Contrastive multiview coding. In European
  conference on computer vision, pp. 776–794. Springer, 2020. 2, 3, 8

Vladimir Vapnik. Principles of risk minimization for learning theory. Advances in neural informa-
  tion processing systems, 4, 1991. 2

Vladimir Vapnik. The nature of statistical learning theory. Springer science & business media,
  1999. 2

Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez,
  Łukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. Advances in neural informa-
  tion processing systems, 30, 2017. 1

Chaoqi Wang, Guodong Zhang, and Roger Grosse. Picking winning tickets before training by
  preserving gradient flow. arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.07376, 2020. 17

Tongzhou Wang, Jun-Yan Zhu, Antonio Torralba, and Alexei A Efros. Dataset distillation. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1811.10959, 2018. 2

Zhilin Yang, Zihang Dai, Yiming Yang, Jaime Carbonell, Russ R Salakhutdinov, and Quoc V Le.
  Xlnet: Generalized autoregressive pretraining for language understanding. Advances in neural
  information processing systems, 32, 2019. 17


                                                 12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Haoran You, Chaojian Li, Pengfei Xu, Yonggan Fu, Yue Wang, Xiaohan Chen, Richard G Baraniuk,
  Zhangyang Wang, and Yingyan Lin. Drawing early-bird tickets: Towards more efficient training
  of deep networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.11957, 2019. 17
Xiang Zhang, Junbo Zhao, and Yann LeCun. Character-level convolutional networks for text clas-
  sification. Advances in neural information processing systems, 28, 2015. 9, 19
Zhenyu Zhang, Xuxi Chen, Tianlong Chen, and Zhangyang Wang. Efficient lottery ticket finding:
  Less data is more. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 12380–12390. PMLR,
  2021. 2, 17
Bo Zhao, Konda Reddy Mopuri, and Hakan Bilen. Dataset condensation with gradient matching.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.05929, 2020. 2
Hattie Zhou, Janice Lan, Rosanne Liu, and Jason Yosinski. Deconstructing lottery tickets: Zeros,
  signs, and the supermask. Advances in neural information processing systems, 32, 2019. 17


                                              13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A PPENDIX

In the appendix, we provide details omitted in the main text, including:
• Section A: Exploration experiments of more classes or more samples in per-class. (Section 4
“Examining Winning Tickets on Various Architectures” of the main paper.)
• Section B: Results of dataset lottery ticket hypothesis on supervised learning. (Section 4 “Exam-
ining Winning Tickets on Various Architectures” of the main paper.)
• Section C: An introduction of experimental settings. (Section 4 “Examining Winning Tickets on
Various Architectures” of the main paper.)
• Section D: Full lists of winning tickets on ImageNet-1K. (Section 3 “Winning Tickets Policies” of
the main paper.)
• Section E: More results of different subsets. (Table 2 “Overview of accuracy trends and correlation
values.” of the main paper.)
• Section F: More results and discussions on the study of generalizability. (Section 4.2 “Generaliz-
ability” of the main paper.)
• Section G: Background of our work. (Section 3 “Winning Tickets Policies” of the main paper.)
• Section H: Implementation details and experimental settings. (Section 4 “Examining Winning
Tickets on Various Architectures” of the main paper.)
• Section I: Results on AG’s news topic classification dataset. (Section 4.2 “Generalizability” of the
main paper.)


A    M ORE C LASSES OR M ORE S AMPLES IN P ER -C LASS ?

Instead of selecting a subset along with the   80
class, we can also keep all categories and                               (Full Set) DINO_Small/16_linear
                                               ACC. (Top-1)


                                               60                        (PD-Bottom) DINO_Small/16_linear
reduce the number of images in each class
                                               40                        (PD-Bottom) MoCoV2_ResNet50_linear
(NiR). This strategy will make the sub-                                  (NiR) DINO_Small/16_linear
                                               20                        (NiR) MoCoV2_ResNet50_linear
set more diverse but the same category has
fewer training samples. In this section, we       0        50      100
                                                         Epoch
examine the influence of number of im- Figure 8: Comparison of linear probing accuracy on
ages in each class for the self-supervised Full Set, PD-Bottom and NiR subsets.
learning. To study this, we keep the set of
original classes and randomly select 1/10 of the images in each class. We illustrate the loss evolution
of self-supervised pre-training and linear probing in Fig. 8. It can be observed that the strategy of
NiP has low accuracy of 38% on MoCo V2 and 46% on DINO (we use Full Set and the low
absolute performance subset PD-Bottom as comparisons.). Though it is not necessary the perfor-
mance is low since we focus more on the trend across the frameworks, the model is concerned to be
“dull” and may be biased to some particular classes that contain few samples since samples in each
class are insufficient.


B    DATASET L OTTERY T ICKET H YPOTHESIS ON S UPERVISED L EARNING

We examine the dataset lottery ticket hypothesis on supervised learning with the following net-
works: ResNet-50, ResNeXt50 (32×4d), RegNet Y 3 2GF, DenseNet121, MobileNet V3 Large,
ConvNext Small on the subsets of NiR, PD-Top, PD-Mid, PD-Bottom, PD-Uniform, ERC
and RS. We did not use ViT here as it is hungry for data in supervised learning. The results are
shown in Table 3, which are aligned with those on self-supervised learning task. The slight dif-
ference we observe is that on supervised learning, PD-Uniform performs much better than it on
self-supervised learning. The common conclusion is that the subset from the dimension of sample’s
number NiR and random sampling subset RS are mediocre with a weak alignment to the full data.


                                                              14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023



                                                     Accuracy Trend (Top-1)
    Training Data                                                                                                 ρp , ρs values
                    ResNet-50   ResNeXt50 32X4D   RegNet Y 3 2GF DenseNet121   MobileNet V3 L   ConvNext S
      NiR             51.12          52.34            53.42            52.45        45.71         29.47      ρp = 0.637, ρs = 0.886
      RS              81.04          85.36            85.52            84.84        79.94         81.27      ρp = 0.922, ρs = 0.886
    PD-Top            90.36          91.75            93.83            93.33        89.87         91.03      ρp = 0.926, ρs = 0.943
    PD-Mid            83.53          83.12            86.97            86.14        83.73         83.11      ρp = 0.885, ρs = 0.943
  PD-Bottom           62.29          61.84            64.71            65.01        60.21         60.00      ρp = 0.918, ρs = 0.829
 PD-Uniform           83.27          84.51            87.49            86.53        82.05         83.19      ρp = 0.959, ρs = 0.943
   ERC-100            84.79          85.81            89.31            88.32        83.75         84.65      ρp = 0.945, ρs = 1.000
   ERC-155            82.37          85.19            87.53            86.21        80.75         82.49      ρp = 0.971, ρs = 0.943


Table 3: Accuracy trends and correlation values (higher is better) on supervised learning across
different backbone networks.


C       M ORE D ETAILS OF S UBSET G ENERATION E XPERIMENTS

Considering that if the size of the subset is too large, the subset will lose its role and advantage of
fast hyperparameter searching. To this end, in the policy of per-class empirical consistency, T is set
to 200 and Mtarget is set to 100. It means that if the size of selected subset is large than 200, we
will randomly choose 100 classes among them as the new subset, so that we can guarantee the final
scales of subsets will not be larger than T . Otherwise, the subset will keep the originally identified
classes.


D       F ULL NAMES OF S UBSET L ISTS ON I MAGE N ET-1K

D.1       PD-B O T T O M (W I N N I N G T I C K E T 1)

n01667778 n01693334 n01729977 n01740131 n01744401 n01753488
n01756291 n01773549 n01773797 n01775062 n02088466 n02089973
n02096294 n02106030 n02107908 n02109961 n02110185 n02114712
n02119022 n02123045 n02123159 n02124075 n02167151 n02229544
n02395406 n02403003 n02412080 n02415577 n02441942 n02443114
n02443484 n02493793 n02497673 n02669723 n02749479 n02769748
n02776631 n02808440 n02895154 n02974003 n02979186 n02988304
n02999410 n03016953 n03045698 n03125729 n03146219 n03179701
n03249569 n03461385 n03485407 n03642806 n03657121 n03658185
n03710637 n03710721 n03770679 n03773504 n03782006 n03787032
n03793489 n03832673 n03866082 n03871628 n03895866 n03950228
n03976657 n04008634 n04081281 n04152593 n04239074 n04264628
n04285008 n04286575 n04355933 n04356056 n04357314 n04380533
n04392985 n04428191 n04443257 n04493381 n04525038 n04557648
n04560804 n04589890 n04591157 n04592741 n04599235 n07579787
n07584110 n07734744 n07860988 n07892512 n07930864 n09332890
n09399592 n09428293 n12144580 n13133613

D.2       ERC (W I N N I N G T I C K E T 2)
n01484850 n01498041 n01580077 n01601694 n01608432 n01622779
n01669191 n01685808 n01688243 n01694178 n01698640 n01728920
n01755581 n01770393 n01824575 n01829413 n01855032 n01873310
n01914609 n01978287 n01981276 n01983481 n01985128 n01990800
n02002556 n02007558 n02012849 n02056570 n02074367 n02077923
n02088238 n02090721 n02091032 n02091467 n02093859 n02096437
n02097209 n02098105 n02099849 n02100583 n02101006 n02108089
n02110806 n02111277 n02111500 n02111889 n02114548 n02128385
n02177972 n02190166 n02346627 n02356798 n02363005 n02444819
n02445715 n02481823 n02484975 n02486261 n02641379 n02690373
n02786058 n02797295 n02799071 n02804414 n02807133 n02823428
n02843684 n02865351 n02892201 n02948072 n02977058 n02992211
n03000684 n03018349 n03062245 n03110669 n03131574 n03207941
n03388183 n03394916 n03445924 n03447721 n03450230 n03459775
n03482405 n03538406 n03584829 n03595614 n03598930 n03649909


                                                                 15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


n03697007 n03764736 n03786901 n03873416 n03876231 n03877472
n03877845 n03888605 n03891251 n03903868 n03929855 n03935335
n03938244 n03967562 n03977966 n03998194 n04005630 n04033901
n04039381 n04041544 n04099969 n04153751 n04209133 n04238763
n04251144 n04273569 n04277352 n04311174 n04336792 n04355338
n04367480 n04371774 n04417672 n04418357 n04442312 n04465501
n04467665 n04482393 n04485082 n04487394 n04509417 n04515003
n04517823 n04523525 n04532106 n04542943 n04553703 n04554684
n04579432 n04589890 n04597913 n04604644 n07565083 n07615774
n07693725 n07697537 n07717556 n07718472 n07753275 n07873807
n07875152 n09229709 n12620546 n12768682 n13052670


E     M ORE R ESULTS

More results of accuracy trends and correlation values are shown in Fig. 4.

           Training Data                                                         Accuracy Trend   ρp , ρs values
                                                                           90
                           Acc. (Top-1) Acc. (Top-1) Acc. (Top-1) Acc. (Top-1)


                                                                                                  ρp = 0.912
              PD-Mid                                                       80                     ρs = 0.821
                                                                           70
                                                                           90
                                                                                                  ρp = 0.916
                WNH                                                        80                     ρs = 0.857
                                                                           70
                                                                           90
                WEC                                                        80                     ρp = 0.877
                                                                                                  ρs = 0.857
                                                                           70
                                                                           90
                                                                                                  ρp = 0.914
                SEC                                                        80                     ρs = 0.929
                                                                           70
Table 4: More accuracy trends and correlation values (higher is better) across different frameworks.


F     M ORE A NALYSES ON G ENERALIZABILITY

Settings: (i) Batch size effect. On this factor, we employ MAE Base/16 Linear as the baseline
and examine the consistency between the winning ticket and full data. The default batch size in
MAE framework is 4,096, we test 2,048 and 1,024 respectively for studying the generalizability
of our selected winning ticket. (ii) Stochastic regularization with DropPath. On this factor, we
employ DINO Small/16 linear as the baseline, the default DropPath ratio in DINO framework is
0.1, we test additional 0.3, 0.5, respectively. Our results indicate that the selected subsets have good
generalizability on slightly different training settings.

F.1   A BRIEF THEORY ANALYSIS OF DATASET LOTTERY TICKET HYPOTHESIS

Inspired by (Sorscher et al., 2022), we also use a teacher-student perceptron scheme to explain our
DLTH theoretically. We consider select the subset training dataset (the subset has P examples with
{xµ , y µ }µ=1,...,P , where xµ ∼ N (0, IN )) by keeping only the examples with the smallest margin
|z µ | = |Sprobe · xµ | along a probe student Sprobe , which matches one of our proposed selection
policies. The selected subset will follow the distribution p(z) along the direction of Sprobe . Similarly,
we can obtain the generalized theory for an arbitrary data distribution p(z) for the small-margin


                                                                                      16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


         strategy. Sprobe
selection                 contains overlap with the teacher that is determined by the angle θ =
    −1      Sprobe ·T
cos     ∥Sprobe ∥∥2 ∥T∥2 .

After the subset has been selected, we train a new student S from scratch on the selected subset. The
typical learning algorithm is to train a classifier for the training data with the maximal margin κ =
minµ S·(y µ xµ ) to find the optimized S. Different from data pruning of computing the generalization
error εg of this student, which is governed by the overlap between the student and teacher, εg =
cos−1 (R)/π, where R = S · T/∥S∥2 ∥T∥2 . we focus on the consistency of test error εs across
different configurations for the final perceptron as a function.


G    BACKGROUND


Self-supervised Learning. Self-supervised pre-training has been recognized as a promising tech-
nique in various fields, such as Computer Vision (Caron et al., 2021; 2020; He et al., 2022),
NLP (Kenton & Toutanova, 2019; Yang et al., 2019; Liu et al., 2019; Brown et al., 2020),
Speech (Hsu et al., 2021; Liu et al., 2021; Chen et al., 2022) and Multimodality (Radford et al.,
2021; Ramesh et al., 2021; 2022). The major drawback of this technique is the costly training
overhead, which dramatically impedes more investigation and exploration. For instance, GPT-3
model (Brown et al., 2020) contains 175 billion parameters and is trained roughly requiring 1,024
A100 GPUs for more than one month, the estimated training cost of it is at least $4.6 million. In the
vision domain, DINO ViT-B/8 (Caron et al., 2021) is also trained on 176 GPUs which is inaccessible
for most research institutions.
Efficient Hyperparameter Tuning. The most common hyperparameter tuning method is the grid
search. While it is always in low-efficiency when the number of hyperparameters is large, as well as
the big training data and model size. Random search with human experience and Bayesian optimiza-
tion (Bergstra et al., 2011; Snoek et al., 2012; Hutter et al., 2019) are two popular fast hyperparameter
tuning methods and have been successfully applied to many applications in practice. In this study,
we focus on finding a proper subset (winning ticket) from the full data, which is orthogonal to these
black-box strategies and can be utilized with them simultaneously. Moreover, a suitable subset is
more efficient if the model’s training cost is high.
Model-level Lottery Ticket Hypothesis. The original lottery ticket hypothesis (Frankle & Carbin,
2019) and its follow-ups (Zhou et al., 2019; Evci et al., 2020; Wang et al., 2020; Chen et al., 2020a;
Morcos et al., 2019; You et al., 2019; Savarese et al., 2020) are proposed on the neural network
dimension as the model pruning technique. The core of this hypothesis is that a randomly-initialized
neural network contains a subnetwork that can match the test accuracy of the original model after
training for the same number of iterations. PrAC (Zhang et al., 2021) observed that a sparse model
can be explored with training and pruning the dense network on the compact PrAC set, which has
a different goal from the proposed DLTH. In this work, we study the lottery ticket hypothesis on
the datatset dimension to reflect the consistency of performance trend, and propose several practice
ways to identify the dataset winning tickets.
Active Learning and Dataset Pruning. Active learning (Settles, 2009) is similar to the semi-
supervised learning strategy by involving the human participation, and the process of selecting suit-
able candidate sets for manual labeling through machine learning algorithms. The idea of active
learning is to obtain the sample that is more difficult to classify through ML approach, then, let
human reconfirm and review them. After that, we can re-use the manually labeled data with a su-
pervised learning or semi-supervised learning model. There are many recent literature following
this interesting paradigm (Ash et al., 2019; Mirzasoleiman et al., 2020; Citovsky et al., 2021). In
contrast, DLTH focuses on selecting a subset with consistent performance trends as the full data.
For the dataset pruning, Sorscher et al. (Sorscher et al., 2022) focused on the scaling of testing error
with dataset size and proposed a self-supervised pruning metric to demonstrate comparable results
to the supervised metrics. Different from the dataset pruning setting, in our scenario, we do not care
about the absolute accuracy of the individual model trained on the subset but the consistency to the
models trained on full data. The two tasks essentially have different goals, and our pruning ratio on
the original dataset is also much higher than dataset pruning.


                                                   17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


H     I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS AND E XPERIMENTAL S ETTINGS

H.1   DINO (C ARON ET AL ., 2021) P RETRAINING AND L INEAR P ROBING

We conduct experiments two configurations of DINO framework (Caron et al., 2021): (I)
DINO Base/16 linear and (II) DINO Small/16 linear. The pre-training settings are
provided in Table 5. The linear probing settings are in Table 6.

                                arch.               vit small      vit base
                             optimizer              AdamW          AdamW
                             patch size                 16             16
                              out dim                65,536         65,536
                         norm last layer              false           true
                     warmup teacher temp               0.04          0.04
                           teacher temp                0.07          0.07
                  warmup teacher temp epochs            30             50
                      momentum teacher                0.996         0.996
                          use bn in head              false          false
                          drop path rate               0.1             0.1
                              use fp16                false          false
                           weight decay                0.04          0.04
                       weight decay end                0.4             0.4
                             clip grad                 0.0             0.3
                             batch size               1024           1024
                               epochs                  800            400
                         freeze last layer              1               3
                                  lr                 0.0005        0.00075
                         warmup epochs                  10             10
                               min lr                 2e-05         2e-06
                       global crops scale          [0.25, 1.0]    [0.25, 1.0]
                        local crops scale         [0.05, 0.25]   [0.05, 0.25]
                      local crops number                10             10
                                seed                    0               0
             Table 5: DINO (Caron et al., 2021) pre-training setting on subsets.


                             arch.             vit small       vit base
                          patch size                16            16
                         n last blocks               4             1
                     avgpool patchtokens          false          true
                        checkpoint key          teacher        teacher
                            epochs                 100           100
                               lr                0.001          0.001
                          batch size             1,024          1,024
                           optimizer             SGD             SGD
                         weight decay              0.0            0.0
                    optimizer momentum             0.9            0.9
                    learning rate schedule   cosine decay    cosine decay
            Table 6: DINO (Caron et al., 2021) linear probing setting on subsets.


H.2   M O C O (H E ET AL ., 2020) P RETRAINING AND L INEAR P ROBING

We conduct experiments with three configrations on MoCo V1&V2 (He et al., 2020; Chen et al.,
2020b) frameworks: (I) MoCoV1-ResNet50-200ep, (II) MoCoV2-ResNet50-200ep and
(III) MoCoV2-ResNet50-800ep. The details of pre-training and linear probing settings are
provided in Table 7 and Table 8, respectively.


                                             18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                        config.                C1                   C2            C3
                         arch.             ResNet50            ResNet50       ResNet50
                      batch size               256                 256           256
                        epochs                 200                 200           800
                           lr                 0.03                 0.03          0.03
                learning rate schedule    cosine decay        cosine decay   cosine decay
                       optimizer              SGD                 SGD            SGD
                      momentum                 0.9                  0.9           0.9
                     weight decay             1e-4                1e-4           1e-4
                      moco-dim                 128                 128           128
                        moco-k               65,536              65,536         65,536
                       moco-m                 0.999               0.999         0.999
                        moco-t                0.07                  0.2           0.2
                       mlp head               false                true          true
                       aug plus               false                true          true
                  Table 7: MoCo (He et al., 2020) pre-training setting on subsets.
            config.                  C1                            C2                    C3
             arch.                ResNet50                     ResNet50               ResNet50
          batch size                 256                          256                    256
            epochs                   100                          100                    100
               lr                     30                           30                    30
    learning rate schedule         [60, 80]                     [60, 80]               [60, 80]
           optimizer                SGD                           SGD                   SGD
          momentum                   0.9                           0.9                   0.9
         weight decay                 0                             0                     0
         augmentation         RandomResizedCrop            RandomResizedCrop      RandomResizedCrop

                 Table 8: MoCo (He et al., 2020) linear probing setting on subsets.

H.3     MAE (H E ET AL ., 2022) P RETRAINING , F INETUNING AND L INEAR P ROBING

We conduct experiments on MAE (He et al., 2022) with one pretraining configuration and two
evaluation protocols: (I) MAE Base/16 Linear and (II) MAE Base/16 Finetuning.
Pre-training: The setting used for our experiments is in Table 9. Following the default protocal,
we do not use color jittering, drop path, or gradient clip. We also use the linear lr scaling rule: lr =
base lr×batchsize / 256. End-to-end fine-tuning: The setting used in our experiments is provided
in Table 10. Linear probing: Our linear classifier training setting is provided in Table 11.

                                      arch.                        vit base
                                    optimizer                     AdamW
                               base learning rate                   1.5e-4
                                  weight decay                       0.05
                             optimizer momentum              β1 , β2 =0.9, 0.95
                                   batch size                       4,096
                             learning rate schedule            cosine decay
                                warmup epochs                         40
                                  augmentation             RandomResizedCrop
                  Table 9: MAE (He et al., 2022) pre-training setting on subsets.


I     R ESULTS ON AG’ S N EWS T OPIC C LASSIFICATION DATASET

Training and Evaluation Settings. To further examine the generalizability of the proposed DLTH,
we extend our method to the NLP domain to see whether this hypothesis still holds using AG’s news
topic classification dataset (Zhang et al., 2015). This dataset is widely used as a text classification
benchmark. It consists of 4 coarse classes from the original corpus. Each class contains 30K training
samples and 1.9K testing samples. The total number of training samples is 120K and testing 7.6K.


                                                      19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                      arch.                    vit base
                                    optimizer                  AdamW
                              base learning rate                 1e-3
                                 weight decay                     0.05
                           optimizer momentum            β1 , β2 =0.9, 0.999
                             layer-wise lr decay                  0.75
                                   batch size                    1,024
                           learning rate schedule           cosine decay
                               warmup epochs                       5
                                training epochs                   100
                                 augmentation            RandAug (9, 0.5)
                               label smoothing                    0.1
                                     mixup                        0.8
                                     cutmix                       1.0
                                   drop path                      0.1
           Table 10: MAE (He et al., 2022) end-to-end fine-tuning setting on subset.
                                    arch.                    vit base
                                  optimizer                   LARS
                            base learning rate                  0.1
                               weight decay                      0
                          optimizer momentum                    0.9
                                 batch size                   16,384
                          learning rate schedule           cosine decay
                             warmup epochs                      10
                              training epochs                   90
                               augmentation             RandomResizedCrop
              Table 11: MAE (He et al., 2022) linear probing setting on subsets.


Configurations and Results. We explore four configurations as shown in Table 12. The results are
provided in Table 13. For the lottery ticket subset, we simply select consistent samples across four
configurations until reaching 10% of the full data. We do this twice to construct different lottery
ticket subsets to mitigate variance in different runs. We can observe that the models trained on
lottery ticket subsets are much more robust with higher correlation values to the full data than the
modles trained on the random subset baselines.
                  config.             C1             C2                     C3         C4
                batch size            64             64                     128        64
                  epochs              10             10                      10        10
                     lr                5              5                      5         10
          learning rate schedule    StepLR    CosineAnnealingLR           StepLR     StepLR
                 optimizer           SGD            SGD                    SGD        SGD
           Table 12: Training configurations on AG’s news topic classification dataset.

                                                   Accuracy Trend
                 Training Data                                                     ρp value
                                          C1        C2      C3            C4
                  Full                   0.910     0.905 0.896           0.909       –
                  RS-0                   0.864     0.862 0.862           0.863     0.764
                  RS-1                   0.863     0.867 0.863           0.871     0.437
                  RS-2                   0.863     0.870 0.859           0.868     0.589
                  RS-3                   0.870     0.868 0.863           0.864     0.617
                  RS-4                   0.861     0.862 0.860           0.867     0.555
            Lottery Ticket-0             0.871     0.864 0.863           0.867     0.814
            Lottery Ticket-1             0.870     0.865 0.864           0.871     0.863

      Table 13: Accuracy trends and correlation values on AG’s news classification dataset.


                                                   20
