Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


E ASY D IFFERENTIALLY P RIVATE
L INEAR R EGRESSION
 Kareem Amin                 Matthew Joseph             Mónica Ribero            Sergei Vassilvitskii∗



                                                 A BSTRACT

             Linear regression is a fundamental tool for statistical analysis. This has motivated
             the development of linear regression methods that also satisfy differential privacy
             and thus guarantee that the learned model reveals little about any one data point
             used to construct it. However, existing differentially private solutions assume
             that the end user can easily specify good data bounds and hyperparameters. Both
             present significant practical obstacles. In this paper, we study an algorithm which
             uses the exponential mechanism to select a model with high Tukey depth from a
             collection of non-private regression models. Given n samples of d-dimensional data
             used to train m models, we construct an efficient analogue using an approximate
             Tukey depth that runs in time O(d2 n + dm log(m)). We find that this algorithm
             obtains strong empirical performance in the data-rich setting with no data bounds
             or hyperparameter selection required.


1       I NTRODUCTION

Existing methods for differentially private linear regression include objective perturbation (Kifer et al.,
2012), ordinary least squares (OLS) using noisy sufficient statistics (Dwork et al., 2014; Wang, 2018;
Sheffet, 2019), and DP-SGD (Abadi et al., 2016). Carefully applied, these methods can obtain high
utility in certain settings. However, each method also has its drawbacks. Objective perturbation and
sufficient statistics require the user to provide bounds on the feature and label norms, and DP-SGD
requires extensive hyperparameter tuning (of clipping norm, learning rate, batch size, and so on).
In practice, users of differentially private algorithms struggle to provide instance-specific inputs like
feature and label norms without looking at the private data (Sarathy et al., 2022). Unfortunately,
looking at the private data also nullifies the desired differential privacy guarantee. Similarly, while
recent work has advanced the state of the art of private hyperparameter tuning (Liu & Talwar,
2019; Papernot & Steinke, 2022), non-private hyperparameter tuning remains the most common and
highest utility approach in practice. Even ignoring its (typically elided) privacy cost, this tuning adds
significant time and implementation overhead. Both considerations present obstacles to differentially
private linear regression in practice.
With these challenges in mind, the goal of this work is to provide an easy differentially private
linear regression algorithm that works quickly and with no user input beyond the data itself. Here,
“ease” refers to the experience of end users. The algorithm we propose requires care to construct and
implement, but it only requires an end user to specify their dataset and desired level of privacy. We
also emphasize that ease of use, while nice to have, is not itself the primary goal. Ease of use affects
both privacy and utility, as an algorithm that is difficult to use will sacrifice one or both when data
bounds and hyperparameters are imperfectly set.

1.1       C ONTRIBUTIONS

Our algorithm generalizes previous work by Alabi et al. (2022), which proposes a differentially private
variant of the Theil-Sen estimator for one-dimensional linear regression (Theil, 1992). The core idea
is to partition the data into m subsets, non-privately estimate a regression model on each, and then
apply the exponential mechanism with some notion of depth to privately estimate a high-depth model
from a restricted domain that the end user specifies. In the simple one-dimensional case (Alabi et al.,
    ∗
        {kamin, mtjoseph, mribero, sergeiv}@google.com. Part of this work done while Mónica was at UT Austin.


                                                        1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


2022) each model is a slope, the natural notion of high depth is the median, and the user provides an
interval for candidate slopes.
We generalize this in two ways to obtain our algorithm, TukeyEM. The first step is to replace the
median with a multidimensional analogue based on Tukey depth. Second, we adapt a technique based
on propose-test-release (PTR), originally introduced by Brown et al. (2021) for private estimation
of unbounded Gaussians, to construct an algorithm which does not require bounds on the domain
for the overall exponential mechanism. We find that a version of TukeyEM using an approximate
and efficiently computable notion of Tukey depth achieves empirical performance competitive with
(and often exceeding) that of non-privately tuned baseline private linear regression algorithms, across
several synthetic and real datasets. We highlight that the approximation only affects utility and
efficiency; TukeyEM is still differentially private. Given an instance where TukeyEM constructs m
models from n samples of d-dimensional data, the main guarantee for our algorithm is the following:
Theorem 1.1. TukeyEM is (ε, δ)-DP and takes time O(d2 n + dm log(m)).

Two caveats apply. First, our use of PTR comes at the cost of an approximate (ε, δ)-DP guarantee as
well as a failure probability: depending on the dataset, it is possible that the PTR step fails, and no
regression model is output. Second, the algorithm technically has one hyperparameter, the number m
of models trained. Our mitigation of both issues is empirical. Across several datasets, we observe
that a simple heuristic about the relationship between the number of samples n and the number of
features d, derived from synthetic experiments, typically suffices to ensure that the PTR step passes
and specifies a high-utility choice of m. For the bulk of our experiments, the required relationship is
on the order of n & 1000 · d. We emphasize that this heuristic is based only on the data dimensions n
and d and does not require further knowledge of the data itself.

1.2   R ELATED W ORK

Linear regression is a specific instance of the more general problem of convex optimization. Ignoring
dependence on the parameter and input space diameter for brevity, DP-SGD√         (Bassily et al., 2014)
and objective perturbation (Kifer et al., 2012) obtain the optimal O( d/ε) error for empirical risk
minimization. AdaOPS and AdaSSP also match this bound (Wang, 2018). Similar results are
known for population loss (Bassily et al., 2019), and still stronger results using additional statistical
assumptions on the data (Cai et al., 2020; Varshney et al., 2022). Recent work provides theoretical
guarantees with no boundedness assumptions on the features or labels (Milionis et al., 2022) but
requires bounds on the data’s covariance matrix to use an efficient subroutine for private Gaussian
estimation and does not include an empirical evaluation. The main difference between these works
and ours is empirical utility without data bounds and hyperparameter tuning.
Another relevant work is that of Liu et al. (2022), which also composes a PTR step adapted
from Brown et al. (2021) with a call to a restricted exponential mechanism. The main drawback
of this work is that, as with the previous work (Brown et al., 2021), neither the PTR step nor the
restricted exponential mechanism step is efficient. This applies to other works that have applied
Tukey depth to private estimation as well (Beimel et al., 2019; Kaplan et al., 2020; Liu et al., 2021;
Ramsay & Chenouri, 2021). The main difference between these works and ours is that our approach
produces an efficient, implemented mechanism.
Finally, concurrent independent work by Cumings-Menon (2022) also studies the usage of Tukey
depth, as well as the separate notion of regression depth, to privately select from a collection of
non-private regression models. A few differences exist between their work and ours. First, they rely
on additive noise scaled to smooth sensitivity to construct a private estimate of a high-depth point.
Second, their methods are not computationally efficient beyond small d, and are only evaluated for
d ≤ 2. Third, their methods require the end user to specify bounds on the parameter space.


2     P RELIMINARIES

We start with the definition of differential privacy, using the “add-remove” variant.
Definition 2.1 (Dwork et al. (2006)). Databases D, D0 from data domain X are neighbors, denoted
D ∼ D0 , if they differ in the presence or absence of a single record. A randomized mechanism


                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


M : X → Y is (ε, δ)-differentially private (DP) if for all D ∼ D0 ∈ X and any S ⊆ Y
                           PM [M(D) ∈ S] ≤ eε PM [M(D0 ) ∈ S] + δ.

When δ = 0, M is ε-DP. One general ε-DP algorithm is the exponential mechanism.
Definition 2.2 (McSherry & Talwar (2007)). Given database D and utility function u : X × Y → R
mapping (database, output) pairs to scores with sensitivity
                               ∆u =     max        |u(D, y) − u(D0 , y)|,
                                      D∼D 0 ,y∈Y

the exponential mechanism selects item y ∈ Y with probability proportional to exp (  u(D,y)
                                                                                      2∆u ). We
say the utility function u is monotonic if, for D1 ⊂ D2 , for any y, u(D1 , y) ≤ u(D2 , y). Given
monotonic u, the 2 inside the exponent denominator can be dropped.
Lemma 2.3 (McSherry & Talwar (2007)). The exponential mechanism is  -DP.

Finally, we define Tukey depth.
Definition 2.4 (Tukey (1975)). A halfspace hv is defined by a vector v ∈ Rd , hv = {y ∈ Rd |
hv, yi ≥ 0}. Let D ⊂ Rd be a collection of n points. The Tukey depth TD (y) of a point y ∈ Rd with
respect to D is the minimum number of points in D in any halfspace containing y,
                                                         1x∈hv .
                                                     X
                                  TD (y) = min
                                              hv |y∈hv
                                                         x∈D


Note that for a collection of n points, the maximum possible Tukey depth is n/2. We will prove a
theoretical utility result for a version of our algorithm that uses exact Tukey depth. However, Tukey
depth is NP-hard to compute for arbitrary d (Johnson & Preparata, 1978), so our experiments instead
use a notion of approximate Tukey depth that can be computed efficiently. The approximate notion of
Tukey depth only takes a minimum over the 2d halfspaces corresponding to the canonical basis.
Definition 2.5. Let E = {e1 , ..., ed } be the canonical basis for Rd and let D ⊂ Rd . The approximate
Tukey depth of a point y ∈ Rd with respect to D, denoted T̃D (y), is the minimum number of points
in D in any of the 2d halfspaces determined by E containing y,
                                                                 1x∈hyi ·ej .
                                                            X
                                T̃D (y) =        min
                                       ej |ej ∈±E,y∈hyi ·ej
                                                              x∈D


Stated more plainly, approximate Tukey depth only evaluates depth with respect to the d axis-aligned
directions. A simple illustration of the difference between exact and approximate Tukey depth appears
in Figure 3 in the Appendix’s Section 7.1. For both exact and approximate Tukey depth, when D is
clear from context, we omit it for neatness.

3   M AIN A LGORITHM
Our algorithm, TukeyEM, consists of four steps:

      1. Randomly partition the dataset into m subsets, non-privately compute the OLS estimator on
         each subset, and collect the m estimators into set {βi }m  i=1 .
      2. Compute the volumes of regions of different approximate Tukey depths with respect to
         {βi }m
              i=1 .
      3. Run a propose-test-release (PTR) algorithm using these volumes. If it passes, set B to be
         the region of Rd with approximate Tukey depth at least m/4 in {βi }m
                                                                            i=1 and proceed to the
         next step. If not, release ⊥ (failure).
      4. If the previous step succeeds, apply the exponential mechanism, using approximate Tukey
         depth as the utility function, to privately select a point from B.

A basic utility result for the version of TukeyEM using exact Tukey depth appears below. The
result is a direct application of work from Brown et al. (2021), and the (short) proof appears in the
Appendix’s Section 7.2..


                                                    3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Theorem 3.1 (Brown et al. (2021)). Let 0 < α, γ < 1 and let S = {β1 , ..., βm } be an i.i.d.
sample from the multivariate normal distribution N (β ∗ , Σ) with covariance Σ ∈ Rd×d and mean
E [βi ] = β ∗ ∈ Rd . Given β̂ ∈  d
                                          depth at least p with respect to S, there exists a constant
                                R with Tukey
c > 0 such that when m ≥ c d+log(1/γ)
                                α2      with probability 1 − γ, kβ̂ − β ∗ kΣ ≤ Φ−1 (1 − p/m + α),
where Φ denotes the CDF of of the standard univariate Gaussian.
In practice, we observe that empirical distributions of models for real data often feature Gaussian-like
concentration, fast tail decay, and symmetry. Plots of histograms for the the models learned by
TukeyEM on experiment datasets appear in the Appendix’s Section 7.7. Nonetheless, we empha-
size that Theorem 3.1 is a statement of sufficiency, not necessity. TukeyEM does not require any
distributional assumption to be private, nor does non-Gaussianity preclude accurate estimation.
The remaining subsections elaborate on the details of our version using approximate Tukey depth,
culminating in the full pseudocode in Algorithm 2 and overall result, Theorem 1.1.

3.1   C OMPUTING VOLUMES

We start by describing how to compute volumes corresponding to different Tukey depths. As shown
in the next subsection, these volumes will be necessary for the PTR subroutine.
Definition 3.2. Given database D, define Vi,D = vol({y | y ∈ Rd and T̃D (y) ≥ i}), the volume
of the region of points in Rd with approximate Tukey depth at least i in D. When D is clear from
context, we write Vi for brevity.
Since our notion of approximate Tukey depth uses the canonical basis (Definition 2.5), it follows
that V1 , V2 , . . . , Vm/2 1 form a sequence of nested (hyper)rectangles, as shown in Figure 3. With
this observation, computing a given Vi is simple. For each axis, project the non-private models
{βi }m
     i=1 onto the axis and compute the distance between the two points of exact Tukey depth i
(from the “left” and “right”) in the one-dimensional sorted array. This yields one side length for the
hyperrectangle. Repeating this d times in total and taking the product then yields the total volume of
the hyperrectangle, as formalized next. The simple proof appears in the Appendix’s Section 7.2.
                                                             m/2
Lemma 3.3. Lines 5 to 10 of Algorithm 2 compute {Vi }i=1 in time O(dm log(m)).

3.2   A PPLYING P ROPOSE -T EST-R ELEASE

The next step of TukeyEM employs PTR to restrict the output region eventually used by the exponen-
tial mechanism. We collect this process into a subroutine PTRCheck.
The overall strategy applies work done by Brown et al. (2021). Their algorithm privately checks
if the given database has a large Hamming distance to any “unsafe” database and then, if this PTR
check passes, runs an exponential mechanism restricted to a domain of high Tukey depth. Since a
“safe” database is defined as one where the restricted exponential mechanism has a similar output
distribution on any neighboring database, the overall algorithm is DP. As part of their utility analysis,
they prove a lemma translating a volume condition on regions of different Tukey depths to a lower
bound on the Hamming distance to an unsafe database (Lemma 3.8 (Brown et al., 2021)). This
enables them to argue that the PTR check typically passes if it receives enough Gaussian data, and
the utility guarantee follows. However, their algorithm requires computing both exact Tukey depths
of the samples and the current database’s exact Hamming distance to unsafety. The given runtimes
for both computations are exponential in the dimension d (see their Section C.2 (Brown et al., 2021)).
We rely on approximate Tukey depth (Definition 2.5) to resolve both issues. First, as the previous
section demonstrated, computing the approximate Tukey depths of a collection of m d-dimensional
points only takes time O(dm log(m)). Second, we adapt their lower bound to give a 1-sensitive lower
bound on the Hamming distance between the current database and any unsafe database. This yields
an efficient replacement for the exact Hamming distance calculation used by Brown et al. (2021).
The overall structure of PTRCheck is therefore as follows: use the volume condition to compute a
1-sensitive lower bound on the given database’s distance to unsafety; add noise to the lower bound
   1
     We assume m is even for simplicity. The algorithm and its guarantees are essentially the same when m is
odd, and our implementation handles both cases.


                                                     4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Algorithm 1 PTRCheck
 1: Input: Tukey depth region volumes V , privacy parameters ε and δ
                             |V |
 2: Use Lemma 3.6 with t = 2 and 8eδε to compute lower bound k for distance to unsafe database
                       log(1/2δ)
 3: if k + Lap (1/ε) ≥     ε      then
 4:    Return True
 5: else
 6:    Return False


and compare it to a threshold calibrated so that an unsafe dataset has probability ≤ δ of passing; and
if the check passes, run the exponential mechanism to pick a point of high approximate Tukey depth
from the domain of points with moderately high approximate Tukey depth. Before proceeding to the
details of the algorithm, we first define a few necessary terms.
Definition 3.4 (Definition 2.1 Brown et al. (2021)). Two distributions P, Q over domain W are
(ε, δ)-indistinguishable, denoted P ≈ε,δ Q, if for any measurable subset W ⊂ W,
      Pw∼P [w ∈ W ] ≤ eε Pw∼Q [w ∈ W ] + δ and Pw∼Q [w ∈ W ] ≤ eε Pw∼P [w ∈ W ] + δ.

Note that (ε, δ)-DP is equivalent to (ε, δ)-indistinguishability between output distributions on arbitrary
neighboring databases. Given database D, let A denote the exponential mechanism with utility
function T̃D (see Definition 2.5). Given nonnegative integer t, let At denote the same mechanism
that assigns score −∞ to any point with score < t, i.e., only samples from points of score ≥ t. We
will say a database is “safe” if At is indistinguishable between neighbors.
Definition 3.5 (Definition 3.1 Brown et al. (2021)). Database D is (ε, δ, t)-safe if for all neighboring
D0 ∼ D, we have At (D) ≈ε,δ At (D0 ). Let Safe(ε,δ,t) be the set of safe databases, and let
Unsafe(ε,δ,t) be its complement.

We now state the main result of this section, Lemma 3.6. Briefly, it modifies Lemma 3.8 from Brown
et al. (2021) to construct a 1-sensitive lower bound on distance to unsafety.
Lemma 3.6. Define M (D) to be a mechanism that receives as input database D and computes
the largest k ∈ {0, . . . , t − 1} such that there exists g > 0 where, for volumes V defined using a
monotonic utility function,
                                         Vt−k−1,D
                                                      · e−εg/2 ≤ δ
                                        Vt+k+g+1,D
or outputs −1 if the inequality does not hold for any such k. Then for arbitrary D

      1. M is 1-sensitive, and
      2. for all z ∈ Unsafe(ε,4eε δ,t) , dH (D, z) > M (D).

The proof of Lemma 3.6 appears in the Appendix’s Section 7.2. Our implementation of the algorithm
described by Lemma 3.6 randomly perturbs the models with a small amount of noise to avoid having
regions with 0 volume. We note that this does not affect the overall privacy guarantee.
PTRCheck therefore runs the mechanism defined by Lemma 3.6, add Laplace noise to the result, and
proceeds to the restricted exponential mechanism if the noisy statistic crosses a threshold. Pseudocode
appears in Algorithm 1, and we now state its guarantee as proved in the Appendix’s Section 7.2.
Lemma 3.7. Given the depth volumes V computed in Lines 9 to 10 of Algorithm 2,
PTRCheck(V, ε, δ) is ε-DP and takes time O(m log(m)).

3.3   S AMPLING

If PTRCheck passes, TukeyEM then calls the exponential mechanism restricted to points of ap-
proximate Tukey depth at least t = m/4, a subroutine denoted RestrictedTukeyEM (Line 12 in
Algorithm 2). Note that the passage of PTR ensures that with probability at least 1 − δ, running
RestrictedTukeyEM is (ε, δ)-DP. We use a common two step process for sampling from an exponen-
tial mechanism over a continuous space: 1) sample a depth using the exponential mechanism, then 2)
return a uniform sample from the region corresponding to the sampled depth.


                                                    5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


3.3.1     S AMPLING A D EPTH
We first define a slight modification W of the volumes V introduced earlier.
Definition 3.8. Given database D, define Wi,D = vol({y | y ∈ Rd and T̃D (y) = i}), the volume of
the region of points in Rd with approximate Tukey depth exactly i in D.

To execute the first step of sampling, for i ∈ {m/4, m/4 + 1, . . . , m/2}, Wi,D = Vi,D − Vi+1,D , so
                          m/2
we can compute {Wi,D }i=m/4 from the V computed earlier in time O(m). The restricted exponential
mechanism then selects approximate Tukey depth i ∈ {m/4, m/4 + 1, . . . , m/2} with probability
                                        P [i] ∝ Wi,D · exp(ε · i).
Note that this expression drops the 2 in the standard exponential mechanism because approximate
Tukey depth is monotonic; see Appendix Section 7.3 for details. For numerical stability, racing
sampling Medina & Gillenwater (2020) can sample from this distribution using logarithmic quantities.

3.3.2     U NIFORMLY S AMPLING F ROM A R EGION
Having sampled a depth î, it remains to return a uniform random point of approximate Tukey depth î.
By construction, Wî,D is the volume of the set of points y = (y1 , ..., yd ) such that the depth along
every dimension j is at least î, and the depth along at least one dimension j 0 is exactly î. The result is
straightforward when d = 1: draw a uniform sample from the union of the two intervals of points of
depth exactly î (depth from the “left” and “right”).
For d > 1, the basic idea of the sampling process is to partition the overall volume into disjoint
subsets, compute each subset volume, sample a subset according to its proportion in the whole
volume, and then sample uniformly from that subset. Our partition will split the overall region of
depth exactly i according to the first dimension with dimension-specific depth exactly i. Since any
point in the overall region has at least one such dimension, this produces a valid partition, and we
will see that computing the volumes of these partitions is straightforward using the S computed
earlier. Finally, the last sampling step will be easy because the final subset will simply be a pair of
(hyper)rectangles. Since space is constrained and the details are relatively straightforward from the
sketch above, full specification and proofs for this process SamplePointWithDepth(S, i) appear in
Section 7.4. For immediate purposes, it suffices to record the following guarantee:
Lemma 3.9. SamplePointWithDepth(S, i) returns a uniform random sample from the region of
points with approximate Tukey depth i in S in time O(d).

3.4     OVERALL A LGORITHM

We now have all of the necessary material for the main result, Theorem 1.1, restated below. The proof
essentially collects the results so far into a concise summary.

Theorem 3.10. TukeyEM, given in Algorithm 2, is (ε, δ)-DP and takes time O d2 n + dm log(m) .

Proof. Line 11 of the TukeyEM pseudocode in Algorithm 2 calls the check with privacy parameters
ε/2 and δ/[8eε ]. By the sensitivity guarantee of Lemma 3.6, the check itself is ε/2-DP. By the safety
guarantee of Lemma 3.6 and our choice of threshold, if it passes, with probability at least 1 − δ/2,
the given database lies in Safe(ε/2,δ/2,t) . A passing check therefore ensures that the sampling step
in Line 12 is (ε/2, δ)-DP. By composition, the overall privacy guarantee is (ε, δ)-DP. Turning to
                                                                         n        n
runtime, the m OLS computations inside Line 3 each multiply d × m           and m   × d matrices, for
    2
O(d n) time overall. From Lemma 3.3, Lines 5 to 10 take time O(dm log(m)). Lemma 3.7 gives
the O(m log(m)) time for Line 11, and Lemma 3.9 gives the O(d) time for Line 12.

4     E XPERIMENTS
4.1     BASELINES

        1. NonDP computes the standard non-private OLS estimator β ∗ = (X T X)−1 X T y.


                                                     6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Algorithm 2 TukeyEM
 1: Input: Features matrix X ∈ Rn×d , label vector y ∈ Rn , number of models m, privacy
    parameters ε and δ
 2: Evenly and randomly partition X and y into subsets {(Xi , yi )}m     i=1
 3: for i = 1, . . . , m do
 4:    Compute OLS estimator βi ← (XiT Xi )−1 XiT yi
 5: for dimension j ∈ [d] do
 6:    {βi,j }m                             m
               i=1 ← projection of {βi }i=1 onto dimension j
 7:    (Sj,1 , . . . , Sj,m ) ← {βi,j }m
                                       i=1 sorted in nondecreasing order
 8: Collect projected estimators into S ∈ Rd×m , where each row is nondecreasing
 9: for i ∈ [m/2] do
                                                           Qd
10:    Compute volume of region of depth ≥ i, Vi ← j=1 (Sj,m−(i−1) − Sj,i )
11: if PTRCheck(V, ε/2, δ) then
12:    β̂ ← RestrictedTukeyEM(V, S, m/4, ε/2)
13:    Return β̂
14: else
15:    Return ⊥


      2. AdaSSP (Wang, 2018) computes a DP OLS estimator based on noisy versions of X T X
         and X T y. This requires the end user to supply bounds on both kXk2 and kyk2 . Our
         implementation uses these values non-privately for each dataset. The implementation is
         therefore not private and represents an artificially strong version of AdaSSP. As specified
         by Wang (2018), AdaSSP (privately) selects a ridge parameter and runs ridge regression.
      3. DPSGD (Abadi et al., 2016) uses DP-SGD, as implemented in TensorFlow Privacy and
         Keras (Chollet et al., 2015), to optimize mean squared error using a single linear layer.
         The layer’s weights are regression coefficients. A discussion of hyperparameter selection
         appears in Section 4.4. As we will see, appropriate choices of these hyperparameters is both
         dataset-specific and crucial to DPSGD’s performance. Since we allow DPSGD to tune these
         non-privately for each dataset, our implementation of DPSGD is also artificially strong.

All experiment code can be found on Github (Google, 2022).

4.2   DATASETS

We evaluate all four algorithms on the following datasets. The first dataset is synthetic, and the rest
are real. The datasets are intentionally selected to be relatively easy use cases for linear regression, as
reflected by the consistent high R2 for NonDP.2 However, we emphasize that, beyond the constraints
on d and n suggested by Section 4.3, they have not been selected to favor TukeyEM: all feature
selection occurred before running any of the algorithms, and we include all datasets evaluated where
NonDP achieved a positive R2 . A complete description of the datasets appears both in the public
code and the Appendix’s Section 7.5. For each dataset, we additionally add an intercept feature.

      1. Synthetic (d = 11, n = 22,000, Pedregosa et al. (2011)). This dataset uses
         sklearn.make regression and N (0, σ 2 ) label noise with σ = 10.
      2. California (d = 9, n = 20,433, Nugent (2017)) predicting house price.
      3. Diamonds (d = 10, n = 53,940, Agarwal (2017)), predicting diamond price.
      4. Traffic (d = 3, n = 7,909, NYSDOT (2013)), predicting number of passenger vehicles.
      5. NBA (d = 6, n = 21,613, Lauga (2022)), predicting home team score.
      6. Beijing (d = 25, n = 159,375, ruiqurm (2018)), predicting house price.
      7. Garbage (d = 8, n = 18,810, DSNY (2022)), predicting tons of garbage collected.
      8. MLB (d = 11, n = 140,657, Samaniego (2018)), predicting home team score.
   2 2
    R measures the variation in labels accounted for by the features. R2 = 1 is perfect, R2 = 0 is the trivial
baseline achieved by simply predicting the average label, and R2 < 0 is worse than the trivial baseline.


                                                      7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


4.3   C HOOSING THE N UMBER OF M ODELS

Before turning to the results of this comparison, recall from Section 3 that TukeyEM privately
aggregates m non-private OLS models. If m is too low, PTRCheck will probably fail; if m is too
high, and each model is trained on only a small number of points, even a non-private aggregation of
inaccurate models will be an inaccurate model as well.
Experiments on synthetic data support this intuition. In the left plot in Figure 2, each solid line
represents synthetic data with a different number of features, generated by the same process as the
Synthetic dataset described in the previous section. We vary the number of models m on the x-axis
and plot the distance computed by Lemma 3.6. As d grows, the number of models required to pass
the PTRCheck threshold, demarcated by the dashed horizontal line, grows as well.
To select the value of R2 used for TukeyEM, we ran it on each dataset using m = 250, 500, . . . , 2000
and selected the smallest m where all PTR checks passed. We give additional details in Section 7.6
but note here that the resulting choices closely track those given by Figure 2. Furthermore, across
many datasets, simply selecting m = 1000 typically produces nearly optimal R2 , with several
datasets exhibiting little dependence on the exact choice of m.

4.4   ACCURACY C OMPARISON

Our main experiments compare the four methods at (ln(3), 10−5 )-DP. A concise summary of the
experiment results appears in Figure 1. For every method other than NonDP (which is deterministic),
we report the median R2 values across the trials. For each dataset, the methods with interquartile
ranges overlapping that of the method with the highest median R2 are bolded. Extended plots
recording R2 for various m appear in Section 7.6. All datasets use 10 trials, except for California and
Diamonds, which use 50.

       Dataset      NonDP      AdaSSP       TukeyEM       DPSGD (tuned)        DPSGD (90% tuned)
      Synthetic      0.997       0.991       0.997           0.997                  0.997
      California     0.637      -1.285       0.099           0.085                  -1.03
      Diamonds       0.907       0.216       0.307           0.828                  0.371
        Traffic      0.966       0.944       0.965           0.938                  0.765
         NBA         0.621       0.018       0.618           0.531                  0.344
       Beijing       0.702       0.209       0.698           0.475                  0.302
       Garbage       0.542       0.119       0.534           0.215                  0.152
        MLB          0.722       0.519       0.721           0.718                  0.712

Figure 1: For each dataset, the DP methods with interquartile ranges overlapping that of the DP
method with the highest median R2 are bolded.

A few takeaways are immediate. First, on most datasets TukeyEM obtains R2 exceeding or matching
that of both AdaSSP and DPSGD. TukeyEM achieves this even though AdaSSP receives non-private
access to the true feature and label norms, and DPSGD receives non-private access to extensive
hyperparameter tuning.
We briefly elaborate on the latter. Our experiments tune DPSGD over a large grid consisting
of 2,184 joint hyperparameter settings, over learning rate ∈ {10−6 , 10−5 , . . . , 1}, clip norm ∈
{10−6 , 10−5 , . . . , 106 }, microbatches ∈ {25 , 26 , . . . , 210 }, and epochs ∈ {1, 5, 10, 20}. Ignoring
the extensive computational resources required to do so at this scale (100 trials of each of the
2,184 hyperparameter combinations, for each dataset), we highlight that even mildly suboptimal
hyperparameters are sufficient to significantly decrease DPSGD’s utility. Figure 1 quantifies this
by recording the R2 obtained by the hyperparameters that achieved the highest and 90th percentile
median R2 during tuning. While the optimal hyperparameters consistently produce results competitive
with or sometimes exceeding that of TukeyEM, even the mildly suboptimal hyperparameters nearly
always produce results significantly worse than those of TukeyEM. The exact hyperparameters used
appear in Section 7.6.
We conclude our discussion of DPSGD by noting that it has so far omitted any attempt at differentially
private hyperparameter tuning. We suggest that the results here indicate that any such method will


                                                     8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                            100                                                                                                                   synthetic time

lower bound on distance to unsafe dataset
                                            80                                                                                              101


                                                                                                             mean time (s) from 10 trials
                                            60

                                            40

                                            20                                                                                              100


                                             0                                                                                               0
                                                  250        500   750    1000 1250 1500       1750   2000
                                                                          # models (m)                                                            1000     1200   1400      1600   1800     2000
                                                  d = 5.0          d = 20.0         d = 35.0     d = 50.0                                                           # models m
                                                  d = 10.0         d = 25.0         d = 40.0     threshold                                               Non-DP    DPSGD-Opt        Tukey
                                                  d = 15.0         d = 30.0         d = 45.0                                                             AdaSSP    DPSGD-Subopt

Figure 2: Left: plot of Hamming distance to unsafety using Lemma 3.6 as the feature dimension d
and number of models m varies, using (ln(3), 10−5 )-DP and n = (d + 1)m throughout. Right: plot
of average time in seconds as the number of models m used by TukeyEM varies


need to select hyperparameters with high accuracy while using little privacy budget, and emphasize
that the presentation of DPSGD in our experiments is generous.
Overall, TukeyEM’s overall performance on the eight datasets is strong. We propose that the empirical
evidence is enough to justify TukeyEM as a first-cut method for linear regression problems whose
data dimensions satisfy its heuristic requirements (n & 1000 · d).

4.5                                               T IME C OMPARISON

We conclude with a brief discussion of runtime. The rightmost plot in Figure 2 records the average
runtime in seconds over 10 trials of each method. TukeyEM is slower than the covariance matrix-
based methods NonDP and AdaSSP, but it still runs in under one second, and it is substantially
faster than DPSGD. TukeyEM’s runtime also, as expected, depends linearly on the number of
models m. Since the plots are essentially identical across datasets, we only include results for the
Synthetic dataset here. Finally, we note that, for most reasonable settings of m, TukeyEM has runtime
asymptotically identical to that of NonDP (Theorem 1.1). The gap in practical performance is likely
a consequence of the relatively unoptimized nature of our implementation.

5                                            F UTURE D IRECTIONS
An immediate natural extension of TukeyEM would generalize the approach to similar problems such
as logistic regression. More broadly, while this work focused on linear regression for the sake of
simplicity and wide applicability, the basic idea of TukeyEM can in principle be applied to select from
arbitrary non-private models that admit expression as vectors in Rd . Part of our analysis observed
that TukeyEM may benefit from algorithms and data that lead to Gaussian-like distributions over
models; describing the characteristics of algorithms and data that induce this property — or a similar
property that better characterizes the performance of TukeyEM — is an open question.

6                                            ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Gavin Brown for helpful discussion of Brown et al. (2021), and we thank Jenny Gillenwater
for useful feedback on an early draft. We also thank attendees of the Fields Institute Workshop on
Differential Privacy and Statistical Data Analysis for helpful general discussions.


                                                                                                             9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


R EFERENCES
Martin Abadi, Andy Chu, Ian Goodfellow, H Brendan McMahan, Ilya Mironov, Kunal Talwar, and
 Li Zhang. Deep learning with differential privacy. In Conference on Computer and Communications
 Security (CCS), 2016.
Shivam Agarwal.  Diamonds dataset.       https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/
  shivam2503/diamonds, 2017. Accessed: 2022-7-6.
Daniel Alabi, Audra McMillan, Jayshree Sarathy, Adam Smith, and Salil Vadhan. Differentially
  private simple linear regression. In Privacy Enhancing Technologies Symposium (PETS), 2022.
Raef Bassily, Adam Smith, and Abhradeep Thakurta. Private empirical risk minimization: Efficient
  algorithms and tight error bounds. In Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS), 2014.
Raef Bassily, Vitaly Feldman, Kunal Talwar, and Abhradeep Guha Thakurta. Private stochastic
  convex optimization with optimal rates. In Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS),
  2019.
Amos Beimel, Shay Moran, Kobbi Nissim, and Uri Stemmer. Private center points and learning of
 halfspaces. In Conference on Learning Theory (COLT), 2019.
Gavin Brown, Marco Gaboardi, Adam Smith, Jonathan Ullman, and Lydia Zakynthinou. Covariance-
  aware private mean estimation without private covariance estimation. In Neural Information
  Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2021.
T Tony Cai, Yichen Wang, and Linjun Zhang. The cost of privacy: Optimal rates of convergence for
  parameter estimation with differential privacy. Annals of Statistics, 2020.
François Chollet et al. Keras. https://keras.io, 2015.
Ryan Cumings-Menon. Differentially private estimation via statistical depth. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2207.12602, 2022.
DSNY.       Dsny monthly tonnage data. https://data.cityofnewyork.us/
 City-Government/DSNY-Monthly-Tonnage-Data/ebb7-mvp5, 2022. Accessed:
 2022-7-28.
Cynthia Dwork, Frank McSherry, Kobbi Nissim, and Adam Smith. Calibrating noise to sensitivity in
  private data analysis. In Theory of Cryptography Conference (TCC), 2006.
Cynthia Dwork, Kunal Talwar, Abhradeep Thakurta, and Li Zhang. Analyze gauss: optimal bounds
  for privacy-preserving principal component analysis. In Symposium on the Theory of Computing
  (STOC), 2014.
Google.       dp regression.    https://github.com/google-research/
  google-research/tree/master/dp_regression, 2022.
David S. Johnson and Franco P Preparata. The densest hemisphere problem. Theoretical Computer
  Science, 1978.
Haim Kaplan, Micha Sharir, and Uri Stemmer. How to find a point in the convex hull privately. In
  Symposium on Computational Geometry (SoCG), 2020.
Daniel Kifer, Adam Smith, and Abhradeep Thakurta. Private convex empirical risk minimization and
  high-dimensional regression. In Conference on Learning Theory (COLT), 2012.
Nathan Lauga.  Nba games dataset.  https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/
  nathanlauga/nba-games?select=games.csv, 2022. Accessed: 2022-7-6.
Jingcheng Liu and Kunal Talwar. Private selection from private candidates. In Symposium on the
   Theory of Computing (STOC), 2019.
Xiyang Liu, Weihao Kong, Sham Kakade, and Sewoong Oh. Robust and differentially private mean
  estimation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2102.09159, 2021.


                                               10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Xiyang Liu, Weihao Kong, and Sewoong Oh. Differential privacy and robust statistics in high
  dimensions. In Conference on Learning Theory (COLT), 2022.
Frank McSherry and Kunal Talwar. Mechanism design via differential privacy. In Foundations of
  Computer Science (FOCS), 2007.
Andrés Muñoz Medina and Jenny Gillenwater. Duff: A dataset-distance-based utility function family
  for the exponential mechanism. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.04235, 2020.
Jason Milionis, Alkis Kalavasis, Dimitris Fotakis, and Stratis Ioannidis. Differentially private
  regression with unbounded covariates. In Artificial Intelligence and Statistics (AISTATS), 2022.
Cam Nugent. California housing prices dataset. https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/
  camnugent/california-housing-prices, 2017. Accessed: 2022-7-6.
NYSDOT.                New york weigh-in-motion station vehicle traffic
 counts      dataset.           https://data.ny.gov/Transportation/
 Weigh-In-Motion-Station-Vehicle-Traffic-Counts-201/gdpg-i86w,
 2013. Accessed: 2022-7-6.
Nicolas Papernot and Thomas Steinke. Hyperparameter tuning with renyi differential privacy. In
  International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2022.
F. Pedregosa, G. Varoquaux, A. Gramfort, V. Michel, B. Thirion, O. Grisel, M. Blondel, P. Pretten-
   hofer, R. Weiss, V. Dubourg, J. Vanderplas, A. Passos, D. Cournapeau, M. Brucher, M. Perrot, and
   E. Duchesnay. Scikit-learn: Machine learning in Python. Journal of Machine Learning Research
   (JMLR), 2011.
Kelly Ramsay and Shoja’eddin Chenouri. Differentially private depth functions and their associated
  medians. arXiv preprint arXiv:2101.02800, 2021.
ruiqurm. Housing price in beijing. https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/ruiqurm/
   lianjia, 2018. Accessed: 2022-7-28.
Antonio Samaniego. Mlb games data from retrosheet. https://www.kaggle.com/
  datasets/samaxtech/mlb-games-data-from-retrosheet?select=game_
  log.csv, 2018. Accessed: 2022-7-28.
Jayshree Sarathy, Sophia Song, Audrey Emma Haque, Tania Schlatter, and Salil Vadhan. Don’t look
  at the data! how differential privacy reconfigures data subjects, data analysts, and the practices of
  data science. In Theory and Practice of Differential Privacy (TPDP), 2022.
Or Sheffet. Old techniques in differentially private linear regression. In Algorithmic Learning Theory
  (ALT), 2019.
Henri Theil. A rank-invariant method of linear and polynomial regression analysis, 1992.
John W Tukey. Mathematics and the picturing of data. In International Congress of Mathematicians
  (IMC), 1975.
Prateek Varshney, Abhradeep Thakurta, and Prateek Jain. (nearly) optimal private linear regression
  for sub-gaussian data via adaptive clipping. In Conference on Learning Theory (COLT), 2022.
Yu-Xiang Wang. Revisiting differentially private linear regression: optimal and adaptive prediction
  & estimation in unbounded domain. In Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence (UAI), 2018.


                                                  11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


7     A PPENDIX
7.1       I LLUSTRATION OF E XACT AND A PPROXIMATE T UKEY D EPTH

      7                                                      7

      6                                                      6

      5                                                      5

      4                                                      4

      3                                                      3

      2                                                      2

      1                                                      1
           1    2      3      4      5      6       7            1   2   3    4     5     6     7     8

Figure 3: An illustrated comparison between exact (left) and approximate (right) Tukey depth. In both
figures, the set of points is {(1, 1), (7, 3), (5, 7), (3, 3), (5, 5), (6, 3)}, the region of depth 0 is white,
the region of depth 1 is light gray, and the region of depth 2 is dark gray. Note that for exact Tukey
depth, the regions of different depths form a sequence of nested convex polygons; for approximate
Tukey depth, they form a sequence of nested rectangles.


7.2       O MITTED P ROOFS

We start with the proof of our utility result for exact Tukey depth, Theorem 3.1.

Proof of Theorem 3.1. This is a direct application of the results of Brown et al. (2021). They
analyzed a notion of probabilistic (and normalized) Tukey depth over samples from a distribution:
TN (µ,Σ) (y) := minv PX∼N (µ,Σ) [hX, vi ≥ hy, vi]. Their Proposition 3.3 shows that TN (µ,Σ) (y)
can be characterized in terms of Φ, the CDF of the standard one-dimensional Gaussian
                                                                                     distribution.

Specifically, they show TN (µ,Σ) (y) = Φ(−ky−µkΣ ). From their Lemma 3.5, if m ≥ c d+log(1/γ)
                                                                                         α 2     ,
then with probability 1 − γ, |p/m − TN (β ∗ ,Σ) (β̂)| ≤ α. Thus

                                                −α ≤ TN (β ∗ ,Σ) (β̂) − p/m
                                         p/m − α ≤ Φ(−kβ̂ − β ∗ kΣ )
                                         p/m − α ≤ 1 − Φ(kβ̂ − β ∗ kΣ )
                                  Φ(kβ̂ − β ∗ kΣ ) ≤ 1 − p/m + α
                                     kβ̂ − β ∗ kΣ ≤ Φ−1 (1 − p/m + α)
where the third inequality used the symmetry of Φ.

Next, we prove our result about computing the volumes associated with different approximate Tukey
depths, Lemma 3.3.

Proof of Lemma 3.3. By the definition of approximate Tukey depth, for arbitrary y = (y1 , . . . , yd )
of Tukey depth at least i, each of the 2d halfspaces hy1 ·e1 , hy1 ·−e1 , . . . , hyd ·ed , hyd ·−ed contains
at least i points from D, where x · y denotes multiplication of a scalar and vector. Fix some
dimension j ∈ [d]. Since min(|hyj ·ej ∩ D|, |hyj ·−ej ∩ D|) ≥ i, yj ∈ [Sj,i , Sj,m−(i−1) ]. Thus
        Qd
Vi,D = j=1 (Sj,m−(i−1) − Sj,i ). The computation of S starting in Line 5 sorts d arrays of length
m and so takes time O(dm log(m)). Line 9 iterates over m/2 depths and computes d quantities,
each in constant time, so its total time is O(dm).

The next result is our 1-sensitive and efficient adaptation of the lower bound from Brown et al. (2021).
We first restate that result. While their paper uses swap DP, the same result holds for add-remove DP.


                                                        12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Lemma 7.1 (Lemma 3.8 (Brown et al., 2021)). For any k ≥ 0, if there exists a g > 0 such that
 Vt−k−1,D      −εg/2
Vt+k+g+1,D · e       ≤ δ, then for every database z in Unsafe(ε,4eε δ,t) , dH (D, z) > k, where dH
denotes Hamming distance.

We now prove its adaptation, Lemma 3.6.

Proof of Lemma 3.6. We first prove item 1. Let D and D0 be neighboring databases, D0 = D ∪ {x},
          ∗      ∗
and let kD  and kD 0 denote the mechanism’s outputs on the respective databases. It suffices to show
  ∗      ∗
|kD − kD0 | ≤ 1.
Consider some Vp for nonnegative integer p. If x has depth less than p in D, then Vp−1,D ≥ Vp,D0 ≥
Vp,D > Vp+1,D . Otherwise, Vp+1,D < Vp,D = Vp,D0 < Vp−1,D . In either case,
                                      Vp+1,D < Vp,D ≤ Vp,D0 ≤ Vp−1,D .                                             (1)

                                                                     Vt−k∗      −1,D 0              ∗
                         ∗
Now suppose there exist kD            ∗
                           0 ≥ 0 and gD 0 > 0 such that
                                                        V
                                                                           D0
                                                                                           · e−εgD0 /2 ≤ δ. Then by
                                                                    t+k∗ 0 +g ∗ 0 +1,D 0
                                                                       D     D
                 Vt−k∗    ,D           ∗
Equation 1, V        D0
                                · e−εgD0 /2 ≤ δ, so kD
                                                     ∗    ∗
                                                       ≥ kD                                   ∗
                                                            0 − 1. Similarly, if there exist kD ≥ 0 and
                t+k∗ 0 +g ∗ 0 ,D
                   D     D
                       Vt−k∗ −1,D            ∗                                      Vt−k∗ ,D0             ∗
 ∗
gD > 0 such that               D
                    Vt+k∗ +g∗ +1,D     · e−εgD /2 ≤ δ, then by Equation 1, V            D
                                                                                                    · e−εgD0 /2 ≤ δ, so
                           D     D                                                 t+k∗ +g ∗ ,D 0
                                                                                      D   D
 ∗      ∗               ∗         ∗          ∗    ∗                                          ∗
kD 0 ≥ kD − 1. Thus if kD ≥ 0 or kD 0 ≥ 0, |kD − kD 0 | ≤ 1. The result then follows since k   ≥ −1.
We now prove item 2. This holds for k ≥ 0 by Lemma 7.1; for k = −1, the lower bound on distance
to unsafety is the trivial one, dH (D, z) ≥ 0.

The next proof is for Lemma 3.7, which verifies the overall privacy and runtime of PTRCheck.

Proof of Lemma 3.7. The privacy guarantee follows from the 1-sensitivity of computing k
(Lemma 3.6). For the runtime guarantee, we perform a binary search over the distance lower
bound k starting from the maximum possible m/4 and, for each k, an exhaustive search over g. Note
that if some k, g pair satisfies the inequality in Lemma 7.1, there exists some g 0 for every k 0 < k that
satisfies it as well. Thus since both have range ≤ m/4, the total time is O(m log(m)).

7.3   U SING M ONOTONICITY

This section discusses our use of monotonicity in the restricted exponential mechanism. Definition 2.2
states that, if u is monotonic,
                                 the exponential mechanism can sample an output y with probability
                        εu(D,y)
proportional to exp       ∆u       and satisfy ε-DP. Approximate Tukey depth is monotonic, so our
application can also sample from this distribution. It remains to incorporate monotonicity into the
PTR step.
It suffices to show that Lemma 7.1 also holds for a restricted exponential mechanism using a
monotonic score function. Turning to the proof
                                          R    of Lemma 7.1 given by Brown et al. (2021), it suffices
to prove their Lemma 3.7 using wx (S) = S exp(εq(x; y))dy. Note that their wx (S) differs by the 2
in its denominator inside the exponent term; this modification is where we incorporate monotonicity.
This difference shows up in two places in their argument. First, we can replace their bound
                          P [Mε,t (x) = y]           wx0 (Yt,x0 )        wx (Yt,x0 )
                                    0
                                            ≤ eε/2 ·              ≤ eε ·
                          P [Mε,t (x ) = y]          wx (Yt,x )          wx (Yt,x )
with the two cases that arise in add-remove differential privacy. The first considers x0 ( x and yields
                           P [Mε,t (x) = y]         wx0 (Yt,x0 )        wx (Yt,x0 )
                                     0
                                             ≤ eε ·              ≤ eε ·
                           P [Mε,t (x ) = y]        wx (Yt,x )          wx (Yt,x )
since the mechanism on x never assigns a lower score to an output than on x0 . Using the same logic,
the second considers x ( x0 , and we get
                               P [Mε,t (x) = y]     wx0 (Yt,x0 )        wx (Yt,x0 )
                                                  ≤              ≤ eε ·             .
                               P [Mε,t (x0 ) = y]   wx (Yt,x )          wx (Yt,x )

                                                        13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                          P [Mε,t (x0 )=y ]
The second application in their argument, which bounds P[Mε,t (x)=y] , uses the same logic. As a
result, their Lemma 3.7 also holds for a monotonic restricted exponential mechanism, and we can
drop the 2 in the sampling distribution as desired.

7.4   S AMPLING F ROM A R EGION D ETAILS

We start by formally defining our partition.
Definition 7.2. Given d-dimensional database D and dimension j ∈ [d], for y ∈ Rd , let TD,j (y)
denote the exact (one-dimensional) Tukey depth of point y with respect to dimension j in database D.
Let Bi denote the region of points with approximate Tukey depth i. Define the partition {Cj,i }dj=1 of
Bi as the volume of points where depth i occurs in dimension j for the first time, i.e.,
           Cj,i := {y ∈ Rd | min
                             0
                                 TD,j 0 (y) > i and TD,j (y) = i and min
                                                                     0
                                                                         TD,j 0 (y) ≥ i}.
                               j <j                                        j >j


The partition is well defined because any point with approximate Tukey depth i is in exactly one of
the Cj,i volumes. Each Cj,i is also the Cartesian product of three sets: any y ∈ Cj,i must have 1)
depth strictly greater than i in dimensions 1, ..., j − 1, 2) depth i in dimension j, and 3) depth at least
i in dimensions j + 1, ..., d. Being the Cartesian product of three sets, the total volume of Cj,i can be
computed as the product of the three corresponding volumes in lower dimensions. We will denote
these by V<j,i , Wj,i , V>j,i , formalized below.
Definition 7.3. Given d-dimensional database D, dimension j ∈ [d], and depth i, define

      1. Vj,i,D = vol({yj | y ∈ Rd , T̃D (y) ≥ i}), the total length in dimension j of the region with
         approximate Tukey depth at least i.

      2. Wj,i,D = vol({yj | y ∈ Rd , TD,j (y) = i and T̃D (y) ≥ i}), the total length in dimension j
         of the region with depth exactly i in dimension j and approximate Tukey depth at least i.

      3. V<j,i,D = vol({y1:j−1 | y ∈ Rd , T̃D (y) ≥ i}), the volume of the projection onto the
         first j − 1 dimensions of points with approximate Tukey depth at least i. Define V>j,i,D
         analogously.

When D is clear from context, we drop it from the subscript.

The next lemma shows how to compute these and other relevant volumes. We again note that we fix
m to be even for neatness. The odd case is similar.
Lemma 7.4. Given matrix S ∈ Rd×m of projected and sorted models, as in Line 8 of Algorithm 2,

      1. Vj,i = Sj,m−(i−1) − Sj,i ,
      2. Wj,i = Vj,i − Vj,i+1 ,
                Qj−1                    Qd
      3. V<j,i = j 0 =1 Vj,i and V>j,i = j 0 =j+1 Vj,i

Proof. The proofs of the first item uses essentially the same reasoning as the proof of Lemma 3.3.
For the second item, any point contributing to Vj,i but not Vj,i+1 has depth exactly i in dimension j.
For the third item, a point contributes to V<j,i if and only if it has depth at least i in all d dimensions;
since the resulting region is a rectangle, its volume is the product of its side lengths.

With Lemma 7.4, we can now prove that SamplePointWithDepth works as intended.

Proof of Lemma 3.9. Given S ∈ Rd×m , define Bi and {Cj,i }dj=1 as in Definition 7.2. To show the
outcome of SamplePointWithDepth(S, i) is uniformly distributed over points with approximate
Tukey depth i, it suffices to show the algorithm samples a Cj,i with probability proportional to its
volume. Recall that Cj,i is the set of points with depth greater than i in dimensions 1, 2, . . . , j − 1,
exactly i in dimension j, and at least i in the remaining dimensions. With this interpretation, Cj,i is


                                                    14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Algorithm 3 RestrictedTukeyEM
 1: Input: Tukey depth region volumes V , sorted collection of estimators S, depth restriction t,
    privacy parameter ε
 2: for i = t, t + 1, . . . , |V | − 1 do
 3:    Compute volume of region of Tukey depth exactly i, Wi ←   Vi − Vi+1
 4: Sample depth î from distribution where P [i] ∝ Wi exp ε·i
                                                            2
 5: Return y ← SamplePointWithDepth(S, î)


Algorithm 4 SamplePointWithDepth
 1: Input: Sorted collection of estimators S, depth i
 2: d, m ← number of rows and columns in S
 3: Compute V≥1,i using Lemma 7.4
 4: for j = 1, . . . , d do
 5:    Compute V<j,i+1 , Wj,i , and V>j,i using Lemma 7.4
 6:    Compute vol(Cj,i ) = V<j,i+1 · Wj,i · V>j,i
                                             vol(C )
 7: Sample index j ∗ ∈ [d] with probability V j,i
                                                ≥1,i
 8: for j 0 = 1, . . . , j ∗ − 1 do
 9:    yj 0 ← uniform random sample from [Sj 0 ,i+1 , Sj 0 ,m−i ]
10: yj ∗ ← uniform random sample from [Sj ∗ ,i , Sj ∗ ,i+1 ) ∪ (Sj ∗ ,m−i , Sj ∗ ,m−(i−1) ]
11: for j 0 = j ∗ + 1, . . . , d do
12:    yj 0 ← uniform random sample from [Sj 0 ,i , Sj 0 ,m−(i−1) ]
13: Return y



the Cartesian product of three lower dimensional regions, and thus its volume is the product of the
corresponding volumes,
                                 vol(Cj,i ) = V<j,i+1 · Wj,i · V>j,i .
These quantities, along with the normalizing constant V≥1,i , can be computed using Lemma 7.4.
Since i is fixed, computing the full set of Vj,i and Wj,i takes time O(d), and by tracking partial sums
and using logarithms, we can compute the full set of V<j,i and V>j,i in time O(d) as well. The last
step is sampling the final point y, which takes time O(d) using the previously computed S.


7.5   DATASET F EATURE S ELECTION D ETAILS

This section provides details for each of the real datasets evaluated in our experiments.

      1. California Housing Nugent (2017): The label is median housevalue, and the categor-
         ical ocean proximity is dropped.
      2. Diamonds Agarwal (2017): The label is price. Ordinal categorical features (carat,
         color, clarity) are replaced with integers 1, 2, . . ..
      3. Traffic NYSDOT (2013): The label is passenger vehicle count (Class 2), and the remain-
         ing features are motorcycles (Class 1) and pickups, panels, and vans (Class 3).
      4. NBA Lauga (2022): The label is PTS home, and the features are FT PCT home,
         FG3 PCT home, FG PCT home, AST home, and REB home.
      5. Beijing Housing ruiqurm (2018): The label is totalPrice.                  Features are
         days on market (DOM), followers, area of house in meters (square), num-
         ber of kitchens (kitchen), buildingType, renovationCondition, build-
         ing material (buildingStructure), ladders per residence (ladderRatio), el-
         evator presence elevator, whether previous owner owned for at least five
         years (fiveYearsProperty), proximity to subway (subway), district, and
         nearby average housing price (communityAverage). Categorical buildingType,
         renovationCondition, and buildingStructure are encoded as one-hot vari-
         ables. We additionally removed a single outlier row (60422) whose norm is more than two


                                                     15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


         orders of magnitude larger than that of other points; none of the DP algorithms achieved
         positive R2 with the row included.
      6. New York Garbage DSNY (2022): The label is REFUSETONSCOLLECTED. The features
         are PAPERTONSCOLLECTED and MPGTONSCOLLECTED. The categorical BOROUGH is
         encoded as one-hot variables.
      7. MLB Samaniego (2018): The label is home team runs (h score) and the features
         are v strikeouts, v walks, v pitchers used, v errors, h at bats, h hits,
         h doubles, h triples, h homeruns, and h stolen bases.

7.6   E XTENDED E XPERIMENT R ESULTS

Figure 4 records, respectively, the number of epochs, the clipping norm, the learning rate, and the
number of microbatches for both the best and 90th percentile hyperparameter settings on each dataset.


                      Dataset       DPSGD (tuned)          DPSGD (90% tuned)
                     Synthetic        (20, 1, 1, 128)       (20, 10−3 , 0.1, 64)
                     California      (20, 100, 1, 64)      (10, 1000, 0.01, 64)
                     Diamonds       (20, 106 , 1, 128)       (10, 106 , 0.1, 32)
                       Traffic      (1, 106 , 1, 1024)      (10, 105 , 0.1, 512)
                        NBA        (20, 100, 1, 512)        (20, 10−6 , 0.1, 32)
                      Beijing     (20, 100, 0.01, 512)     (20, 0.1, 0.001, 512)
                      Garbage          (20, 1, 1, 32)         (5, 1000, 1, 64)
                       MLB        (10, 100, 0.01, 512)    (10, 10−5 , 0.001, 128)

                Figure 4: Hyperparameter settings used by DPSGD on each dataset.



7.7   D ISTRIBUTION OF MODELS FOR ALL DATASETS

Figures 7 through 13 display histograms of models trained on each dataset. For each plot, we train
2,000 standard OLS models on disjoint partitions of the data and plot the resulting histograms for each
coefficient. The red curve plots a Gaussian distribution with the same mean and standard deviation as
the underlying data.


                                                  16
7.7                               Distribution of models for all datasets                                                                                                          17


                                                              synthetic                                                                              housing
                         0.997                                                                                           0.5
                         0.996
    R 2 from 10 trials
                         0.995                                                                                           0.0


                                                                                                  R 2 from 50 trials
                         0.994
                                                                                                                         0.5
                         0.993
                         0.992                                                                                           1.0
                         0.991
                                                                                                                         1.5
                         0.990

                                        1000       1200     1400      1600   1800     2000                                      800      1000   1200 1400 1600     1800     2000
                                                              # models m                                                                            # models m
                                                Non-DP       DPSGD-Opt        Tukey                                                    Non-DP      DPSGD-Opt       Tukey
                                                AdaSSP       DPSGD-Subopt                                                              AdaSSP      DPSGD-Subopt
                                                              diamonds                                                                                traffic
                                1.00                                                                                   0.975
                                0.75                                                                                   0.950
                                0.50                                                                                   0.925
                                0.25                                                                                   0.900
 R 2 from 50 trials


                                                                                                R 2 from 10 trials
                                0.00                                                                                   0.875
                                0.25                                                                                   0.850
                                0.50                                                                                   0.825
                                0.75                                                                                   0.800
                                1.00                                                                                   0.775
                                          800      1000   1200 1400 1600      1800    2000                                       600      800   1000 1200 1400 1600 1800 2000
                                                              # models m                                                                             # models m
                                                Non-DP       DPSGD-Opt        Tukey                                                    Non-DP       DPSGD-Opt      Tukey
                                                AdaSSP       DPSGD-Subopt                                                              AdaSSP       DPSGD-Subopt
                                                                nba                                                    100
                                                                                                                                                    beijing
                                  0.6
                                  0.5
             R 2 from 10 trials


                                                                                               R 2 from 10 trials


                                  0.4
                                  0.3
                                  0.2
                                  0.1
                                  0.0                                                                                   0
                                         800       1000   1200 1400 1600      1800    2000                                     1300 1400 1500 1600 1700 1800 1900 2000
                                                              # models m                                                                      # models m
                                                Non-DP       DPSGD-Opt       Tukey                                                 Non-DP    DPSGD-Opt      Tukey
                                                AdaSSP       DPSGD-Subopt                                                          AdaSSP    DPSGD-Subopt
                                                              garbage                                                                                mlb
                                  0.5                                                                               0.70
                                  0.4
                                                                                                                    0.65
           R 2 from 10 trials


                                                                                             R 2 from 10 trials


                                  0.3

                                  0.2                                                                               0.60

                                  0.1                                                                               0.55
                                  0.0
                                         800      1000    1200 1400 1600      1800    2000                                     800      1000    1200 1400 1600    1800     2000
                                                              # models m                                                                            # models m
                                                Non-DP       DPSGD-Opt       Tukey                                                    Non-DP       DPSGD-Opt      Tukey
                                                AdaSSP       DPSGD-Subopt                                                             AdaSSP       DPSGD-Subopt


Figure 5: Plots of R2 as the number of models m used by TukeyEM varies. The lines mark medians
and the shaded regions span the first and third quartiles. All datasets except Housing and Diamonds
use 10 trials. Housing and Diamonds use 50 trials due to the variance of TukeyEM. Methods other
than TukeyEM appear as flat lines because they do not vary with m. Each plot varies the number of
models m in increments of 250, starting with the m sufficient to pass PTR in all trials.
7.7             Distribution of models for all datasets                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               18


           1e 5                                                                                 1e 5
      6                                                                                2.0
                                                                                                                                                                     0.00010                                                                                       0.004
      5
                                                                                       1.5                                                                           0.00008                                                                                       0.003
      4
      3                                                                                                                                                              0.00006
                                                                                       1.0                                                                                                                                                                         0.002
      2                                                                                                                                                              0.00004
                                                                                       0.5                                                                                                                                                                         0.001
      1                                                                                                                                                              0.00002
      0                                                                                0.0                                                                           0.00000                                                                                       0.000
         00          00                   0                 00                                       000                00          0        00        000                                   00                0              00               00                                   500    250            0        250         500
      400         200                                 200                                       100                500                    500      100                                 100                              100              200
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1e 5
0.0004
                                                                                    0.0030                                                                           0.00030                                                                                        1.50
0.0003                                                                              0.0025                                                                           0.00025                                                                                        1.25
                                                                                    0.0020                                                                           0.00020                                                                                        1.00
0.0002                                                                                                                                                               0.00015                                                                                        0.75
                                                                                    0.0015
                                                                                    0.0010                                                                           0.00010                                                                                        0.50
0.0001
                                                                                    0.0005                                                                           0.00005                                                                                        0.25
0.0000                                                                              0.0000                                                                           0.00000                                                                                        0.00
             00   500
                        0            0
                                              500
                                                      0              00                          100
                                                                                                      0        500            0    500 1000 1500                             00             500
                                                                                                                                                                                                  0        0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    500
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0             00            00                             00        0           00            000         000
          100                                                  100                                                                                                       100                                                       100             150                         500                      500        100         150



                                                                 Figure 6: Histograms of models on the California dataset.


                                                                                    0.030                                                 0.030                                                                                                            0.030
                        0.030                                                                                                                                                                  0.030
                                                                                    0.025                                                 0.025                                                                                                            0.025
                        0.025                                                                                                                                                                  0.025
                        0.020                                                       0.020                                                 0.020                                                                                                            0.020
                                                                                                                                                                                               0.020
                        0.015                                                       0.015                                                 0.015                                                0.015                                                       0.015
                        0.010                                                       0.010                                                 0.010                                                0.010                                                       0.010
                        0.005                                                       0.005                                                 0.005                                                0.005                                                       0.005
                        0.000                                                       0.000                                                 0.000                                                0.000                                                       0.000
                                25        0       25           50         75                    25        0        25        50    75                  0        25      50        75        100           40       20     0        20         40     60            25      0         25   50       75    100
                        0.030                                                       0.030
                                                                                                                                                                                                  0.030                                                    0.030
                        0.025                                                       0.025                                                  0.03
                                                                                                                                                                                                  0.025                                                    0.025
                        0.020                                                       0.020                                                                                                                                                                  0.020
                                                                                                                                                                                                  0.020
                        0.015                                                       0.015                                                  0.02
                                                                                                                                                                                                  0.015                                                    0.015
                        0.010                                                       0.010                                                                                                         0.010                                                    0.010
                                                                                                                                           0.01
                        0.005                                                       0.005                                                                                                         0.005                                                    0.005
                        0.000                                                       0.000                                                  0.00                                                   0.000                                                    0.000
                                     25       0           25        50         75           0        20       40        60    80    100           40       20   0      20    40        60                 50       25         0          25         50               40        20     0   20       40    60


                                                                                      Figure 7: Histograms of models on Synthetic.


 0.006                                                                                                                  0.35                                                                                                   0.0014
                                                                                                                        0.30                                                                                                   0.0012
 0.005
                                                                                                                        0.25                                                                                                   0.0010
 0.004
                                                                                                                        0.20                                                                                                   0.0008
 0.003
                                                                                                                        0.15                                                                                                   0.0006
 0.002                                                                                                                  0.10                                                                                                   0.0004
 0.001                                                                                                                  0.05                                                                                                   0.0002
 0.000                                                                                                                  0.00                                                                                                   0.0000
                   1000                           0                        1000                                                           10               0           10               20                30                                               7500 5000 2500                                      0           2500

                                                                                            Figure 8: Histograms of models on Traffic.
7.7       Distribution of models for all datasets                                                                                                                                                                      19


                                        0.00175                                                                                                                                       0.0035
                                                                                         0.0020                                        0.00175
0.0004                                  0.00150                                                                                        0.00150                                        0.0030
                                        0.00125                                          0.0015                                        0.00125                                        0.0025
0.0003
                                        0.00100                                                                                        0.00100                                        0.0020
                                        0.00075                                          0.0010                                                                                       0.0015
0.0002                                                                                                                                 0.00075
                                        0.00050                                                                                        0.00050                                        0.0010
0.0001                                                                                   0.0005
                                        0.00025                                                                                        0.00025                                        0.0005
0.0000                                  0.00000                                          0.0000                                        0.00000                                        0.0000
          0   2000 4000 6000 8000                 1000 500          0        500 1000                 500       0        500    1000                     0       500       1000                750 500 250    0    250


 0.0035                                               0.00150                                                       0.0014                                                  0.0014
 0.0030                                               0.00125                                                       0.0012                                                  0.0012
 0.0025                                                                                                             0.0010                                                  0.0010
                                                      0.00100
 0.0020                                                                                                             0.0008                                                  0.0008
                                                      0.00075
 0.0015                                                                                                             0.0006                                                  0.0006
                                                      0.00050                                                                                                               0.0004
 0.0010                                                                                                             0.0004
 0.0005                                               0.00025                                                       0.0002                                                  0.0002
 0.0000                                               0.00000                                                       0.0000                                                  0.0000
              500        250        0   250                              0          1000          2000                              1000         0       1000 2000                              0           2000


                                                       Figure 9: Histograms of models on Diamonds.


0.10                                     0.12                                           0.175
                                                                                                                                           0.7                                        1.2
                                                                                        0.150                                              0.6
0.08                                     0.10
                                                                                        0.125                                                                                         1.0
                                         0.08                                                                                              0.5
0.06                                                                                    0.100                                                                                         0.8
                                                                                                                                           0.4
                                         0.06                                                                                                                                         0.6
0.04                                                                                    0.075                                              0.3
                                         0.04                                           0.050                                                                                         0.4
                                                                                                                                           0.2
0.02                                     0.02                                           0.025                                              0.1                                        0.2
0.00                                     0.00                                           0.000                                              0.0                                        0.0
          0         10         20                 5     0       5       10    15   20             0         5       10         15                    0       2         4          6              0      1          2


                                                            Figure 10: Histograms of models on NBA.
7.7        Distribution of models for all datasets                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    20


                                                                   1.0                                                            0.5
   0.7                                                                                                                                                                                0.006
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0.005
   0.6                                                             0.8                                                            0.4                                                 0.005
   0.5                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0.004
                                                                   0.6                                                            0.3                                                 0.004
   0.4                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0.003
                                                                                                                                                                                      0.003
   0.3                                                             0.4                                                            0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                      0.002                                                       0.002
   0.2
                                                                   0.2                                                            0.1                                                 0.001                                                       0.001
   0.1
   0.0                                                             0.0                                                            0.0                                                 0.000                                                       0.000
               1         0         1         2       3                         1       0          1            2         3                   2          4          6        8                  400        200       0           200       400                 250             0     250       500
 0.008                                                                                                                                                                                 0.08
                                                                 0.012
 0.007                                                                                                                       0.012                                                     0.07                                                        400
 0.006                                                           0.010                                                       0.010                                                     0.06
 0.005                                                           0.008                                                                                                                 0.05                                                        300
                                                                                                                             0.008
 0.004                                                           0.006                                                                                                                 0.04
                                                                                                                             0.006                                                                                                                 200
 0.003                                                                                                                                                                                 0.03
                                                                 0.004                                                       0.004
 0.002                                                                                                                                                                                 0.02                                                        100
 0.001                                                           0.002                                                       0.002                                                     0.01
 0.000                                                           0.000                                                       0.000                                                     0.00                                                          0
                         200             0           200                           100                    0                                  100        50     0       50       100                      20                 0               20       0.002 0.004 0.006 0.008 0.010

 0.012                                                            0.30                                                       0.012                                                                                                                0.012
                                                                                                                                                                                      0.012
 0.010                                                            0.25                                                       0.010                                                                                                                0.010
                                                                                                                                                                                      0.010
 0.008                                                            0.20                                                       0.008                                                    0.008                                                       0.008
 0.006                                                            0.15                                                       0.006                                                    0.006                                                       0.006
 0.004                                                            0.10                                                       0.004                                                    0.004                                                       0.004
 0.002                                                            0.05                                                       0.002                                                    0.002                                                       0.002
 0.000                                                            0.00                                                       0.000                                                    0.000                                                       0.000
           150           100        50       0        50                 150          100             50            0                        200             100        0                           200             100               0                       300         200        100          0
 0.016                                                                                                                                                                                 0.12                                                       0.012
                                                                 0.014                                                       0.014
 0.014                                                                                                                                                                                 0.10
                                                                 0.012                                                       0.012                                                                                                                0.010
 0.012
                                                                 0.010                                                       0.010                                                     0.08                                                       0.008
 0.010
 0.008                                                           0.008                                                       0.008                                                     0.06                                                       0.006
 0.006                                                           0.006                                                       0.006
                                                                                                                                                                                       0.04                                                       0.004
 0.004                                                           0.004                                                       0.004
 0.002                                                           0.002                                                       0.002                                                     0.02                                                       0.002
 0.000                                                           0.000                                                       0.000                                                     0.00                                                       0.000
         400 200               0        200 400                          200         100          0                100                              100            0        100                    200        100       0           100     200                     200           100         0
                                                                 0.010                                                                                                                0.010
 0.175                                                                                                                        0.16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0.008
 0.150                                                           0.008                                                        0.14
                                                                                                                                                                                      0.008
                                                                                                                              0.12
 0.125                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0.006
                                                                 0.006                                                        0.10                                                    0.006
 0.100
                                                                                                                              0.08                                                                                                                0.004
 0.075                                                           0.004                                                                                                                0.004
                                                                                                                              0.06
 0.050                                                                                                                        0.04                                                                                                                0.002
                                                                 0.002                                                                                                                0.002
 0.025                                                                                                                        0.02
 0.000                                                           0.000                                                        0.00                                                    0.000                                                       0.000
         200                 100             0                                 200       100          0        100                                  100            0            100                200          100             0         100                         400               200           0


                                                                                Figure 11: Histograms of models on Beijing.


                                                                               0.12                                                                                                                                                   0.0012
  0.14                                                                                                                                                       0.0025
  0.12                                                                         0.10                                                                                                                                                   0.0010
                                                                                                                                                             0.0020
  0.10                                                                         0.08                                                                                                                                                   0.0008
  0.08                                                                         0.06                                                                          0.0015
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0.0006
  0.06                                                                                                                                                       0.0010
                                                                               0.04                                                                                                                                                   0.0004
  0.04
                                                                               0.02                                                                          0.0005                                                                   0.0002
  0.02
  0.00                                                                         0.00                                                                          0.0000                                                                   0.0000
                   20              10            0          10                               10            0        10       20         30         40                   1500 1000 500          0         500 1000 1500                            1000 500                0       500 1000 1500
0.0030                                                                                                                                                        0.012
                                                                           0.0020                                                                                                                                                     0.0010
0.0025                                                                                                                                                        0.010
                                                                           0.0015                                                                                                                                                     0.0008
0.0020                                                                                                                                                        0.008
0.0015                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0.0006
                                                                           0.0010                                                                             0.006
0.0010                                                                                                                                                        0.004                                                                   0.0004
                                                                           0.0005
0.0005                                                                                                                                                        0.002                                                                   0.0002
0.0000                                                                     0.0000                                                                             0.000                                                                   0.0000
                        1000             0           1000          2000                     1000 500                0    500 1000 1500                                 1000 500       0       500 1000 1500 2000                                          0               1000            2000


                                                                               Figure 12: Histograms of models on Garbage.
7.7           Distribution of models for all datasets                                                                                                                                                                                    21


                                                                                                                     2.0
4                                            5                                                                                                                10                                     4
                                                                               2.0
                                             4                                                                       1.5                                      8
3                                                                              1.5                                                                                                                   3
                                             3                                                                                                                6
                                                                                                                     1.0                                                                             2
2                                                                              1.0
                                             2                                                                                                                4
1                                                                              0.5                                   0.5                                                                             1
                                             1                                                                                                                2
0                                            0                                 0.0                                   0.0                                      0                                      0
            0.2         0.0     0.2    0.4          0.2   0.0        0.2             0.25 0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00           0.0         0.5      1.0                0.25 0.20 0.15 0.10 0.05 0.00       0.2       0.4       0.6       0.8

                                                                                               1.75                                                                                         0.6
                                                   1.0                                                                                         1.75
2.0                                                                                            1.50                                            1.50                                         0.5
                                                   0.8                                         1.25                                            1.25
1.5                                                                                                                                                                                         0.4
                                                   0.6                                         1.00                                            1.00
1.0                                                                                                                                                                                         0.3
                                                                                               0.75                                            0.75
                                                   0.4                                                                                                                                      0.2
                                                                                               0.50                                            0.50
0.5                                                0.2                                         0.25                                            0.25                                         0.1
0.0                                                0.0                                         0.00                                            0.00                                         0.0
      0.5         0.0         0.5     1.0    1.5                0          1           2              0.0    0.5       1.0         1.5                  0.5    0.0       0.5     1.0                     1     0         1    2    3         4


                                                                    Figure 13: Histograms of models on MLB.
