Q UANTIFYING AND M ITIGATING THE I MPACT OF L A -
BEL E RRORS ON M ODEL D ISPARITY M ETRICS

 Julius Adebayo                             Melissa Hall           Bowen Yu             Bobbie Chern
 Prescient Design / Genentech               Meta Inc.              Meta Inc.            Meta Inc.



                                                A BSTRACT

          Errors in labels obtained via human annotation adversely affect a model’s perfor-
          mance. Existing approaches propose ways to mitigate the effect of label error on a
          model’s downstream accuracy, yet little is known about its impact on a model’s
          disparity metrics1 . Here we study the effect of label error on a model’s disparity
          metrics. We empirically characterize how varying levels of label error, in both
          training and test data, affect these disparity metrics. We find that group calibration
          and other metrics are sensitive to train-time and test-time label error—particularly
          for minority groups. This disparate effect persists even for models trained with
          noise-aware algorithms. To mitigate the impact of training-time label error, we
          present an approach to estimate the influence of a training input’s label on a model’s
          group disparity metric. We empirically assess the proposed approach on a variety of
          datasets and find significant improvement, compared to alternative approaches, in
          identifying training inputs that improve a model’s disparity metric. We complement
          the approach with an automatic relabel-and-finetune scheme that produces updated
          models with, provably, improved group calibration error.


1    I NTRODUCTION

Label error (noise) — mistakes associated with the label assigned to a data point — is a pervasive
problem in machine learning (Northcutt et al., 2021). For example, 30 percent of a random 1000
samples from the Google Emotions dataset (Demszky et al., 2020) had label errors (Chen, 2022).
Similarly, an analysis of the MS COCO dataset found that up to 37 percent (273,834 errors) of all
annotations are erroneous (Murdoch, 2022). Yet, little is known about the effect of label error on a
model’s group-based disparity metrics like equal odds (Hardt et al., 2016), group calibration (Pleiss
et al., 2017), and false positive rate (Barocas et al., 2019).
It is now common practice to conduct ‘fairness’ audits (see: (Buolamwini and Gebru, 2018; Raji and
Buolamwini, 2019; Bakalar et al., 2021)) of a model’s predictions to identify data subgroups where
the model underperforms. Label error in the test data used to conduct a fairness audit renders the
results unreliable. Similarly, label error in the training data, especially if the error is systematically
more prevalent in certain groups, can lead to models that associate erroneous labels to such groups.
The reliability of a fairness audit rests on the assumption that labels are accurate; yet, the sensi-
tivity of a model’s disparity metrics to label error is still poorly understood. Towards such end, we ask:

                     what is the effect of label error on a model’s disparity metric?
We address the high-level question in a two-pronged manner via the following questions:

      1. Research Question 1: What is the sensitivity of a model’s disparity metric to label errors in
         training and test data? Does the effect of label error vary based on group size?
      2. Research Question 2: How can a practitioner identify training points whose labels have the
         most influence on a model’s group disparity metric?
   1
     Group-based disparity metrics like subgroup calibration, false positive rate, false negative rate, equalized
odds, and equal opportunity are more often known, colloquially, as fairness metrics in the literature. We use the
term group-based disparity metrics in this work.


                                                       1
C ONTRIBUTIONS & S UMMARY OF F INDINGS


Figure 1: A schematic of the test and train-time empirical sensitivity tests. Here we show the
model training and fairness audit pipeline. Our proposed sensitivity tests capture the effect of label
error, in both stages, on the disparity metric. In the Test-time sensitivity test, we flip the label of a
portion of the test data and then compare the corresponding disparity metric (group calibration for
example) for the flipped dataset to the metrics for a standard model where the test labels were not
flipped. In the Train-time sensitivity test, we flip the labels of a portion of the training set, and then
measure the change in disparity metric to a standard model.


In addressing these questions, we make two broad contributions:
Empirical Sensitivity Tests. We assess the sensitivity of model disparity metrics to label errors with
a label flipping experiment. First, we iteratively flip the labels of samples in the test set, for a fixed
model, and then measure the corresponding change in the model disparity metric compared to an
unflipped test set. Second, we fix the test set for the fairness audit but flip the labels of a proportion of
the training samples. We then measure the change in the model disparity metrics for a model trained
on the data with flipped labels. We perform these tests across a datasets and model combinations.
Training Point Influence on Disparity Metric. We propose an approach, based on a modification
to the influence of a training example on a test example’s loss, to identify training points whose
labels have undue effects on any disparity metric of interest on the test set. We empirically assess the
proposed approach on a variety of datasets and find a 10-40% improvement, compared to alternative
approaches that focus solely on model’s loss, in identifying training inputs that improve a model’s
disparity metric.


2    S ETUP & BACKGROUND

In this section, we discuss notation, and set the stage for our contributions by discussing the disparity
metrics that we focus on. We also provide an overview of the datasets and models used in the
experimental portions of the paper.2
Overview of Notation. We consider prediction problems, i.e, settings where the task is to learn
a mapping, θ : X × A → Y, where X ∈ Rd is the feature space, Y ∈ {0, 1} is the output space,
and A is a group identifier that partitions the population into disjoint sets e.g. race, gender. We can
represent the tuple (xi , ai , yi ) as zi . Consequently, the n training points can be written as: {zi }ni=1 .
Throughout this work, we will only consider learning via empirical risk minimization (ERM), which
                                            Pn
corresponds to: θ̂ := arg minθ∈Θ n1 i ℓ(zi , θ). Similar to Koh and Liang (2017), we will assume
that the ERM objective is twice-differentiable and strictly convex in the parameters. We focus on
binary classification tasks, however, our analysis can be easily generalized.
Disparity Metrics. We define a group disparity metric to be a function, GD, that gives a performance
score given a model’s probabilistic predictions (θ outputs the probability of belonging to the positive
class) and ‘ground-truth’ labels. We consider the following metrics (We refer readers to the Appendix
for a detailed overview of these metrics):

    2
      We refer readers to the longer version of this work on the arxiv. Code to replicate our findings is available
at: https://github.com/adebayoj/influencedisparity


                                                        2
    Dataset                 Classes             n         d      Group    Source
    CivilComments                 2   1, 820, 000       768         Sex   Koh and Liang (2017)
    ACSIncome                     2      195, 665        10   Sex, Race   Ding et al. (2021)
    ACSEmployment                 2      378, 817        16   Sex, Race   Ding et al. (2021)
    ACSPublic Coverage            2      138, 554        19   Sex, Race   Ding et al. (2021)
    Credit Dataset                2      405, 032         6         Sex   De Montjoye et al. (2015)

        Table 1: Overview of dataset characteristics for the datasets considered in this work.


       1. Calibration: defined as P (ŷ = y|p̂ = p) , ∀p ∈ [0, 1]. In this work, we measure calibration
          with two different metrics: 1) Expected Calibration Error (ECE) (Naeini et al., 2015; Pleiss
          et al., 2017), and 2) the Brier Score (Rufibach, 2010) (BS).
       2. (Generalized) False Positive Rate (FPR): is GDfpr (θ) = E[θ(xi ) | yi = 0] (see Guo et al.
          (2017)),
       3. (Generalized) False Negative Rate (FNR): is GDfnr (θ) = E[(1 − θ(xi )) | yi = 1],
       4. Error Rate (ER): is the GDer (θ) = 1 − acc(θ).

We consider these metrics separately for each group as opposed to relative differences. For each
dataset, we consider the protected data subgroup with the largest size as the majority group, and the
group the smallest size is the minority group.
Datasets. We consider datasets across different modalities: 4 tabular, and a text dataset. A description
of these datasets along with test accuracy is provided in Table 2. Each dataset contains annotations
with a group label for both training and test data, so we are able to manipulate these labels for our
empirical sensitivity tests. For the purposes of this work, we assume that the provided labels are
the ground-truth—a strong assumption that nevertheless does not impact the interpretation of our
findings.
Model. We consider three kinds of model classes in this work: 1) a logistic regression model, 2) a
Gradient-boosted Tree (GBT) classifier for the tabular datasets, and 3) a ResNet-18 model. We only
consider the logistic regression and GBT models for tabular data, while we fine-tune a ResNet-18
model on embeddings for the text data.

3     E MPIRICAL A SSESSMENT OF L ABEL S ENSITIVITY
In this section, we perform empirical sensitivity tests to quantify the impact of label error on test
group disparity metrics. We conduct tests on data from two different stages of the ML pipeline: 1)
Test-time (test dataset) and 2) Training-time (training data). We use as our primary experimental tool:
label flipping, i.e., we flip the labels of a percentage of the samples, uniformly at random in either
the test or training set, and then measure the concomitant change in the model disparity metric. We
assume that each dataset’s labels are the ground truth and that flipping the label results in label error
for the samples whose labels have been overturned. Recent literature has termed this setting synthetic
noise, i.e., the label flipping simulates noise that might not be representative of real-world noise in
labels (Arpit et al., 2017; Zhang et al., 2021; Jiang et al., 2020).

3.1    S ENSITIVITY TO T EST- TIME L ABEL E RROR

Overview & Experimental Setup. The goal of the test-time empirical test is to measure the impact
of label error on the group calibration error of a fixed model. Consider the setting where a model
has been trained, and a fairness assessment is to be conducted on the model. What impact does label
error, in the test set used to conduct the audit, have on the calibration error on the test data? The
test-time empirical tests answer this question. Given a fixed model, we iteratively flip a percentage of
the labels, uniformly at random, ranging from zero to 30 percent in the test data. We then estimate the
model’s calibration using the modified dataset. Critically, we keep the model fixed while performing
these tests across each dataset.
Results. In Figure 2, we report results of the label flipping experiments across 6 tasks. On the
horizontal axis, we have the percentage of labels flipped in the test dataset, while on the vertical


                                                    3
Figure 2: Test-time Label Flipping Results across. For each dataset, we plot the percent change
in calibration error versus the corresponding percentage change in label error. Here, we plot the
minority (smallest) group as well as the majority (largest) group. These two groups represent two
ends of the spectrum for the impact of label error. We observe that across all datasets, the minority
group incurs higher percentage change in group calibration compared to the majority group.


axis, we have the percentage change in the model’s calibration. For each dataset, we compute model
calibration for two demographic groups in the dataset, the majority and the minority—in size–groups.
We do this since these two groups constitute the two ends of the spectrum in the dataset. As shown,
we observe a more distinctive effect for the minority group across all datasets. This is to be expected
since flipping even a small number samples in the minority group can have a dramatic effect on test
and training accuracy within this group. For both groups, we observe a changes to the calibration
error. For example, for the Income prediction task on the Adult dataset, a 10 percent label error
induces at least a 20 percent change in the model’s test calibration error. These results suggest that
test-time label error has more pronounced effects for minority groups. Similarly, we observe for
other disparity metrics (See Appendix) across all model classes that increases in percentage of labels
flipped disproportionately affects the minority group.


3.2   S ENSITIVITY TO T RAINING L ABEL E RROR

Overview & Experimental Setup. The goal of the training-time empirical tests is to measure the
impact of label error on a trained model. More specifically, given a training set in which a fraction of
the samples’ labels have been flipped, what effect does the label error have on the calibration error
compared to a model trained on data without label error? We simulate this setting by creating multiple
copies of each of the datasets where a percentage of the training labels have been flipped uniformly
at random. We then assess the model calibration of these different model using the same fixed test
dataset. Under similar experimental training conditions for these models, we are then able to quantify
the effect of training label error on a model’s test calibration error. We conduct this analysis across
all dataset-model task pairs.
Results & Implications. We show the results of the training-time experiments in Figure 3. Similar
to the test-time experiments, we find minority groups are more sensitive to label error than larger
groups. Specifically, we find that even a 5 percent label error can induce significant changes in the
disparity metrics, of a model trained on such data, for these groups.
A conjecture for the higher sensitivity to extreme training-time error is that a model trained on
significant label error might have a more difficult time learning patterns in the minority class where
there are not enough samples to begin with. Consequently, the generalization performance of this
model worsens for inputs that belong to the minority group. Alternatively, in the majority group, the
proportion of corrupted labels due to label error is smaller. This might mean that uniform flipping
does not affect the proportion of true labels compared to the minority group. Even though the majority
group exhibits label error, there still exists enough samples with true labels such that a model can
learn the underlying signal for the majority class.


                                                   4
Figure 3: Training-time Label Flipping Results. For each dataset, we plot the percent change in
calibration error versus the corresponding percentage change in label error for the training set. Here,
we plot the minority (smallest) group as well as the majority (largest) groups by size. Similar to the
test-time setting, we observe that across all datasets, the minority group incurs higher percentage
change in group calibration compared to the majority group. However, we observe a larger magnitude
change for the minority groups.



A second important finding is that overparameterization seems to confer more resilience to training
label error. We find that for the same levels of training label error, an overparametrized model is less
sensitive to such change compared to a model with a smaller number of parameters. Recent work
suggests that models that learn functions that are more aligned with the underlying target function of
the data generation process are more resilient to training label error (Li et al., 2021). It might be that
compared to linear and tree-based models, an overparametrized deep net is more capable of learning
an aligned function.



3.3   N OISE -AWARE ROBUST L EARNING HAS D ISPARATE I MPACT

Overview & Experimental Setup. We now assess whether training
models with noise-aware algorithmic interventions (e.g. robust loss
functions (Ma et al., 2020; Ghosh et al., 2017)) results in models
whose disparity metrics have reduced sensitivity to label error in the
training set. We test this hypothesis on a modified Cifar-10 dataset
following the setting of Hall et al. (2022). Specifically, the Cifar-
10 dataset is modified to a binary classification setting along with
group labels by inverting a subset of each class’s examples. Given
a specified parameter ϵ ∈ [0, 1/2], a 12 − ϵ of the negative class is
inverted, while a 12 + ϵ of the positive class is inverted leading to Figure 4: Effect of Noise-
2ϵ fraction of one group of samples and 1 − 2ϵ of the other group. aware algorithms on group
In all experiments we set ϵ = 0.15 for a 30 percent minority group calibration.
membership. We replicate the label flipping experiment on the task
with a Resnet-18 model. We test the MEIDTM (Cheng et al., 2022), DivideMix (Li et al., 2020), and
a robust loss approach (Ghosh et al., 2017).
Results. At a high level, for the majority group, we find that group calibration remains resilient
to low rates of label error (below 25 percent). At high rates (>30 percent label error), we start to
see increased sensitivity. However, for the minority group (30 percent of the dataset), we observe
group calibration remains sensitive to label error even at low levels. This finding suggests that
noise-aware methods show are more effective for larger groups in the data. A similar observation
has also been made for other algorithmic interventions like Pruning (Tran et al., 2022; Hooker et al.,
2019), differential privacy (Bagdasaryan et al., 2019), selective classification (Jones et al., 2020) and
adversarial training (Xu et al., 2021).


                                                    5
4    I NFLUENCE OF T RAINING L ABEL ON T EST D ISPARITY M ETRIC
We now present an approach for estimating the ‘influence’ of perturbing a training point’s label on
a disparity metric of interest. We consider: 1) up-weighting a training point, and 2) perturbing the
training label.
 Upweighting a training point. Let θ̂−zi be the ERM solution when a model is trained on all data
 points, {zj }nj=1 , except zi . The influence, Iup,params , of datapoint, zi , on the model parameters is
 then defined: θ̂−zi − θ̂. This measure indicates how much the parameters change when the model is
‘refit’ on all training data points except zi . Koh and Liang (2017) give a closed-form estimate of this
 quantity as:


                                              def dθ̂ϵ, zi
                             Iup,params =                           = −Hθ̂−1 ∇θ ℓ(zi , θ̂),                 (1)
                                                    dϵ       ϵ=0
                                        def   Pn
where H is the hessian, i.e., Hθ̂ = n1                2
                                                 i=1 ∇θ ℓ(zi , θ).

The loss on a test example, ℓ(zt , θ̂), is a function of the model parameters, so using the chain-rule,
we can estimate the influence, Iup,loss (zi , zt ), of a training point, zi , on ℓ(zt , θ̂) as:


                                  def dℓ(zt , θ̂ϵ, zi )
                Iup,loss (zi , zt ) =                              = −∇θ ℓ(zt , θ̂)⊤ Hθ̂−1 ∇θ ℓ(zi , θ̂).   (2)
                                               dϵ            ϵ=0

Perturbing a training point’s label. A second notion of influence that Koh and Liang (2017) study
is how perturbing a training point leads to changes in the model parameters. Specifically, given a
training input, zi , that is a tuple (xi , yi ), how would the perturbation, zi → zi,δ , which is defined as
(xi , yi ) → (xi , yi + δ), change the model’s predictions? Koh and Liang (2017) give a closed-form
estimate of this quantity as:


                    Ipert,loss,y (zj , zt ) ≈ −∇θ ℓ(zt , θ̂zj,δ ,−zj )⊤ Hθ̂−1 ∇y ∇θ ℓ(zj , θ̂).             (3)

Adapting influence functions to group disparity metrics. We now propose modifications that
allow us to compute the influence of a training point on a test group disparity metric (See Appendix D
for longer discussion). Let St be a set of test examples. We can then denote GD(St , θ̂) as the group
disparity metric of interest, e.g., the estimated ECE for the set St given parameter setting θ̂.
Influence of upweighting a training point on a test group disparity metric. A group disparity
metric on the test set is a function of the model parameters; consequently, we can apply the chain rule
to Iup,params (from Equation 1) to estimate the influence, Iup,disparity , of up-weighting a training
point on the disparity metric as follows:
                                    def dGD(St , θ̂ϵ, zi )                                     dθ̂ϵ, zi
            Iup,disparity (zi , St ) =                                   = −∇θ GD(St , θ̂)⊤             ,
                                                    dϵ             ϵ=0                           dϵ ϵ=0
                                    = −∇θ GD(St , θ̂)⊤ Hθ̂−1 ∇θ ℓ(zi , θ̂).                                 (4)
We now have a closed-form expression for a training point’s influence on a test group disparity metric.
Influence of perturbing a training point’s label on a test group disparity metric. We now consider
the influence of a training label perturbation on a group disparity metric of interest. To do this, we
simply consider the group disparity metric function as the quantity of interest instead of the test loss.
Consequently, the closed-form expression for the influence of a modification to the training label on
disparity for a given test set is:


                    Ipert,disparity,y (zj , St ) ≈ −∇θ GD(St , θ̂)⊤ Hθ̂−1 ∇y ∇θ ℓ(zj , θ̂).                 (5)

With Equations 4 and 5, we have the key quantities of interest that allows us to rank training points,
in terms of influence, on the test group disparity metric.


                                                              6
5                               I DENTIFYING AND C ORRECTING T RAINING L ABEL E RROR

In this section, we empirically assess the modified influence expressions for calibration across these
datasets for prioritizing mislabelled samples. We find that the prioritization scheme shows improve-
ment, compared to alternative approaches. In addition, we propose an approach to automatically
correct the labels identified by our proposed approach.

5.1                             I DENTIFYING L ABEL E RROR

Overview & Experimental Question. We are interested in surfacing training points whose change
in label will induce a concomitant change in a test disparity metric like group calibration. Specifically,
we ask: When the training points are ranked by influence on test calibration, are the most highly
influential training points most likely to have the wrong labels? We conduct our experiments to
directly measure a method’s ability to answer this question.
Experimental Setup. For each dataset, we randomly flip the labels of 10 − 30 percent of the training
samples. We then train on this modified dataset. In this task, we have direct access to the ground-truth
of the exact samples whose labels were flipped. This allows us to directly compare the performance
of our proposed methods to each of the baselines on this task. We then rank training points using
a number of baseline approaches as well as the modified influence approaches. For the top 50
examples, we consider what fraction of these examples had flipped labels in the training set. We
discuss additional experimental details in the Appendix.
Approaches & Baselines. We consider the following methods: 1) IF-Calib: The closed-form
approximation to the influence of a training point on the test calibration; 2) IF-Calib-Label: The
closed-form approximation to the influence of a training point’s label on the test calibration; 3) Loss:
A baseline method which is the training loss evaluated at each data point in the training set. The
intuition is that, presumably, more difficult training samples will have higher training loss. We also
consider several additional baselines that we discuss in the Appendix.
 Proportion of Flipped Labels
 Proportion of Flipped Labels


Figure 5: Empirical Results for Training Point Ranking Across 6 datasets. For the top 50 most
influential examples, we show the proportion of samples whose labels were flipped in the training
data.

Results: Prioritizing Samples. In Figure 5, we show the performance of the two approximations
that we consider in this work as well as two baselines. We plot the fraction of inputs, out of the
top ranked 50 ranked training points, whose labels were flipped in the training set. The higher this
proportion, then the more effective an approach is in identifying the samples that likely have wrong
labels. In practice, the goal is to surface these training samples and have a domain expert inspect
them. If a larger proportion of the items to be inspected are mislabeled, then a higher proportion of
training set mistakes, i.e. label error, can be fixed. Across the different datasets, we find a 10-40
percent improvement, compared to baseline approaches, in identifying critical training data points
whose labels need to be reexamined.


                                                              7
We find the loss baseline to be ineffective for ranking in our experiments. A possible reason is that
modern machine learning models can typically be trained to ‘memorize’ the training data; resulting
in settings where a model has low loss even on outliers or mislabeled examples. In such a case,
ranking by training loss for a sample is an ineffective ranking strategy. We find that the noise-aware
approaches perform similarly to the IF-Norm baseline. We defer the results of the uncertainty-based
baselines and the noise-aware methods to Appendix (Section F). We find that these baselines also
underperform our proposed approaches.

5.2   C ORRECTING L ABEL E RROR

We take label error identification one step further to automatically relabelling inputs that have
identified as critical. We restrict our focus to binary classification where the label set is {0, 1}, and
the corresponding relabelling function is simply 1 − yi , where yi is the predicted label.
Setup & Experiment: We consider the logistic regression model across all tasks for a setting with
20 percent training label error. We consider calibration as the disparity function of interest. We then
rank the top 20 percent of training points by label-disparity influence, our proposed approach. For
these points, we apply the relabelling function, and then fine-tune the model for an additional epoch
with the modified labels.
Results: First, we observe an improvement, in group calibration, across all groups, with larger
improvement coming from the smallest group. As expected, we also observe a decrease in the average
loss for the overall training set. These results point to increasing promise of automatic relabeling.
Theoretical Justification. We now present a theorem that suggests that the influence priorization and
relabeling scheme described above provably leads to better calibrated models.
Theorem 1. Given a κ-strongly convex loss function ℓ(., .), with κ > 0, a training dataset, D, where
A indexes the data groups, and a model, θ̂ : xi → yi , optimized via ℓ(., .) that maps inputs to labels.
Let Q be a set of test examples all belonging to group A = a, where ECalQ (θ̂) is the expected
calibration error of θ̂ on the set Q. In addition, let DA=a be the set of problematic training examples,
belonging to group a, prioritized based on influence, i.e., Ipert,calib,yi (xia , Q) > 0. We term a model
trained on a different training set (D+ ) where the problematic examples have been relabeled to be
θ̂R . Analogously, the expected calibration error of this new model on the set Q is ECalQ (θ̂R ). We
have that:

                                       ECalQ (θ̂R ) ≤ ECalQ (θ̂).

We defer the proof to the Appendix. Theorem 1 suggests that when a model is trained on a relabeled
dataset, following the influence prioritization scheme, the expected group calibration of the retrained
model should be lower than that of a model trained on a dataset that has not been relabeled.

6     R ELATED W ORK
We discuss directly related work here, and defer a longer discussion to Section A of the Appendix.
Impact of Label Error/Noise on Model Accuracy. Learning under label error falls under the
category more commonly known as learning under noise (Frénay and Verleysen, 2013; Natarajan
et al., 2013; Bootkrajang and Kabán, 2012). Noise in learning can come from different either input
features or the labels. In this work, we focus on label error—categorization mistakes associated with
the label in both the test and training data. Previous work focused primarily on the effect of label error
in the training data; however, we advance this line of work to investigate the effect of label error in the
test data used to conduct a fairness audit on the reliability of the audit. Model resilience to training
label error has been studied for both synthetic (Arpit et al., 2017; Zhang et al., 2021; Rolnick et al.,
2017) and real-world noise settings (Jiang et al., 2020). A major line of inquiry is the development
of algorithmic approaches to learn accurate models given a training set with noisy labels. These
approaches include model regularization (Srivastava et al., 2014; Zhang et al., 2017), bootstrap (Reed
et al., 2014), knowledge distillation (Jiang et al., 2020), instance weighting (Ren et al., 2018; Jiang and
Nachum, 2020), robust loss functions (Ma et al., 2020; Ghosh et al., 2017), or trusted data (Hendrycks
et al., 2018), joint training (Wei et al., 2020), mixture models in semi-supervised learning (Li et al.,


                                                    8
2020), and methods to learn a transition matrix that captures noise dependencies (Cheng et al., 2022).
In contrast to this line of work, we primarily seek to identify the problematic instances that need to be
relabelled, often by a human labeler, and not automatically learn a model that is robust to label error.
Impact of Label Error on Model ‘Fairness’. This work contributes to the burgeoning area that
studies the impact of label error on a model’s ‘fairness’ (termed ‘group-based disparity’ in this paper)
metrics. Fogliato et al. (2020) studied a setting in which the labels used for model training are a noisy
proxy for the true label of interest, e.g., predicting rearrest as a proxy for rearrest. Wang et al. (2021)
considers an ERM problem subject to group disparity constraints with group-dependent label noise,
and provides theoretical results along with a scheme to obtain classifiers that are robust to noise.
Different from their setting, we consider unconstrained ERM (no fairness constraints during learning).
Similarly, Konstantinov and Lampert (2021) study the effect of adversarial data corruptions on fair
learning in a PAC model. Jiang and Nachum (2020) propose a re-weighting scheme that is able to
correct for label noise.
Influence Functions & Their Uses. Influence functions originate from robust statistics where it is
used as a tool to identify outliers (Cook and Weisberg, 1982; Cook, 1986; Hampel, 1974). Koh and
Liang (2017) introduced influence functions for modern machine learning models, and used them for
various model debugging tasks. Most similar to our work, Sattigeri et al. (2022) and Li and Liu (2022)
also consider the influence of a training point on model’s disparity metric, and present intriguing
results that demonstrate that reweighting training samples can improve a model’s disparity metrics.
Here, we focus specifically on the role of mislabeled examples; however, our goal aligns with theirs.
Similarly, Kong et al. (2021) propose RDIA, a relabelling scheme based on the influence function
that is able to provably correct for label error in the training data. RDIA identifies training samples
that have a high influence on the test loss for a validation set; however, we focus on identifying
training samples that influence a group-disparity metric on a test/audit set. We also rely on their
technical results to prove Theorem 1.
In recent work, De-Arteaga et al. (2021) study expert consistency in data labeling and use influence
functions to estimate the impact of labelers on a model’s predictions. Along similar direction, Brunet
et al. (2019) adapt the influence function approach to measure how removing a small part of a training
corpus, in a word embedding task, affects test bias as measured by the word embedding association
test Caliskan et al. (2017). Feldman and Zhang (2020) use influence functions to estimate how likely
a training point is to have been memorized by a model. More generally, influence functions are
gaining widespread use as a tool for debugging model predictions (Barshan et al., 2020; Han et al.,
2020; Yeh et al., 2018; Pruthi et al., 2020). Different from these uses of influence functions, here we
isolate the effect of a training point’s label on a model’s disparity metric on a audit data.



7    C ONCLUSION

In this paper, we sought to address two key questions: 1) What is the impact of label error on
a model’s group disparity metric, especially for smaller groups in the data; and 2) How can a
practitioner identify training samples whose labels would also lead to a significant change in the test
disparity metric of interest? We find that disparity metrics are, indeed, sensitive to test and training
time label error particularly for minority groups in the data. In addition, we present an approach for
estimating the ‘influence’ of perturbing a training point’s label on a disparity metric of interest, and
find a 10-40% improvement, compared to alternative approaches, in identifying training inputs that
improve a model’s disparity metric. We present an approach to estimate the effect of a training input’s
label on a model’s group disparity metric. Lastly, perform a simple automatic relabel-and-finetune
scheme that produces updated models with, provably, improved group calibration error.
Our findings come with certain limitations. In this work, we focused on the influence of label error
on disparity metrics. However, other components of the ML pipeline can also impact downstream
model performance. The proposed empirical tests simulate the impact of label error; however, it
might be the case that real-world label error is less pernicious to model learning dynamics than the
synthetic flipping results suggest. Ultimately, we see our work as helping to provide insight and as an
additional tool for practitioners seeking to address the challenge of label error particularly in relation
to a disparity metric of interest.


                                                    9
R EFERENCES
Devansh Arpit, Stanisław Jastrz˛ebski, Nicolas Ballas, David Krueger, Emmanuel Bengio, Maxinder S
  Kanwal, Tegan Maharaj, Asja Fischer, Aaron Courville, Yoshua Bengio, et al. A closer look
  at memorization in deep networks. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pages
  233–242. PMLR, 2017.
Eugene Bagdasaryan, Omid Poursaeed, and Vitaly Shmatikov. Differential privacy has disparate
  impact on model accuracy. Advances in neural information processing systems, 32, 2019.
Chloé Bakalar, Renata Barreto, Stevie Bergman, Miranda Bogen, Bobbie Chern, Sam Corbett-Davies,
  Melissa Hall, Isabel Kloumann, Michelle Lam, Joaquin Quiñonero Candela, et al. Fairness on
  the ground: Applying algorithmic fairness approaches to production systems. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2103.06172, 2021.
Solon Barocas, Moritz Hardt, and Arvind Narayanan. Fairness and Machine Learning. fairml-
  book.org, 2019. http://www.fairmlbook.org.
Elnaz Barshan, Marc-Etienne Brunet, and Gintare Karolina Dziugaite. Relatif: Identifying explanatory
  training samples via relative influence. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and
  Statistics, pages 1899–1909. PMLR, 2020.
Jakramate Bootkrajang and Ata Kabán. Label-noise robust logistic regression and its applications.
  In Joint European conference on machine learning and knowledge discovery in databases, pages
  143–158. Springer, 2012.
Marc-Etienne Brunet, Colleen Alkalay-Houlihan, Ashton Anderson, and Richard Zemel. Understand-
 ing the origins of bias in word embeddings. In International Conference on Machine Learning,
 pages 803–811. PMLR, 2019.
Joy Buolamwini and Timnit Gebru. Gender shades: Intersectional accuracy disparities in commercial
  gender classification. In Conference on fairness, accountability and transparency, pages 77–91.
  PMLR, 2018.
Aylin Caliskan, Joanna J Bryson, and Arvind Narayanan. Semantics derived automatically from
  language corpora contain human-like biases. Science, 356(6334):183–186, 2017.
Edwin      Chen.       30%  of   google’s    emotions  dataset is  mis-
  labeled,       2022.         URL        https://www.surgehq.ai/blog/
  30-percent-of-googles-reddit-emotions-dataset-is-mislabeled.
De Cheng, Tongliang Liu, Yixiong Ning, Nannan Wang, Bo Han, Gang Niu, Xinbo Gao, and
  Masashi Sugiyama. Instance-dependent label-noise learning with manifold-regularized transition
  matrix estimation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
  Recognition, pages 16630–16639, 2022.
Alexis Conneau, Kartikay Khandelwal, Naman Goyal, Vishrav Chaudhary, Guillaume Wenzek, Fran-
  cisco Guzmán, Edouard Grave, Myle Ott, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Veselin Stoyanov. Unsupervised
  cross-lingual representation learning at scale. arXiv preprint arXiv:1911.02116, 2019.
R Dennis Cook. Assessment of local influence. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series B
  (Methodological), 48(2):133–155, 1986.
R Dennis Cook and Sanford Weisberg. Residuals and influence in regression. New York: Chapman
  and Hall, 1982.
Elliot Creager, Jörn-Henrik Jacobsen, and Richard Zemel. Environment inference for invariant
  learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pages 2189–2200. PMLR, 2021.
Maria De-Arteaga, Artur Dubrawski, and Alexandra Chouldechova. Leveraging expert consistency
 to improve algorithmic decision support. arXiv preprint arXiv:2101.09648, 2021.
Yves-Alexandre De Montjoye, Laura Radaelli, Vivek Kumar Singh, and Alex “Sandy” Pentland.
  Unique in the shopping mall: On the reidentifiability of credit card metadata. Science, 347(6221):
  536–539, 2015.


                                                 10
Dorottya Demszky, Dana Movshovitz-Attias, Jeongwoo Ko, Alan Cowen, Gaurav Nemade, and
  Sujith Ravi. Goemotions: A dataset of fine-grained emotions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.00547,
  2020.
Frances Ding, Moritz Hardt, John Miller, and Ludwig Schmidt. Retiring adult: New datasets for fair
  machine learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34, 2021.
Vitaly Feldman and Chiyuan Zhang. What neural networks memorize and why: Discovering the long
  tail via influence estimation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2008.03703, 2020.
Riccardo Fogliato, Alexandra Chouldechova, and Max G’Sell. Fairness evaluation in presence of
  biased noisy labels. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pages
  2325–2336. PMLR, 2020.
Benoît Frénay and Michel Verleysen. Classification in the presence of label noise: a survey. IEEE
  transactions on neural networks and learning systems, 25(5):845–869, 2013.
Aritra Ghosh, Himanshu Kumar, and PS Sastry. Robust loss functions under label noise for deep
  neural networks. In Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence, volume 31,
  2017.
Chuan Guo, Geoff Pleiss, Yu Sun, and Kilian Q Weinberger. On calibration of modern neural
  networks. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pages 1321–1330. PMLR, 2017.
Melissa Hall, Laurens van der Maaten, Laura Gustafson, and Aaron Adcock. A systematic study of
 bias amplification. arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.11706, 2022.
Frank R Hampel. The influence curve and its role in robust estimation. Journal of the american
  statistical association, 69(346):383–393, 1974.
Xiaochuang Han, Byron C Wallace, and Yulia Tsvetkov. Explaining black box predictions and
  unveiling data artifacts through influence functions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.06676, 2020.
Moritz Hardt, Eric Price, and Nati Srebro. Equality of opportunity in supervised learning. Advances
 in neural information processing systems, 29:3315–3323, 2016.
Dan Hendrycks, Mantas Mazeika, Duncan Wilson, and Kevin Gimpel. Using trusted data to train
  deep networks on labels corrupted by severe noise. Advances in neural information processing
  systems, 31, 2018.
Sara Hooker, Aaron Courville, Gregory Clark, Yann Dauphin, and Andrea Frome. What do com-
  pressed deep neural networks forget? arXiv preprint arXiv:1911.05248, 2019.
Heinrich Jiang and Ofir Nachum. Identifying and correcting label bias in machine learning. In
  International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pages 702–712. PMLR, 2020.
Lu Jiang, Di Huang, Mason Liu, and Weilong Yang. Beyond synthetic noise: Deep learning on
  controlled noisy labels. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pages 4804–4815.
  PMLR, 2020.
Erik Jones, Shiori Sagawa, Pang Wei Koh, Ananya Kumar, and Percy Liang. Selective classification
  can magnify disparities across groups. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.14134, 2020.
Michael P Kim, Amirata Ghorbani, and James Zou. Multiaccuracy: Black-box post-processing for
 fairness in classification. In Proceedings of the 2019 AAAI/ACM Conference on AI, Ethics, and
 Society, pages 247–254, 2019.
Pang Wei Koh and Percy Liang. Understanding black-box predictions via influence functions. In
  International Conference on Machine Learning, pages 1885–1894. PMLR, 2017.
Shuming Kong, Yanyan Shen, and Linpeng Huang. Resolving training biases via influence-based
  data relabeling. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2021.
Nikola Konstantinov and Christoph H Lampert. Fairness-aware pac learning from corrupted data.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2102.06004, 2021.


                                                11
Fabian Küppers, Jan Kronenberger, Amirhossein Shantia, and Anselm Haselhoff. Multivariate
  confidence calibration for object detection. In The IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
  Pattern Recognition (CVPR) Workshops, June 2020.
Jingling Li, Mozhi Zhang, Keyulu Xu, John Dickerson, and Jimmy Ba. How does a neural network’s
   architecture impact its robustness to noisy labels? Advances in Neural Information Processing
   Systems, 34:9788–9803, 2021.
Junnan Li, Richard Socher, and Steven CH Hoi. Dividemix: Learning with noisy labels as semi-
  supervised learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.07394, 2020.
Peizhao Li and Hongfu Liu. Achieving fairness at no utility cost via data reweighing with influence.
  In International Conference on Machine Learning, pages 12917–12930. PMLR, 2022.
Lydia T Liu, Max Simchowitz, and Moritz Hardt. The implicit fairness criterion of unconstrained
  learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pages 4051–4060. PMLR, 2019.
Xingjun Ma, Hanxun Huang, Yisen Wang, Simone Romano, Sarah Erfani, and James Bailey. Normal-
  ized loss functions for deep learning with noisy labels. In International Conference on Machine
  Learning, pages 6543–6553. PMLR, 2020.
Edwin   Murdoch.      How   i  found   nearly 300,000 errors in  ms
  coco,    2022.           URL     https://medium.com/@jamie_34747/
  how-i-found-nearly-300-000-errors-in-ms-coco-79d382edf22b.
Mahdi Pakdaman Naeini, Gregory Cooper, and Milos Hauskrecht. Obtaining well calibrated prob-
 abilities using bayesian binning. In Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence,
 2015.
Nagarajan Natarajan, Inderjit S Dhillon, Pradeep K Ravikumar, and Ambuj Tewari. Learning with
  noisy labels. Advances in neural information processing systems, 26:1196–1204, 2013.
Curtis G Northcutt, Anish Athalye, and Jonas Mueller. Pervasive label errors in test sets destabilize
  machine learning benchmarks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2103.14749, 2021.
Geoff Pleiss, Manish Raghavan, Felix Wu, Jon Kleinberg, and Kilian Q Weinberger. On fairness and
  calibration. arXiv preprint arXiv:1709.02012, 2017.
Romila Pradhan, Jiongli Zhu, Boris Glavic, and Babak Salimi. Interpretable data-based explanations
  for fairness debugging. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.09745, 2021.
Garima Pruthi, Frederick Liu, Mukund Sundararajan, and Satyen Kale. Estimating training data
  influence by tracing gradient descent. arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.08484, 2020.
Inioluwa Deborah Raji and Joy Buolamwini. Actionable auditing: Investigating the impact of
   publicly naming biased performance results of commercial ai products. In Proceedings of the 2019
  AAAI/ACM Conference on AI, Ethics, and Society, pages 429–435, 2019.
Scott Reed, Honglak Lee, Dragomir Anguelov, Christian Szegedy, Dumitru Erhan, and Andrew
  Rabinovich. Training deep neural networks on noisy labels with bootstrapping. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1412.6596, 2014.
Mengye Ren, Wenyuan Zeng, Bin Yang, and Raquel Urtasun. Learning to reweight examples for
 robust deep learning. In International conference on machine learning, pages 4334–4343. PMLR,
 2018.
David Rolnick, Andreas Veit, Serge Belongie, and Nir Shavit. Deep learning is robust to massive
  label noise. arXiv preprint arXiv:1705.10694, 2017.
Elan Rosenfeld, Ezra Winston, Pradeep Ravikumar, and Zico Kolter. Certified robustness to label-
  flipping attacks via randomized smoothing. In International Conference on Machine Learning,
  pages 8230–8241. PMLR, 2020.
Kaspar Rufibach. Use of brier score to assess binary predictions. Journal of clinical epidemiology,
  63(8):938–939, 2010.


                                                 12
Prasanna Sattigeri, Soumya Ghosh, Inkit Padhi, Pierre Dognin, and Kush R Varshney. Fair infinites-
  imal jackknife: Mitigating the influence of biased training data points without refitting. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2212.06803, 2022.
Nitish Srivastava, Geoffrey Hinton, Alex Krizhevsky, Ilya Sutskever, and Ruslan Salakhutdinov.
  Dropout: a simple way to prevent neural networks from overfitting. The journal of machine
  learning research, 15(1):1929–1958, 2014.
Cuong Tran, Ferdinando Fioretto, Jung-Eun Kim, and Rakshit Naidu. Pruning has a disparate impact
  on model accuracy. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.13574, 2022.
Jialu Wang, Yang Liu, and Caleb Levy. Fair classification with group-dependent label noise. In
   Proceedings of the 2021 ACM conference on fairness, accountability, and transparency, pages
   526–536, 2021.
Hongxin Wei, Lei Feng, Xiangyu Chen, and Bo An. Combating noisy labels by agreement: A joint
  training method with co-regularization. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
 Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 13726–13735, 2020.
Huiyu Wu and Diego Klabjan. Logit-based uncertainty measure in classification. In 2021 IEEE
 International Conference on Big Data (Big Data), pages 948–956. IEEE, 2021.
Han Xu, Xiaorui Liu, Yaxin Li, Anil Jain, and Jiliang Tang. To be robust or to be fair: Towards fairness
  in adversarial training. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pages 11492–11501.
  PMLR, 2021.
Chih-Kuan Yeh, Joon Kim, Ian En-Hsu Yen, and Pradeep K Ravikumar. Representer point selection
  for explaining deep neural networks. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 31,
  2018.
Chiyuan Zhang, Samy Bengio, Moritz Hardt, Benjamin Recht, and Oriol Vinyals. Understanding deep
  learning (still) requires rethinking generalization. Communications of the ACM, 64(3):107–115,
  2021.
Hongyi Zhang, Moustapha Cisse, Yann N Dauphin, and David Lopez-Paz. mixup: Beyond empirical
  risk minimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:1710.09412, 2017.


                                                  13
