Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


V ERIFYING THE U NION OF M ANIFOLDS H YPOTHESIS
FOR I MAGE DATA

 Bradley C.A. Brown∗                          Anthony L. Caterini               Brendan Leigh Ross
 University of Waterloo                       Layer 6 AI                        Layer 6 AI
 bcabrown@uwaterloo.ca                        anthony@layer6.ai                 brendan@layer6.ai

 Jesse C. Cresswell                                     Gabriel Loaiza-Ganem
 Layer 6 AI                                             Layer 6 AI
 jesse@layer6.ai                                        gabriel@layer6.ai



                                                 A BSTRACT

             Deep learning has had tremendous success at learning low-dimensional representa-
             tions of high-dimensional data. This success would be impossible if there was no
             hidden low-dimensional structure in data of interest; this existence is posited by the
             manifold hypothesis, which states that the data lies on an unknown manifold of low
             intrinsic dimension. In this paper, we argue that this hypothesis does not properly
             capture the low-dimensional structure typically present in image data. Assuming
             that data lies on a single manifold implies intrinsic dimension is identical across the
             entire data space, and does not allow for subregions of this space to have a different
             number of factors of variation. To address this deficiency, we consider the union of
             manifolds hypothesis, which states that data lies on a disjoint union of manifolds of
             varying intrinsic dimensions. We empirically verify this hypothesis on commonly-
             used image datasets, finding that indeed, observed data lies on a disconnected set
             and that intrinsic dimension is not constant. We also provide insights into the impli-
             cations of the union of manifolds hypothesis in deep learning, both supervised and
             unsupervised, showing that designing models with an inductive bias for this struc-
             ture improves performance across classification and generative modelling tasks.
             Our code is available at https://github.com/layer6ai-labs/UoMH.


1       I NTRODUCTION
The manifold hypothesis (Bengio et al., 2013) states that high-dimensional data of interest often
lives in an unknown lower-dimensional manifold embedded in ambient space, and there is strong
evidence supporting this hypothesis. From a theoretical perspective, it is known that both manifold
learning and density estimation scale exponentially with the (low) intrinsic dimension when such
structure exists (Ozakin & Gray, 2009; Narayanan & Mitter, 2010), while scaling exponentially with
the (high) ambient dimension otherwise (Cacoullos, 1966). Thus, the most plausible explanation
for the success of machine learning methods on high-dimensional data is the existence of far lower
intrinsic dimension, which facilitates learning on datasets of fairly reasonable size. This is verified
empirically by Pope et al. (2021), in which a comprehensive study estimating the intrinsic dimension
of commonly-used image datasets is performed, clearly finding low-dimensional structure.
However, thinking of observed data as lying on a single unknown low-dimensional manifold is quite
limiting, as this implies that the intrinsic dimension throughout the dataset is constant. If we consider
the intrinsic dimensionality to be the number of factors of variation generating the data, we can see
that this formulation prevents distinct regions of the data’s support from having differing quantities of
factors of variation. Yet this seems to be unrealistic: for example, we should not expect the number
of factors needed to describe 8s and 1s in the MNIST dataset (LeCun et al., 1998) to be equal.
To accommodate this intuition, in this paper we consider the union of manifolds hypothesis: that
high-dimensional image data often lies not on a single manifold, but on a disjoint union of manifolds
    ∗
        Work done during an internship at Layer 6 AI.


                                                        1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


of different intrinsic dimensions.1 While this hypothesis has motivated work in the clustering literature
(Vidal, 2011; Elhamifar & Vidal, 2011; 2012; 2013; Zhang et al., 2019; Abdolali & Gillis, 2021; Cai
et al., 2022), to the best of our knowledge it has never been empirically explored analogously to the
way that Pope et al. (2021) probe the manifold hypothesis. In this work we carry out this verification
on commonly-used image datasets, first by confirming their supports are disconnected, and then by
estimating the intrinsic dimension on each component, finding that there is indeed variation in these
estimates. In order to verify that the support of the data is disconnected, we leverage pushforward deep
generative models (Salmona et al., 2022; Ross et al., 2022), which generate samples by transforming
noise through a neural network G. We first prove that these deep generative models (DGMs) are
incapable of modelling disconnected supports. We then argue that the class labels provided in our
considered datasets approximately identify connected components (i.e. different classes are mostly
disconnected from each other), and show that training a pushforward model on each class outperforms
training a single such model on the entire dataset, even when using the same computational budget:
this improvement is a firm indicator that the support is truly disconnected.
After empirically verifying the union of manifolds hypothesis, we turn our attention to some of its
implications in deep learning. We establish that classes with higher intrinsic dimension are harder to
classify, and guided by this insight, we also show that classification accuracy can be improved by
more heavily weighting the terms corresponding to classes of higher intrinsic dimension in the cross
entropy loss. We also show that the same DGMs we used to confirm the disconnectedness of the
data support, which we call disconnected DGMs, provide a performant class of models which are
competitive with their non-disconnected baselines across a wide range of datasets and models, and
thus provide a promising direction towards improving generative models.

2       BACKGROUND AND RELATED WORK
Throughout our paper, we consider the setup where we have access to a dataset D = {xi }ni=1 ,
generated i.i.d. from some distribution P∗ in a high dimensional ambient space X = RD .

Pushforward DGMs As mentioned in the introduction, we leverage DGMs – in particular pushfor-
ward DGMs – in order to verify the disconnectedness of the support of P∗ . We call a pushforward
model any DGM whose samples X are given by:
                                        Z ∼ PZ      and     X = G(Z),                                         (1)
where PZ is a (potentially trainable) base distribution in some latent space Z, and G : Z → X is
a neural network. We highlight many popular DGMs fall into this category, including (Gaussian)
variational autoencoders (VAEs) (Kingma & Welling, 2014; Rezende et al., 2014), normalizing flows
(NFs) (Dinh et al., 2017; Kingma & Dhariwal, 2018; Behrmann et al., 2019; Chen et al., 2019; Durkan
et al., 2019), generative adversarial networks (GANs) (Goodfellow et al., 2014), and Wasserstein
autoencoders (WAEs) (Tolstikhin et al., 2018).

Intrinsic dimension estimation If we assume that P∗ is supported on the closure of a d-dimensional
manifold embedded in X for some unknown d < D, a natural question is how to estimate d from
D.2 We follow Pope et al. (2021) and use the Levina & Bickel (2004) estimator with the MacKay &
Ghahramani (2005) extension, given by:
                                                                  −1
                                               n k−1
                                       1      X  X       Tk (x i )
                           dˆk :=                   log            ,                         (2)
                                    n(k − 1) i=1 j=1     Tj (xi )

where Tj (x) is the Euclidean distance from x to its j th -nearest neighbour in D \ {x}, and k is a
hyperparameter specifying the maximum number of nearest neighbours to consider. While other
estimators have been recently proposed (Block et al., 2021; Lim et al., 2021; Tempczyk et al., 2022),
we stick with (2) throughout this work as it is well-established in the literature. As we will see,
popular image datasets exhibit different intrinsic dimensions in separate regions of data space.
    1
     The disjoint union of d-dimensional manifolds is a d-dimensional manifold (Lee, 2013): the possibility of
having different intrinsic dimensions separates the union of manifolds hypothesis from the manifold hypothesis.
   2
     Requiring the support to be the closure of a manifold (or a union thereof) rather than the manifold itself is
merely a technicality due to the formal definition of support, which is always a closed set. See Appendix A.


                                                        2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


On the relevance of understanding low-dimensional structure As mentioned in the introduction,
the manifold hypothesis provides intuition as to why deep learning has been so successful. One
might naı̈vely believe its usefulness is merely conceptual, yet uncovering and exploiting the structure
underlying data of interest is a highly relevant problem (Bronstein et al., 2021) which has recently
started receiving increased attention. Pope et al. (2021) use (2) to estimate the intrinsic dimension of
image datasets, not only finding strong evidence of low-dimensional structure, but also uncovering
that datasets of higher intrinsic dimension are harder to classify. Similarly, Ansuini et al. (2019)
link the intrinsic dimension of the representations of deep classifiers to their classification accuracy.
Furthermore, the low-dimensional structure of data not only affects supervised methods: for example,
training a high-dimensional density to model data lying on a low-dimensional manifold through
maximum-likelihood can result in manifold overfitting (Dai & Wipf, 2019; Loaiza-Ganem et al.,
2022), a phenomenon resulting in P∗ not being learned, even if an infinite amount of data was
observed. Indeed, there is a rapidly growing body of work aiming to account for the manifold
hypothesis within DGMs (Gemici et al., 2016; Rezende et al., 2020; Brehmer & Cranmer, 2020;
Mathieu & Nickel, 2020; Arbel et al., 2021; Kothari et al., 2021; Caterini et al., 2021; Ross &
Cresswell, 2021; Cunningham et al., 2022; De Bortoli et al., 2022; Ross et al., 2022). All these works
highlight the relevance of properly understanding and accounting for the low-dimensional structure
of data, an understanding we improve upon in this work.

3     T HE UNION OF MANIFOLDS HYPOTHESIS
We will assume that the support of P∗ , supp(P∗ ), can be written as:
                                                      L
                                                      G
                                       supp(P∗ ) =          cl(Mℓ ) ⊂ X ,                                     (3)
                                                      ℓ=1

where ⊔ denotes disjoint union, each Mℓ is a connected manifold of dimension d(ℓ) , and cl(·) denotes
closure in X .2 We refer to this assumption the union of manifolds hypothesis. Note that we make the
assumption that each Mℓ is connected merely for notational simplicity, as we could collapse each
union of manifolds of matching dimension into a single disconnected manifold, but this notation
allows us to reason about different cl(Mℓ ) as connected components of interest. Note also that the
standard manifold hypothesis is equivalent to adding the assumption that all d(ℓ) s are identical. In the
rest of this section we empirically verify this hypothesis on various commonly-used image datasets in
two parts: first by establishing the disconnectedness of supp(P∗ ), and then by estimating the intrinsic
dimension on each of its (approximate) connected components.

3.1   V ERIFYING THE HYPOTHESIS : D ISCONNECTEDNESS

Before empirically verifying that the support of commonly-used image datasets is disconnected,
let us develop intuition as to why this might be the case. For example, on MNIST we can likely
continuously transform any 2 into any other 2 without leaving the manifold of 2s, whereas attempting
to similarly transform a 2 into an 8 would likely result in intermediate images that are neither 2s nor
8s. We conjecture that class labels, which are often available for our considered datasets, provide
a sensible proxy for the connected components cl(Mℓ ) of supp(P∗ ), precisely because one can
conceive of continuously transforming any one member of any class into any other member of the
same class without ever leaving the class.
In order to verify this conjecture, we leverage a shortcoming of pushforward models, namely their
inability to model disconnected supports, which we formalize in the following proposition. We use
measure-theoretic notation, where the model from (1) is given by the pushforward measure G# PZ .
Proposition 1: Let Z and X be topological spaces and G : Z → X be continuous. Considering Z
and X as measurable spaces with their respective Borel σ-algebras, let PZ be a probability measure
on Z such that supp(PZ ) is connected and PZ (supp(PZ )) = 1.3 Then supp(G# PZ ) is connected.
Proof sketch: From the formal definition of support, supp(G# PZ ) need not be equal to
G(supp(PZ )), so the proof does not immediately follow from the fact that continuous functions map
   3
     The condition PZ (supp(PZ )) = 1 is highly technical and holds in all settings of practical interest, but can
be violated in contrived counterexamples. See Appendix A for a discussion.


                                                        3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                Figure 2: Samples from various VAE models on a synthetic dataset.



connected sets to connected sets. We show that supp(G# PZ ) = cl(G(supp(PZ ))), and the result
follows from the closure of connected sets being connected. See Appendix A for the formal proof.
The implication of Proposition 1 is simple:
if the support of the data is not connected
(i.e. has multiple connected components),
then pushforward models are insufficient
to properly model the data, since in prac-
tice supp(PZ ) is always connected. Intu-
itively, this result rules out the possibility
of G# PZ assigning 0 probability to regions
of G(supp(PZ )) which connect different
disconnected components of the data sup-
port supp(P∗ ), as illustrated in Figure 1.
We highlight that topological limitations Figure 1: Depiction of the inability of pushforward
of pushforward models have been studied models to represent multiple connected components. If
before (Cornish et al., 2020; Salmona et al., supp(P∗ ) is given by the two blue connected compo-
2022; Ross et al., 2022), although to the nents on X , then by continuity, G cannot map supp(PZ )
best of our knowledge not to the gener- to this set, and so its image must contain some region
ality of Proposition 1. Indeed, there are (shown in green) connecting them. Proposition 1 shows
many methods aiming to better model dis- that the model G# PZ cannot learn to assign 0 probabil-
connected supports with pushforward mod- ity to this green region.
els (Arora et al., 2017; Banijamali et al.,
2017; Locatello et al., 2018; Khayatkhoei et al., 2018; Dinh et al., 2019; Tanielian et al., 2020; Luzi
et al., 2020; Pires & Figueiredo, 2020; Duan, 2021; Ye & Bors, 2021). Figure 2, which we will use as
a running example throughout this section, further visualizes this result, with the first panel showing a
synthetic dataset obeying the union of manifolds hypothesis (two connected components of respective
intrinsic dimensions 1 and 2), along with a Gaussian VAE trained on this dataset on the second panel.
The VAE fails to recover a disconnected support, further confirming this limitation of pushforward
models. We include all experimental details pertaining to this section in Appendix D.1.
As a means to empirically verify that supp(P∗ ) is disconnected, we introduce disconnected DGMs:
rather than train a single pushforward model (PZ , G) on D as in standard DGMs, we first partition
the data as D = ⊔L  ℓ=1 Dℓ , where D(ℓ)
                                     ℓ contains only the datapoints belonging to the ℓ
                                                                                      th
                                                                                         class, and we
then train a pushforward DGM (PZ , Gℓ ) on each cluster Dℓ . In order to obtain a sample X from a
trained disconnected DGM, we simply sample ℓ with probability proportional to the size of Dℓ , |Dℓ |,
and then sample from the corresponding DGM, which can be performed in a memory-efficient way
(i.e. without having to load L models in memory) as described in Appendix B.2.
We see disconnected DGMs as the most straightforward modification that can be done to pushforward
models so as to enable them to model disconnected supports. Disconnected DGMs also allow to
straightforwardly compare against standard pushforward models in a FLOP-equivalent manner that
uses the same architectures (see Appendix B.1 for details). If we observe any improvement of
disconnected DGMs over their standard counterparts, the simplest explanation for this behaviour
would be that supp(P∗ ) is disconnected. The third panel of Figure 2 shows a disconnected VAE
(denoted D-VAE), which correctly recovers two connected components (albeit not their intrinsic
dimensions, which we will address later with the fourth panel), and was given the same computational
budget as the VAE on the second panel: demonstrating that disconnected DGMs show improvements


                                                   4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


               Table 1: FID scores. We show means and standard errors across 3 runs.
   Model                        MNIST          FMNIST        SVHN            CIFAR-10       CIFAR-100
   WAE                          19.1 ± 2.1     51.2 ± 2.4    89.8 ± 12.2     146.7 ± 1.2    145.0 ± 0.7
   D-WAE (random)               23.7 ± 2.8     61.1 ± 3.6    77.6 ± 1.7      154.7 ± 0.5    146.5 ± 3.2
   D-WAE (classes)              13.5 ± 0.2     36.8 ± 1.4    83.7 ± 15.2     133.3 ± 0.5    209.9 ± 3.5
   WAE (GMM)                    152.7 ± 19.1   97.6 ± 20.9   276.1 ± 8.6     253.6 ± 17.1   250.3 ± 5.0
   Conditional WAE (classes)    9.9 ± 0.2      36.7 ± 0.4    172.9 ± 122.2   142.9 ± 0.5    206.0 ± 36.2
   Conditional WAE (clusters)   10.0 ± 0.3     40.9 ± 3.7    54.1 ± 1.6      140.7 ± 1.1    259.5 ± 2.8
   D-WAE (clusters)             11.4 ± 0.3     35.3 ± 4.3    97.6 ± 1.4      139.2 ± 1.7    134.3 ± 1.8



over their standard counterparts when data is disconnected, thus providing more evidence for the
validity of our test of disconnectedness.
The top half of Table 1 shows analogous results in the more realistic setting of image datasets. We
use the FID score (Heusel et al., 2017) (lower is better), a commonly-used sample quality metric,
to measure performance on the MNIST, FMNIST (Xiao et al., 2017), SVHN (Netzer et al., 2011),
CIFAR-10, and CIFAR-100 (Krizhevsky et al., 2009) datasets. We can see that disconnected WAEs
(indicated as “D-WAE (classes)”) consistently outperform WAEs4 , strongly supporting our hypothesis
that supp(P∗ ) is indeed not connected in these datasets. We highlight once again that disconnected
WAEs were given the exact same computational budget as WAEs (both in terms of floating point
operations and memory usage) to ensure fair comparisons. Nonetheless, disconnected WAEs do have
more parameters. In order to ensure that the added parameters are not the reason that disconnected
WAEs perform better, we perform an ablation, where we train a disconnected WAE but use random
labels instead of class labels (indicated as “D-WAE (random)”). We can see that disconnected WAEs
using labels are still the best performing option, once again providing strong empirical evidence to
the claim that one can indeed think of classes of these datasets as approximating different connected
components of supp(P∗ ). Finally, we point out that these results are not exclusive to WAEs: we
carried out the same comparisons using VAEs, and found the conclusions to be the same, further
backing our claims. Due to space constraints, we present these results in Table 3 in Appendix C.1.

3.2   V ERIFYING THE HYPOTHESIS : VARYING INTRINSIC DIMENSIONS

So far we have empirically verified that commonly-used image datasets have disconnected supports
and that class labels provide a good proxy for the corresponding connected components. We now
confirm that these disconnected components have varying intrinsic dimensions. We achieve this by
applying (2) to each Dℓ (the subset of the data corresponding to the ℓth class) separately: observing
similar estimates across different values of ℓ would support the manifold hypothesis, whereas
observing different values would instead support the union of manifolds hypothesis.
                                                                                           (ℓ)
Figure 3 shows, for different values of the hyperparameter k, boxplots of the values dˆk for class
labels ℓ = 1, . . . , L in our considered datasets: MNIST, FMNIST, SVHN, CIFAR-10, CIFAR-100,
and ImageNet (Russakovsky et al., 2015). Two relevant patterns emerge. First, within each dataset,
results are mostly consistent across different choices of k, so that any conclusions we draw are
not caused by a specific choice of this hyperparameter. Second, for all datasets except SVHN,
we can observe a wide range of estimated intrinsic dimensions. These results empirically verify
that the union of manifolds hypothesis is a more appropriate way to think about images than the
manifold hypothesis. Additionally, we estimate the variance of these estimators through subsampling
in Appendix C.2, ensuring that the observed variability of estimated intrinsic dimensions is not
due to chance. We highlight that (2) is known to underestimate the true intrinsic dimension when
the dataset is not large enough, which might in principle affect our estimates on CIFAR-100 and
ImageNet, since these datasets have fewer datapoints per class. Strong consistency across k on
CIFAR-100 however suggests this is not a concern for this dataset; and even if the estimates we
obtained on ImageNet do exhibit slightly more variation across k, the overall range of estimated
intrinsic dimensions remains consistent across k. In other words, these results still strongly support

    4
      Except on CIFAR-100, which we hypothesize is due to each class having too few datapoints. We provide
further evidence that CIFAR-100 also has disconnected support in subsection 4.2.


                                                     5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


       Figure 3: Boxplots showing variability of intrinsic dimension estimates across classes.


the union of manifolds hypothesis. We take a more granular look into these estimates in Appendix
C.2, where we show further choices of k as well as the intrinsic dimensions of individual classes.


4     E XPLOITING THE UNION OF MANIFOLDS HYPOTHESIS

Now that we have empirically verified the union of manifolds hypothesis on images–both the
disconnectedness of the support of the data and its varying intrinsic dimensions–we turn our attention
to the benefits brought to deep learning by being aware of the union of manifolds structure present
in observed data. We see the results in this section as a sensible and promising first step towards
realizing these benefits, and hope to encourage the community to further explore them.

4.1   S UPERVISED LEARNING : C LASSIFICATION ACCURACY AND INTRINSIC DIMENSION

Pope et al. (2021) showed that datasets of high intrinsic dimension are harder to classify. Here we
provide a more granular look, by showing that classes of higher intrinsic dimension are harder to
classify. We train 3 classifiers on CIFAR-100 (see Appendix D.2 for details): a VGG-19 (Simonyan &
Zisserman, 2015), a ResNet-18, and a ResNet-34 (He et al., 2016). We focused on CIFAR-100 here as
the other datasets considered in this work were either too simple to classify (MNIST, FMNIST, SVHN,
CIFAR-10), or produced less-reliable intrinsic dimension estimates (ImageNet). For each class, we
compute its classification accuracy and plot this against its estimated intrinsic dimension in Figure 4.
We can see that, consistently across classifiers, there is an inverse relationship between estimated
intrinsic dimension and classification accuracy. We also quantitatively compare intrinsic dimension
and classification accuracy by computing their correlation, along with a p-value for independence
with a t-test: we find that the negative correlation is significant (see figure caption). In other words,
the higher the intrinsic dimension of a class, the harder it is to classify. While clearly intrinsic
dimension does not fully explain accuracy, this correlation suggests the following intuition: learning
useful representations for classes with higher intrinsic dimension requires learning more factors of
variation and is thus more challenging.
To check if this insight can help improve Table 2: Means and standard errors of ResNet-18 accu-
classifiers, we train the ResNet-18 in two racy on CIFAR-100 across 5 runs.
different ways (see Appendix D.2 for ex-         Weights                             Test accuracy
perimental setup): in the first, we use the
                                                 Standard                            61.38% ± 0.17%
standard cross entropy loss, and in the sec-     Proportional to intrinsic dimension 61.77% ± 0.20%
ond, we weight the terms corresponding to
each class in the cross entropy loss propor-
tionally to their intrinsic dimension. This reweighting of the loss focuses more on classes of higher


                                                   6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 4: Class intrinsic dimension versus test accuracy on CIFAR-100, along with a least-squares
regression line. Correlation coefficients for each model are −0.243 ± 0.015, −0.269 ± 0.012, and
−0.274 ± 0.007, respectively (means and standard errors over 5 runs). Corresponding p-values,
0.008 ± 0.002, 0.019 ± 0.008, and 0.006 ± 0.001, show the relationship is significant.


intrinsic dimension, as we have just shown these are harder to classify. Results are shown in Table 2,
where we can see that this very simple change to the cross entropy loss marginally (but significantly,
as error bars do not overlap) improves the accuracy of the network, providing an essentially “free”
improvement, given the low computational overhead of estimating intrinsic dimension. Note that we
did not perform any data augmentation scheme so as to not affect the intrinsic dimension of the data.

4.2     U NSUPERVISED LEARNING : D ISCONNECTED DGM S THROUGH CLUSTERING

In subsection 3.1 we used disconnected DGMs to show that the support of image datasets is dis-
connected. Here we show that despite their simplicity, disconnected DGMs are performant models
which can provide improvements over competing alternatives. We highlight that the aim of these
experiments is not to achieve state-of-the-art performance, but rather to show that disconnected DGMs
outperform comparable non-disconnected models, emphasizing the relevance of properly accounting
for the union of manifolds structure present in data. To this end, we introduce a fully-unsupervised
version of disconnected DGMs, where we run a clustering algorithm to partition the dataset instead
of using class labels. The idea behind this modification is simply that if class labels are unavailable, a
clustering algorithm might manage to recover connected components of the data support as clusters,
at least approximately. Our training and clustering procedures are detailed in Appendix B.1.
We highlight once again that we use the same computational budget for training disconnected
DGMs as for their standard counterparts. The only computational overhead is running the clustering
algorithm itself – and more disk space is required to store the model – but the number of floating point
operations and memory usage throughout training is identical (see Appendix B.1). All experimental
details relevant to this section are included in Appendix D.1.

4.2.1    B ETTER MODELLING OF DISCONNECTED SUPPORTS
As we already showed in subsection 3.1, D-WAEs outperform standard WAEs. The comparisons we
have discussed so far were however meant to confirm the union of manifolds hypothesis, and remain
unfair as comparisons of generative performance since the D-WAE (classes) model has access to class
labels. The bottom half of Table 3 includes additional comparisons to show that D-WAEs are not
just useful as a way of confirming the disconnectedness of the data support, but that they are also an
effective way of accounting for this structure. We include comparisons against standard conditional
WAEs, which also have access to class labels (indicated as “Conditional WAE (classes)”), but as
additional inputs to their neural networks (Sohn et al., 2015), rather than having separate models
for each class like D-WAEs. We can see that conditional WAEs (classes) outperform our D-WAEs
(classes) only on MNIST, highlighting that D-WAEs are performant DGMs, despite their simplicity.
Importanly, while we believe that D-DGMs are better than conditional models for verifying the
disconnectedness of the data support (as they allow for FLOP and memory-equivalent comparisons),
conditional WAEs outperforming WAEs provides further evidence supporting the union of manifolds
hypothesis. Note that conditional WAEs outperform WAEs on CIFAR-100, which also supports our
previous conjecture that the poor performance of D-WAEs on this dataset is due to having too few
datapoints per class, rather than the union of manifolds hypothesis not holding.


                                                    7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


We also show results for the fully-unsupervised version of the D-WAE (indicated as “D-WAE
(clusters)”), and we can see that it not only outperforms the standard WAE, but that it remains
competitive with the same conditional WAE, now conditioned on cluster membership rather than
class labels for a fully-unsupervised baseline (indicated as “Conditional WAE (clusters)”). Finally,
we also include a comparison against a WAE whose prior PZ is given by a mixture of L Gaussians
(indicated as “WAE (GMM)”) instead of a standard Gaussian as in the other models. Having a
multimodal PZ is a popular strategy in pushforward models to better model multimodal target
distributions (Nalisnick et al., 2016; Dilokthanakul et al., 2017; Jiang et al., 2017; Ben-Yosef &
Weinshall, 2018; Izmailov et al., 2020; Cao et al., 2020; Śmieja et al., 2020; Potapczynski et al.,
2020). We can see that our D-WAE models outperform WAE (GMM) in all cases: this is not too
surprising in light of Proposition 1, since the support of PZ remains connected when using mixtures,
even if it is now multimodal. Once again, we omit comparisons with other pushforward models
here due to space constraints, but highlight that Appendix C.1 includes analogous comparisons with
VAEs in Table 3, where we see the exact same behaviour of disconnected DGMs outperforming or
remaining competitive with naı̈ve conditioning and using mixtures as base distributions.

4.2.2    B ETTER MODELLING OF VARYING INTRINSIC DIMENSIONS

While so far we have only focused on the ability of D-DGMs to model disconnected supports, our
method also easily allows modelling varying intrinsic dimensions, thus fully accounting for the
union of manifolds hypothesis. In order to do this, we simply set different dimensions for the latent
                                                                                       (ℓ)
spaces Zℓ of each of the L DGMs. In particular, we(ℓ)use (2) to obtain an estimate dˆk of the intrinsic
                                                       dˆk
dimension of Mℓ using Dℓ , and then set Zℓ = R . Any observed improvement of disconnected
                        (ℓ)                                          (ℓ)
DGMs with varying dˆk s over disconnected DGMs with fixed dˆk s can thus be attributed to having
                                                                                  (ℓ)
accounted for varying intrinsic dimensions. For each of the L DGMs (PZ , Gℓ ), we use two-step
models (Dai & Wipf, 2019; Loaiza-Ganem et al., 2022), which were specifically designed to properly
model manifold-supported data by avoiding manifold overfitting: we first train an autoencoder-type
                                                                              (ℓ)
model as a first step, whose decoder is Gℓ ; and then train a DGM PZ on the low-dimensional
representations obtained by running Dℓ through the encoder. In other words, we use a disconnected
version of two-step models as a way to account for varying intrinsic dimensions. The fourth panel of
Figure 2 illustrates the benefits of this approach by training a disconnected two-step VAE (indicated
as “D-VAE+VAE”). This model is trained by clustering the data to obtain its connected components,
estimating the respective intrinsic dimensions as 2 and 1, and then training a VAE+VAE model on each
of these clusters. In the first cluster (of intrinsic dimension 2), the first VAE obtains 2-dimensional
representations, and the second VAE learns the distribution of these representations. The same is
done for the second cluster, except the first VAE obtains 1-dimensional representations.
In Table 4 in Appendix C.1, we carry out an analogous comparison on image datasets using VAE+NF
models. Surprisingly, we found that while both versions of disconnected DGMs (i.e. with fixed
or varying intrinsic dimensions) outperformed non-disconnected two-step models – once again
confirming the conclusions about better modelling of disconnected supports – setting intrinsic
dimensions differently on every cluster did not improve performance over keeping intrinsic dimension
constant across clusters. At a first glance this might appear to imply that there is no benefit to
accounting for varying intrinsic dimensions, seemingly contradicting the theoretical result of Loaiza-
Ganem et al. (2022, Theorem 1), which states that manifold overfitting will occur whenever intrinsic
dimension is overspecified. However, upon closer inspection of the proof of Theorem 1 in Loaiza-
Ganem et al. (2022), we can see that the rate at which manifold overfitting happens depends on
the difference between ambient and intrinsic dimension.5 This observation explains both the good
empirical results of Loaiza-Ganem et al. (2022) and our aforementioned results: the former are driven
by the difference between ambient and intrinsic dimension (on the order of hundreds/thousands),
while the latter by the error between the true and estimated intrinsic dimension (on the order of
ones/tens). While a partially negative result, we provide further insight into the connection between
the low-dimensional structure of the data and DGMs.
In order to verify that properly setting varying intrinsic dimensions in DGMs
is advantageous, provided the true intrinsic dimensions are different enough, we
generate a synthetic dataset using a pretrained BigGAN (Brock et al., 2019).
    5
      For positive σ → 0, Loaiza-Ganem et al. (2022) show that the likelihood of a D-dimensional model can go
to infinity at a rate of σ d−D , while not recovering P∗ , if the data is supported on a d-dimensional manifold.


                                                       8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


We use this model, which has Z = R120 , to
generate 64,000 samples from the golden
retriever class. These samples have true
intrinsic dimension at most 120, and their
estimated intrinsic dimension through (2)
is 22 (we rounded the real-valued estimate
up). We also generate another 64,000 sam-
ples from this model, except we zero out all
but m = 1 latent coordinates before pass-
ing them through the generator, resulting
in samples of true intrinsic dimension of at
most m, and estimated intrinsic dimension
3. We then combine these two types of sam-
ples into a single dataset of size 128,000, Figure 5: Mean FID scores for 3 runs on golden retriever
with each type of sample corresponding to data, the shaded areas show standard errors.
a class. This dataset has the property that
its classes have a large difference in intrinsic dimension, and estimating the intrinsic dimension of the
entire dataset while ignoring classes gives a value of 5. We then train two models on this dataset: a
disconnected two-step model, where the first models are WAEs with fixed intrinsic dimension set to 5
(i.e. the single estimate of intrinsic dimension over the entire dataset) and the second models NFs (in-
dicated as “D-WAE+NF (constant d)”);   ˆ and a disconnected version of the same model except clusters
have their latent dimensions set to 22 and 3 (i.e. class intrinsic dimension estimates), respectively
(indicated as “D-WAE+NF”). We then repeat this entire process for m = 3 and m = 5, and show
the resulting FID scores in Figure 5 for 3 runs. We can see that setting the latent dimension of each
cluster to its estimated intrinsic dimension results in a large performance improvement versus setting
it without accounting for varying intrinsic dimensions. We can also see that this gap in performance
tightens as the difference in true intrinsic dimensions decreases. These results show that considering
varying intrinsic dimensions is practically relevant in DGMs, particularly when the difference in true
intrinsic dimensions is large.



5    C ONCLUSIONS , LIMITATIONS , AND FUTURE WORK

In this work, we empirically verified the union of manifolds hypothesis by showing that image datasets
have multiple connected components whose intrinsic dimensions vary widely. We also establish uses
of the union of manifolds hypothesis, showing that classes of higher intrinsic dimension are harder
to classify and how this insight can be used to improve classification accuracy. We anticipate that
the broader deep learning community will further unlock the potential of the union of manifolds
hypothesis for both understanding natural data and discovering empirical improvements.
Although we confirmed the union of manifolds hypothesis on commonly-used datasets, we have
not tested on anything besides image data; verification of the union of manifolds hypothesis and the
efficacy of disconnected DGMs on other types of data remain to be proven. We have reason to believe
our improvements will generalize though, as has often been the case with other DGM innovations
developed on image-like data.
We also highlight that, while our experiments show that classes are a good approximation for
connected components, they do not imply an exact match: our results are consistent with some classes
overlapping, e.g. 1s and 7s on MNIST might belong to the same connected component. Additionally,
while we improve upon the manifold hypothesis, the realistic scenario of intrinsic dimension varying
within a connected component is not covered by the union of manifolds hypothesis, and we believe
that further probing data for this structure to be an interesting direction for future work.
Another point to note is that, while we did obtain classification accuracy improvements through
the union of manifolds hypothesis, these were marginal. Finally, even though our main goal with
disconnected DGMs was to verify the union of manifolds hypothesis, they can likely be improved
upon as DGMs in several ways, for example through parameter sharing, or by learning the number of
clusters (Salvador & Chan, 2004; Kulis & Jordan, 2012; Villecroze et al., 2022).


                                                   9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


R EFERENCES
Maryam Abdolali and Nicolas Gillis. Beyond linear subspace clustering: A comparative study of
 nonlinear manifold clustering algorithms. Computer Science Review, 42:100435, nov 2021. doi:
 10.1016/j.cosrev.2021.100435. URL https://doi.org/10.1016%2Fj.cosrev.2021.
 100435.
Alessio Ansuini, Alessandro Laio, Jakob H Macke, and Davide Zoccolan. Intrinsic dimension of
  data representations in deep neural networks. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  32, 2019.
Michael Arbel, Liang Zhou, and Arthur Gretton. Generalized energy based models. ICLR, 2021.
Sanjeev Arora, Rong Ge, Yingyu Liang, Tengyu Ma, and Yi Zhang. Generalization and equilibrium in
  generative adversarial nets (gans). In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 224–232.
  PMLR, 2017.
David Arthur and Sergei Vassilvitskii. k-means++: The advantages of careful seeding. In Proceedings
  of the eighteenth annual ACM-SIAM symposium on Discrete algorithms, pp. 1027–1035, 2007.
Ershad Banijamali, Ali Ghodsi, and Pascal Popuart. Generative mixture of networks. In 2017
  International Joint Conference on Neural Networks (IJCNN), pp. 3753–3760. IEEE, 2017.
Jens Behrmann, Will Grathwohl, Ricky TQ Chen, David Duvenaud, and Jörn-Henrik Jacobsen.
  Invertible residual networks. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 573–582.
  PMLR, 2019.
Matan Ben-Yosef and Daphna Weinshall. Gaussian mixture generative adversarial networks for
 diverse datasets, and the unsupervised clustering of images. arXiv preprint arXiv:1808.10356,
 2018.
Yoshua Bengio, Aaron Courville, and Pascal Vincent. Representation learning: A review and new
  perspectives. IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence, 35(8):1798–1828,
  2013.
Adam Block, Zeyu Jia, Yury Polyanskiy, and Alexander Rakhlin. Intrinsic dimension estimation.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.04018, 2021.
Vladimir Igorevich Bogachev. Measure theory, volume 2. Springer, 2007.
Johann Brehmer and Kyle Cranmer. Flows for simultaneous manifold learning and density estimation.
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:442–453, 2020.
Andrew Brock, Jeff Donahue, and Karen Simonyan. Large scale GAN training for high fidelity
  natural image synthesis. ICLR, 2019.
Michael M Bronstein, Joan Bruna, Taco Cohen, and Petar Veličković. Geometric deep learning:
 Grids, groups, graphs, geodesics, and gauges. arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.13478, 2021.
Theophilos Cacoullos. Estimation of a multivariate density. Annals of the Institute of Statistical
  Mathematics, 18(1):179–189, 1966.
Jinyu Cai, Jicong Fan, Wenzhong Guo, Shiping Wang, Yunhe Zhang, and Zhao Zhang. Efficient deep
   embedded subspace clustering. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision
   and Pattern Recognition, pp. 1–10, 2022.
Lele Cao, Sahar Asadi, Wenfei Zhu, Christian Schmidli, and Michael Sjöberg. Simple, scalable,
  and stable variational deep clustering. In Joint European Conference on Machine Learning and
  Knowledge Discovery in Databases, pp. 108–124. Springer, 2020.
Anthony L Caterini, Gabriel Loaiza-Ganem, Geoff Pleiss, and John P Cunningham. Rectangular
  flows for manifold learning. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 34,
  2021.


                                                10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Ricky T. Q. Chen, Jens Behrmann, David K Duvenaud, and Joern-Henrik Jacobsen. Residual flows for
  invertible generative modeling. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 32,
  2019.
Rob Cornish, Anthony Caterini, George Deligiannidis, and Arnaud Doucet. Relaxing bijectivity
  constraints with continuously indexed normalising flows. In International conference on machine
  learning, pp. 2133–2143. PMLR, 2020.
Edmond Cunningham, Adam Cobb, and Susmit Jha. Principal manifold flows. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2202.07037, 2022.
Bin Dai and David Wipf. Diagnosing and enhancing VAE models. ICLR, 2019.
Valentin De Bortoli, Emile Mathieu, Michael Hutchinson, James Thornton, Yee Whye Teh, and
  Arnaud Doucet. Riemannian score-based generative modeling. arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.02763,
  2022.
Nat Dilokthanakul, Pedro AM Mediano, Marta Garnelo, Matthew CH Lee, Hugh Salimbeni, Kai
  Arulkumaran, and Murray Shanahan. Deep unsupervised clustering with gaussian mixture varia-
  tional autoencoders. ICLR, 2017.
Laurent Dinh, Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, and Samy Bengio. Density estimation using Real NVP. ICLR,
  2017.
Laurent Dinh, Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, Hugo Larochelle, and Razvan Pascanu. A RAD approach to
  deep mixture models. arXiv preprint arXiv:1903.07714, 2019.
Leo L Duan. Transport Monte Carlo: High-accuracy posterior approximation via random transport.
  Journal of the American Statistical Association, (just-accepted):1–30, 2021.
Conor Durkan, Artur Bekasov, Iain Murray, and George Papamakarios. Neural Spline Flows. In
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 32, 2019.
Ehsan Elhamifar and René Vidal.    Sparse manifold clustering and embedding.      In
  J. Shawe-Taylor, R. Zemel, P. Bartlett, F. Pereira, and K.Q. Weinberger (eds.), Ad-
  vances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 24. Curran Associates,
  Inc., 2011.      URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2011/file/
  fc490ca45c00b1249bbe3554a4fdf6fb-Paper.pdf.
Ehsan Elhamifar and Rene Vidal. Sparse subspace clustering: Algorithm, theory, and applications,
  2012. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1203.1005.
Ehsan Elhamifar and René Vidal. Sparse subspace clustering: Algorithm, theory, and applications.
  IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence, 35(11):2765–2781, 2013.
Mevlana C Gemici, Danilo Rezende, and Shakir Mohamed. Normalizing flows on riemannian
 manifolds. arXiv preprint arXiv:1611.02304, 2016.
Ian Goodfellow, Jean Pouget-Abadie, Mehdi Mirza, Bing Xu, David Warde-Farley, Sherjil Ozair,
  Aaron Courville, and Yoshua Bengio. Generative adversarial nets. Advances in neural information
  processing systems, 27, 2014.
Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image
  recognition. In 2016 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp.
  770–778. IEEE, 2016.
Martin Heusel, Hubert Ramsauer, Thomas Unterthiner, Bernhard Nessler, and Sepp Hochreiter.
 GANs trained by a two time-scale update rule converge to a local nash equilibrium. In Advances
 in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 30, 2017.
Sergey Ioffe and Christian Szegedy. Batch normalization: Accelerating deep network training by
  reducing internal covariate shift. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 448–456.
  pmlr, 2015.


                                               11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Pavel Izmailov, Polina Kirichenko, Marc Finzi, and Andrew Gordon Wilson. Semi-supervised
  learning with normalizing flows. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 4615–
  4630. PMLR, 2020.
Zhuxi Jiang, Yin Zheng, Huachun Tan, Bangsheng Tang, and Hanning Zhou. Variational deep
  embedding: an unsupervised and generative approach to clustering. In Proceedings of the 26th
  International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, pp. 1965–1972, 2017.
Mahyar Khayatkhoei, Maneesh K Singh, and Ahmed Elgammal. Disconnected manifold learning for
 generative adversarial networks. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 31, 2018.
Diederik P Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. ICLR, 2015.
Diederik P Kingma and Prafulla Dhariwal. Glow: Generative Flow with Invertible 1× 1 Convolutions.
  In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 31, 2018.
Diederik P Kingma and Max Welling. Auto-encoding variational Bayes. ICLR, 2014.
Konik Kothari, AmirEhsan Khorashadizadeh, Maarten de Hoop, and Ivan Dokmanić. Trumpets:
  Injective flows for inference and inverse problems. In Proceedings of the Thirty-Seventh Conference
  on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, volume 161, pp. 1269–1278, 2021.
Alex Krizhevsky, Geoffrey Hinton, et al. Learning multiple layers of features from tiny images. 2009.
Brian Kulis and Michael I Jordan. Revisiting k-means: new algorithms via bayesian nonparametrics.
  In Proceedings of the 29th International Coference on International Conference on Machine
  Learning, pp. 1131–1138, 2012.
Yann LeCun, Léon Bottou, Yoshua Bengio, and Patrick Haffner. Gradient-based learning applied to
  document recognition. Proceedings of the IEEE, 86(11):2278–2324, 1998.
John M Lee. Introduction to smooth manifolds. pp. 1–31. Springer, 2013.
Elizaveta Levina and Peter Bickel. Maximum likelihood estimation of intrinsic dimension. Advances
  in neural information processing systems, 17, 2004.
Uzu Lim, Vidit Nanda, and Harald Oberhauser. Tangent space and dimension estimation with the
  wasserstein distance. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.06357, 2021.
Gabriel Loaiza-Ganem, Brendan Leigh Ross, Jesse C Cresswell, and Anthony L. Caterini. Diagnosing
  and fixing manifold overfitting in deep generative models. Transactions on Machine Learning
  Research, 2022. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=0nEZCVshxS.
Francesco Locatello, Damien Vincent, Ilya Tolstikhin, Gunnar Rätsch, Sylvain Gelly, and Bernhard
  Schölkopf. Competitive training of mixtures of independent deep generative models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1804.11130, 2018.
Lorenzo Luzi, Randall Balestriero, and Richard G Baraniuk. Ensembles of generative adversarial
  networks for disconnected data. arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.14600, 2020.
David JC MacKay and Zoubin Ghahramani. Comments on’maximum likelihood estimation of
  intrinsic dimension’by e. levina and p. bickel (2004). The Inference Group Website, Cavendish
  Laboratory, Cambridge University, 2005.
Emile Mathieu and Maximilian Nickel. Riemannian continuous normalizing flows. In Advances in
 Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 33, 2020.
Eric Nalisnick, Lars Hertel, and Padhraic Smyth. Approximate inference for deep latent gaussian
  mixtures. In NIPS Workshop on Bayesian Deep Learning, volume 2, pp. 131, 2016.
Hariharan Narayanan and Sanjoy Mitter. Sample complexity of testing the manifold hypothesis.
 Advances in neural information processing systems, 23, 2010.
Yuval Netzer, Tao Wang, Adam Coates, Alessandro Bissacco, Bo Wu, and Andrew Y Ng. Reading
  digits in natural images with unsupervised feature learning. 2011.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Arkadas Ozakin and Alexander Gray. Submanifold density estimation. Advances in Neural Informa-
  tion Processing Systems, 22, 2009.
Guilherme GP Freitas Pires and Mário AT Figueiredo. Variational mixture of normalizing flows. In
 ESANN, 2020.
Phil Pope, Chen Zhu, Ahmed Abdelkader, Micah Goldblum, and Tom Goldstein. The intrinsic dimen-
  sion of images and its impact on learning. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2021.
Andres Potapczynski, Gabriel Loaiza-Ganem, and John P Cunningham. Invertible gaussian reparam-
  eterization: Revisiting the gumbel-softmax. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  33:12311–12321, 2020.
Danilo Jimenez Rezende, Shakir Mohamed, and Daan Wierstra. Stochastic backpropagation and
  approximate inference in deep generative models. In International conference on machine learning,
  pp. 1278–1286. PMLR, 2014.
Danilo Jimenez Rezende, George Papamakarios, Sébastien Racaniere, Michael Albergo, Gurtej Kan-
  war, Phiala Shanahan, and Kyle Cranmer. Normalizing flows on tori and spheres. In International
  Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 8083–8092. PMLR, 2020.
Lior Rokach and Oded Maimon. Clustering methods. In Data mining and knowledge discovery
  handbook, pp. 321–352. Springer, 2005.
Brendan Leigh Ross and Jesse C Cresswell. Tractable density estimation on learned manifolds with
  conformal embedding flows. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 34,
  2021.
Brendan Leigh Ross, Gabriel Loaiza-Ganem, Anthony L Caterini, and Jesse C Cresswell. Neural im-
  plicit manifold learning for topology-aware generative modelling. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.11267,
  2022.
Olga Russakovsky, Jia Deng, Hao Su, Jonathan Krause, Sanjeev Satheesh, Sean Ma, Zhiheng Huang,
  Andrej Karpathy, Aditya Khosla, Michael Bernstein, et al. Imagenet large scale visual recognition
  challenge. International journal of computer vision, 115(3):211–252, 2015.
Antoine Salmona, Valentin de Bortoli, Julie Delon, and Agnès Desolneux. Can push-forward
  generative models fit multimodal distributions? arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.14476, 2022.
Stan Salvador and Philip Chan. Determining the number of clusters/segments in hierarchical clus-
  tering/segmentation algorithms. In 16th IEEE international conference on tools with artificial
  intelligence, pp. 576–584. IEEE, 2004.
René L Schilling and Franziska Kühn. Counterexamples in Measure and Integration. Cambridge
  University Press, 2021.
Karen Simonyan and Andrew Zisserman. Very deep convolutional networks for large-scale image
  recognition. ICLR, 2015.

Marek Śmieja, Maciej Wołczyk, Jacek Tabor, and Bernhard C Geiger. Segma: Semi-supervised
 gaussian mixture autoencoder. IEEE transactions on neural networks and learning systems, 32(9):
 3930–3941, 2020.
Kihyuk Sohn, Honglak Lee, and Xinchen Yan. Learning structured output representation using deep
  conditional generative models. Advances in neural information processing systems, 28, 2015.
Ugo Tanielian, Thibaut Issenhuth, Elvis Dohmatob, and Jeremie Mary. Learning disconnected
  manifolds: a no gan’s land. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 9418–9427.
  PMLR, 2020.
Piotr Tempczyk, Rafał Michaluk, Lukasz Garncarek, Przemysław Spurek, Jacek Tabor, and Adam
  Golinski. Lidl: Local intrinsic dimension estimation using approximate likelihood. In International
  Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 21205–21231. PMLR, 2022.


                                                 13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Ilya Tolstikhin, Olivier Bousquet, Sylvain Gelly, and Bernhard Schoelkopf. Wasserstein auto-encoders.
   ICLR, 2018.
René Vidal. Subspace clustering. IEEE Signal Processing Magazine, 28(2):52–68, 2011.
Valentin Villecroze, Harry J Braviner, Panteha Naderian, Chris J Maddison, and Gabriel Loaiza-
  Ganem. Bayesian nonparametrics for offline skill discovery. arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.04675,
  2022.
Joe H Ward Jr. Hierarchical grouping to optimize an objective function. Journal of the American
  statistical association, 58(301):236–244, 1963.
Han Xiao, Kashif Rasul, and Roland Vollgraf. Fashion-MNIST: a novel image dataset for bench-
  marking machine learning algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1708.07747, 2017.
Fei Ye and Adrian G Bors. Lifelong mixture of variational autoencoders. IEEE Transactions on
  Neural Networks and Learning Systems, 2021.
Tong Zhang, Pan Ji, Mehrtash Harandi, Wenbing Huang, and Hongdong Li. Neural collaborative
  subspace clustering. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 7384–7393. PMLR,
  2019.


                                                14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A    D EFINITION OF SUPPORT AND PROOF OF PROPOSITION 1

Before giving the standard definition of support, we motivate it. Intuitively, the support of a dis-
tribution P is “the smallest set” to which P assigns probability 1. The idea of “the smallest set”
satisfying a property is often formalized by taking the intersection of all sets satisfying the property.
Naı̈ve application of this principle however results in a “definition” of support with undesirable
properties. Consider for example the case where P is a standard Gaussian distribution on R. Clearly
any definition of support that we use should obey that the support of P is R. However, if we simply
follow the “definition” of support as the intersectionTof all sets of probability 1, we would not obtain
this: for any x ∈ R, clearly P(R \ {x}) = 1, yet x∈R R \ {x} = ∅, where ∅ denotes the empty
set. In other words, arbitrary intersections of sets of probability 1 need not have probability 1, and
in fact can have probability 0. More abstractly, sets of probability 1 are not closed under arbitrary
intersections, which is desirable when defining “the smallest set” satisfying a given property as the
intersection of all such sets. In order to solve this problem, the support is defined as the intersection
of all closed sets having probability 1 (closed sets are indeed closed under intersections).
Definition 1 (Support of probability distributions): Let Z be a topological space. Equipping Z
with its Borel σ-algebra to make it a measurable space, let P be a probability distribution on Z. Let
C(P) be the collection of all closed sets C in Z such that P(C) = 1. The support of P, denoted as
supp(P), is defined as:
                                                     \
                                        supp(P) =          C.                                     (4)
                                                     C∈C(P)


Before continuing, we point out that there exist counterexamples showing that the support of a
distribution need not have probability 1 (Schilling & Kühn, 2021, Examples 6.2 and 6.3). In other
words, even though closed sets are closed under intersections, closed sets of probability 1 need not
share this property. These examples are however much more contrived than the one above and of
no practical interest (if Z is a separable metric space, as is the case of Rd , then any Borel measure
P on Z satisfies P(supp(P)) = 1, see Bogachev (2007, Proposition 7.2.9)), and thus support is
commonly defined as above. Note that the assumption that PZ (supp(PZ )) = 1 in Proposition 1
could be replaced by the requirement that Z be a separable metric space and PZ a Borel measure on
it (which covers all settings of practical interest), although this would yield a slightly less general
result. We restate Proposition 1 below for convenience:
Proposition 1: Let Z and X be topological spaces and G : Z → X be continuous. Considering Z
and X as measurable spaces with their respective Borel σ-algebras, let PZ be a probability measure
on Z such that supp(PZ ) is connected and PZ (supp(PZ )) = 1. Then supp(G# PZ ) is connected.
Proof: As mentioned in the proof sketch in the main manuscript, showing that supp(G# PZ ) =
cl(G(supp(PZ ))), where cl(·) denotes closure in X , is enough, since by continuity of G,
G(supp(PZ )) is connected, and the closure of connected sets is itself connected.
We begin by verifying that cl(G(supp(PZ ))) ⊆ supp(G# PZ ). Let C ∈ C(G# PZ ). By definition of
C(G# PZ ), C is closed in X and is such that G# PZ (C) = 1. By definition of pushforward measure,
it follows that:
                                 PZ (G−1 (C)) = G# PZ (C) = 1,                                (5)
and by continuity of G, it also follows that G−1 (C) is closed in Z. Then, G−1 (C) ∈ C(PZ ), and by
definition of support, supp(PZ ) ⊆ G−1 (C). It then follows that G(supp(PZ )) ⊆ G(G−1 (C)) ⊆ C.
Since this holds for every C ∈ C(G# PZ ), we have that:
                                                \
                          G(supp(PZ )) ⊆                C = supp(G# PZ ).                       (6)
                                            C∈C(G# PZ )

Applying cl(·) on both sides, and using the fact that supp(G# PZ ) is closed in X (since it is an
intersection of closed sets), yields cl(G(supp(PZ ))) ⊆ supp(G# PZ ).
It now only remains to show that supp(G# PZ ) ⊆ cl(G(supp(PZ ))). By definition of pushforward
measure, we have that:
            G# PZ (G(supp(PZ ))) = PZ (G−1 (G(supp(PZ )))) ≥ PZ (supp(PZ )) = 1,                     (7)


                                                  15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


where the inequality follows from supp(PZ ) ⊆ G−1 (G(supp(PZ ))). Since G(supp(PZ )) ⊆
cl(G(supp(PZ ))), then G# PZ (cl(G(supp(PZ )))) = 1. It follows that cl(G(supp(PZ ))) ∈
C(G# PZ ), and thus supp(G# PZ ) ⊆ cl(G(supp(PZ ))) by definition of support.



B     D ISCONNECTED DGM S : D ETAILS

B.1    T RAINING DISCONNECTED DGM S

Algorithm 1: Training of disconnected DGMs
   Input: clustering algorithm(·), D
                   (ℓ)
   Output: {(PZ , Gℓ )}L   ℓ=1
 1 D1 , . . . , DL ← clustering algorithm(D)
 2 for ℓ = 1 to L do
                               (ℓ)
 3     Potentially initialize PZ and Gℓ
                                   (ℓ)
 4     Train Gℓ and potentially PZ on Dℓ
 5 end


Training We summarize the training procedure for disconnected DGMs that we mentioned in the
main manuscript in Algorithm 1. Note that we use the exact same computational budget to train
                              (ℓ)
a disconnected DGM {(PZ , Gℓ )}L       ℓ=1 as we do to train an equivalent non-disconnected baseline
(PZ , G). We begin with the observation that due to the serial nature of Algorithm 1, all L models
need not be in memory when training a disconnected DGM: once the ℓth model has been trained, it
can be moved to disk before loading the (ℓ + 1)th model to memory. In other words, even though
disconnected DGMs do have more parameters than their non-disconnected counterparts and thus
require more disk space to be stored, it is not needed at any point during training to load more than
a single model in memory. We also make the key observation that, if using the same architecture
                                                                                  (ℓ)
throughout (i.e. G and every Gℓ have the same architecture, as do PZ and PZ if they are trainable),
then training the non-disconnected DGM (PZ , G) for N epochs on D requires the same amount
                                   (ℓ)                                     (ℓ)
of compute as training each (PZ , Gℓ ) for N epochs, since every (PZ , Gℓ ) is trained on a smaller
dataset Dℓ . To see this in more detail, assume training (PZ , G) for a single epoch requires T gradient
                                                                                      (ℓ)
steps, so the total training cost is T N gradient steps. In order to train a single (PZ , Gℓ ) model for a
single epoch, since Dℓ is |D|/|Dℓ | times smaller than D, only |Dℓ |/|D|T gradient steps are required.
                             (ℓ)
Thus, training a single (PZ , Gℓ ) model for N epochs requires |Dℓ |/|D|T N gradient steps, and it
                                  (ℓ)
follows that training all the (PZ , Gℓ ) for ℓ = 1, . . . , L requires
                           L                       L
                           X |Dℓ |            TN X         TN
                                       TN =        |Dℓ | =     |D| = T N                              (8)
                                 |D|          |D|          |D|
                           ℓ=1                    ℓ=1

gradient steps. Finally, since exactly the same number of steps are required to train disconnected
and non-disconnected models, and these models share architectures, it follows that the FLOP and
memory costs of training them are indeed equivalent under our setup.

Clustering algorithm In order to generate the dataset clusters to train each component in our
disconnected DGMs (with the goal of approximating the connected components of the full dataset)
without labels, we perform agglomerative clustering (Rokach & Maimon, 2005) on the dataset. At
the start of the algorithm, each datapoint is in its own cluster. Then, at every step, the two clusters
with the smallest linkage distance are merged, decreasing the number of clusters by 1. This occurs
until a pre-specified number of clusters, L, is reached. For all of our datasets, we set L = 10 which is
the number of classes for the MNIST, FMNIST, SVHN, and CIFAR-10 datasets. We experimented
with ranges of L between 7 and 15 and did not find a large variation in performance. Automatically
inferring L from a dataset is the subject of future work and would make our clustering models
completely unsupervised. For all of our experiments involving agglomerative clustering, we used
Ward’s linkage criterion (Ward Jr, 1963). The distance between two clusters with this criterion is the
variance of the Euclidean distance between all datapoints in the clusters being merged. Therefore, at
each step, the two clusters with the smallest variance will be combined. We experimented with using


                                                   16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


single linkage, which defines the distance between two clusters as the minimum distance between a
datapoint in both clusters, but found that this led to very unbalanced cluster sizes and had very poor
performance when training our DGMs. We also tried a custom linkage metric that merges the two
clusters at each step to maximize the inter-cluster intrinsic dimension estimate variance, with the
intuition that building clusters with a large variance in intrinsic dimension would better model the
submanifolds of the dataset. In practice, we found this method very sensitive to initialization and saw
the same unbalanced cluster failure mode as the single linkage criterion.
For all of our experiments, we also tried using the k-means++ (Arthur & Vassilvitskii, 2007)
clustering algorithm. This also worked well but gave slightly worse results than agglomerative
clustering with Ward’s criterion across the board.

B.2     S AMPLING FROM DISCONNECTED DGM S

Algorithm 2: Sampling of disconnected DGMs
                                                (ℓ)
   Input: m, trained disconnected DGM {(PZ , Gℓ )}L
                                                  ℓ=1 , and corresponding cluster sizes
    |D1 |, . . . , |DL |.
   Output: S
 1 S ← ∅
                                                                    !!
                                               |D1 |                 |DL |
 2    (m1 , . . . , mL ) ∼ Multinomial m,   PL           , . . . , PL
                                             ℓ′ =1 |Dℓ |            ℓ′ =1 |Dℓ |
                                                      ′                      ′

 3 for ℓ = 1 to L do
  4    for t = 1 to mℓ do
                  (ℓ)
 5         Z ∼ PZ
 6         X = Gℓ (Z)
 7         S ← S ∪ {X}
 8     end
 9 end


As mentioned in the main manuscript, sampling from a disconnected DGM is achieved by first
sampling ℓ with probability proportional to |Dℓ |, and then sampling from the corresponding DGM:
                                |Dℓ |                        (ℓ)
                  ℓ ∼ p(ℓ) = PL           ,       Z | ℓ ∼ PZ ,      and    X = Gℓ (Z).               (9)
                              ℓ′ =1 |Dℓ |
                                       ′


Sampling from (9) can be made memory-efficient, and we now describe how to do so. Assume we
                                                                             (ℓ)
want to generate m samples from a trained disconnected DGM model {(PZ , Gℓ )}L         ℓ=1 . The idea is
to make sure that each of the L DGMs are only loaded into memory once and one at a time, which
requires first knowing exactly how many samples will be required from each model. Note that, if we
denote the number of samples coming from the ℓth model as mℓ , then clearly (m1 , . . . , mL ) follows
                                                                        PL
a multinomial distribution with parameters m and (|D1 |, . . . , |DL |)/ ℓ′ =1 |Dℓ′ |. We can thus first
sample from this multinomial, and then sample the appropriate number of times from each model, as
described in Algorithm 2. Note that, similarly to Algorithm 1, the outer for loop in Algorithm 2 can
                                                                        (ℓ)
be trivially made memory-efficient by loading the required model (PZ , Gℓ ) into memory and then
removing it from memory once it has been sampled from mℓ times (and the inner for loop can be
trivially parallelized).

C      A DDITIONAL RESULTS
C.1     D ISCONNECTED DGM S

Table 3 shows analogous results to those of Table 1 for VAEs. We can see that D-VAEs (classes)
consistently outperform VAEs and D-VAEs (random), except on CIFAR-100, further confirming the
disconnectedness of the support of the data. Also, conditional VAEs (classes) convincingly outperform
D-VAEs (classes) only on FMNIST and SVHN, and conditional VAEs (clusters) convincingly
outperform D-VAEs (clusters) only on these same datasets, showing once again that D-DGMs provide
a sensible way to account for disconnected supports.


                                                   17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Table 4 shows results of running a VAE+NF two-step model mentioned in subsubsection 4.2.2. We
can see that the best performing disconnected versions still outperform the non-disconnected version.
This is consistent with our previous results and highlights once again the relevance of accounting for
multiple connected components. As mentioned in the main manuscript though, there is no significant
improvement between fixing the latent dimension of every cluster to its estimated intrinsic dimension,
and simply fixing the intrinsic dimension of every cluster to the same value (the estimated intrinsic
dimension of the entire dataset).


                Table 3: FID scores. We show means and standard errors across 3 runs.
      Model                        MNIST           FMNIST          SVHN             CIFAR-10        CIFAR-100
      VAE                          110.7 ± 1.7     100.1 ± 0.6     93.2 ± 0.2       213.8 ± 1.3     198.4 ± 0.6
      D-VAE (random)               155.4 ± 1.3     125.6 ± 0.6     115.6 ± 0.7      232.3 ± 0.8     220.9 ± 0.8
      D-VAE (classes)              81.5 ± 0.7      87.7 ± 1.0      86.4 ± 2.0       202.4 ± 0.6     203.3 ± 1.9
      VAE (GMM)                    108.7 ± 1.6     99.2 ± 0.3      95.0 ± 0.7       213.7 ± 1.1     200.3 ± 1.6
      Conditional VAE (classes)    82.0 ± 0.3      84.7 ± 0.9      71.9 ± 1.4       211.6 ± 1.5     203.0 ± 1.7
      Conditional VAE (clusters)   92.3 ± 1.5      105.2 ± 1.0     100.2 ± 1.7      218.8 ± 0.3     260.9 ± 55.7
      D-VAE (clusters)             84.9 ± 1.0      106.9 ± 0.1     173.7 ± 15.4     220.8 ± 0.9     217.8 ± 0.9



                Table 4: FID scores. We show means and standard errors across 3 runs.
  Model                              MNIST           FMNIST          SVHN             CIFAR-10        CIFAR-100
  VAE+NF                             119.7 ± 2.6     140.8 ± 3.2     112.5 ± 0.4      216.4 ± 1.3     204.0 ± 0.7
                      ˆ classes)
  D-VAE+NF (constant d,              76.9 ± 1.1      86.6 ± 0.9      87.7 ± 0.8       198.8 ± 2.6     189.5 ± 0.9
                      ˆ
  D-VAE+NF (constant d,clusters)     75.1 ± 0.2      102.5 ± 1.6     196.5 ± 12.1     243.6 ± 6.1     207.2 ± 0.8
  D-VAE+NF (classes)                 74.5 ± 0.3      85.2 ± 1.2      92.4 ± 3.2       201.4 ± 1.6     188.1 ± 2.2
  D-VAE+NF (clusters)                73.0 ± 0.9      99.5 ± 0.8      184.6 ± 18.6     229.0 ± 3.9     207.8 ± 1.9



C.2     I NTRINSIC DIMENSION ESTIMATES


Figure 6: Variability of estimated class intrinsic dimension (with k = 10) across classes in blue (i.e.
11 dots, one per subsample), and across subsamples in green (i.e. one dot per class).


                                                        18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Variability of intrinsic dimension estimates In order to ensure that the variability of estimated in-
trinsic dimensions across classes observed in Figure 3 is caused by the true intrinsic dimensions being
different rather than the variance of the estimator we used, we carry out the following experiment: For
each dataset and each of their classes, we randomly subsample (without replacement) 1000 datapoints
(except for CIFAR-100 where use use 300 instead, as there are only 500 datapoints per class), and
estimate the corresponding class intrinsic dimension using only this reduced dataset. We repeat this
process an additional 10 times, and compute the variance of estimated intrinsic dimension across
classes (i.e. inter-class), and across subsamples (i.e. intra-class). Observing much lower variability
across subsamples–as we do in Figure 6 for all datasets except SVHN–shows that the variability
observed across classes cannot be explained by the variance of the estimator, once again supporting
the union of manifolds hypothesis. Note that we sample without replacement to avoid duplicates, as
these would result in a distance of 0 to their nearest neighbour.

Intrinsic dimension of specific classes We show a more granular breakdown of Figure 3, with
intrinsic dimension estimate values for each class in Figure 7 for MNIST, Figure 8 for FMNIST,
Figure 9 for SVHN, and Figure 10 for CIFAR-10. Since CIFAR-100 and ImageNet have too many
classes to show, we only include the top 5 highest and lowest intrinsic dimension classes in Figure 11
for CIFAR-100, and Figure 12 for ImageNet.


             Figure 7: Intrinsic dimension estimates for classes in the MNIST dataset.


                                                 19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


           Figure 8: Intrinsic dimension estimates for classes in the FMINST dataset.


            Figure 9: Intrinsic dimension estimates for classes in the SVHN dataset.


                                               20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


          Figure 10: Intrinsic dimension estimates for classes in the CIFAR-10 dataset.


         Figure 11: Intrinsic dimension estimates for classes in the CIFAR-100 dataset.


                                               21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


          Figure 12: Intrinsic dimension estimates for classes in the ImageNet dataset.


                                               22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


D     E XPERIMENTAL DETAILS

D.1    D ISCONNECTED DGM S

For all models, we randomly select 10% of the training dataset to be used for validation and train on
the remaining 90%. We use a separate test dataset to report all metrics for our models. A batch size
of 128 is used for all datasets. Unless otherwise noted, at the beginning of training, we scale all the
data to between 0 and 1. For all experiments, we use the ADAM optimizer (Kingma & Ba, 2015),
typically with learning rate 0.001 and cosine annealing for a maximum of 100 epochs. We also use
gradient norm clipping with a value of 10.

Simulated Data To generate the ground truth data, we create a uniform mixture of two components.
The first is a two dimensional square of width 1 centered at (0, 0.8). The distribution along the x and
y axis are independent beta distributions with (α, β) set to (2, 2) for the y axis and (2, 5) for the x
axis. The second component is a one dimensional sinusoid (with y as the input and x as the output)
that is one unit in length centred at 0.5 with an amplitude of 0.5 and a period of 1. The distribution
along this line is a beta distribution with (α, β) set to (2, 5). We generate 10,000 samples for training,
10,000 for validation and 5,000 for testing. We train three models on this simulated data. For the
baseline model we use a VAE with MLPs for the encoder and decoder, with ReLU activations. The
encoder and decoder each have a single hidden layer with 25 units. The latent dimension of the
model is set to 2. The learning rate is set to 0.0001. We do not use early stopping and train for 200
epochs. For the second model, we train a clustering VAE with two components trained using the
same setup as the baseline model. For the third model we train a disconnected VAE+VAE where
each component is a two step VAE+VAE model. Both VAEs have the same architecture and are each
trained the same way as the baseline model. The latent dimension of the GAE is obtained by running
the MLE intrinsic dimension estimator 2 on each component.

VAEs For MNIST and FMNIST, we use MLPs for the encoder and decoder, with ReLU activations.
The encoder and decoder have two hidden layers with 512 units. For SVHN, CIFAR-100 and
CIFAR-10, we use convolutional networks. The encoder and decoder have 4 convolutional layers
with (32, 32, 16, 16) and (16, 16, 32, 32) channels, respectively, followed by a flattening operation
and a fully-connected layer. The convolutional networks also use ReLU activations, and have kernel
size 3 and stride 1. The latent dimension of the model is set to 20. We use early stopping on validation
loss with a patience of 30 epochs, up to a maximum of 100 epochs. For the GMM, we set the prior
to have 10 modes with learnable mixture weights, means, and standard deviations. The mixture
components of the prior were initialized with fixed means spaced 3 units apart centred at 0, standard
deviations of 1, and uniform mixture weights. For all models, the decoder’s variance is not learned.

WAEs For all datasets, we use an MLP with 2 hidden layers of size 256 each for the discriminator.
The encoder and decoder for all datasets are the same convolutional networks used for VAEs except
we increase the channels to (64, 64, 32, 32) and (32, 32, 64, 64) respectively. The latent dimension
of the model is also set to 20. We train every model for a total of 300 epochs and perform early
stopping on the reconstruction error with a patience of 30 epochs only for the GMM baselines. We
note that when training for the full 300 epochs (without early stopping) the GMM baselines perform
significantly worse and the other models perform better. We use a learning rate of 0.0005 for the
discriminator and do not use any learning rate schedule for the model. We weight the discriminator
loss with a lambda value of 10. For the GMM, we set the prior to have 10 modes with fixed means
spaced 3 units apart centred at 0, fixed standard deviations of 1, and uniform mixture weights. We
attempted to learn these parameters similar to the VAE but observed worse results.

VAE+NF For the VAE GAE, we followed the same setup as the single VAE. For the NF, we use a
rational quadratic spline flow (Durkan et al., 2019) with 64 hidden units, 4 layers, and 3 blocks per
layer. For all datasets, we standardize the data (ie. the latent vectors of the VAE) by subtracting the
mean and dividing by the standard deviation. We do not scale the data or apply a logit transform. The
latent dimension is set to the estimated intrinsic dimension of the cluster for fitted models, and set to
20 otherwise.


                                                   23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


WAE+NF For the WAE, we followed the same setup as the single WAE except we use residual
networks (He et al., 2016) to handle the larger and more complex golden retriever datasets. The
encoder first applies a convolution (increasing the channel dimension to 16), batch normalization, and
ReLU activation to the input before a max pool operation with stride 2 and kernel size of 3. The main
body of the encoder is a set of 4 residual layers with channel dimensions (16, 32, 64, 128). Each layer
consists of two basic blocks which are two consecutive convolution, BatchNorm (Ioffe & Szegedy,
2015) and ReLU layers where the input of the block is added to the model’s activations before the
final ReLU. The stride of the first convolution of each layer is set to 2 to halve the spatial resolution.
The skip connection is downsampled by a convolution with a stride of 2. The activations are then
average-pooled across each channel and projected to the latent space dimension by a linear layer.
The decoder is identical to the encoder main body except there are no downsampling operations, the
spatial resolution of the activation is doubled at each layer by bilinear upsampling and the channel
dimensions are (128, 64, 32, 16). For the GAE, we do not perform early stopping and train for
100 epochs. The latent dimension is set to 20. The NF density estimator is also identical to the
VAE+NF setup except we perform early stopping on validation loss with a patience of 30 epochs, for
a maximum of 100 epochs.

D.2    E XPLOITING THE UNION OF MANIFOLDS HYPOTHESIS : S UPERVISED LEARNING

In order to investigate if there is a correlation between intrinsic dimension and the difficulty of
classification for a given class, we train three different classifiers on CIFAR-100 and measure the
accuracy for each class. We use the same hyperparameters and training strategy for each of the
three models we consider (VGG-19 (Simonyan & Zisserman, 2015), ResNet-18, and ResNet-34
(He et al., 2016)). We do not modify the model architecture except for changing the dimension
of the last linear layer to project into a 100-dimensional vector to match the number of classes in
CIFAR-100. We use the CIFAR-100 dataset test split (10,000 images) then randomly select 10%
of the training dataset as our validation set (5,000 images) and use the remaining 90% as our train
split. Note that this validation split is constant across all runs. The classification accuracy is reported
as the accuracy on the test set on the same epoch where the best validation accuracy is achieved.
We do not add any data augmentations as doing so could modify intrinsic dimension estimates and
confound our results. Studying the relationship between intrinsic dimension and data augmentations
is an interesting direction for future work. The combination of (1) no data augmentations, and (2) the
presence of a validation set causes our results to be lower than the state-of-the-art for the models,
although the results remain self-consistent here. We train each model using the cross entropy loss
for a total of 200 epochs starting with a learning rate of 0.1 and decrease this to 10−2 , 4 × 10−3 ,
and 8 × 10−4 after 60, 120, and 160 epochs respectively. We use the standard SGD optimizer with
momentum set to 0.9 and train with a weight decay of 5 × 10−4 . For all datasets, we normalize by
the channel-wise mean and standard deviation of all training images. We use a batch size of 128 for
training, and a batch size of 100 for both validation and test.
We now detail the exact loss we used for our experiments with the re-weighted cross entropy loss. A
weighted version of the categorical cross entropy loss is given by:
                                        n X
                                        X L
                                    −             ωℓ · yi,ℓ · log fθ (xi )ℓ ,                         (10)
                                        i=1 ℓ=1

where yi is a one-hot vector of length L corresponding to the label of xi , fθ (xi ) is the L-dimensional
output of the classifier containing assigned class probabilities, and ωℓ is the scalar weight given to
the ℓth class. The standard categorical cross entropy uses the weights ωℓ = 1 for ℓ = 1, . . . , L. Our
modified weights are given by:
                                                        (ℓ)
                                                      dˆ
                                        ωℓ = L · PL k (ℓ′ ) .                                        (11)
                                                     ′    dˆ
                                                          ℓ =1   k
Note that when the intrinsic dimension estimates of all classes match, our proposed weights recover
the standard ones, but more heavily weight classes of higher intrinsic dimension otherwise.


                                                       24
