Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


D IVERSIFY AND D ISAMBIGUATE :
O UT- OF -D ISTRIBUTION ROBUSTNESS VIA D ISAGREEMENT

 Yoonho Lee∗                            Huaxiu Yao                         Chelsea Finn
 Stanford University                    Stanford University                Stanford University



                                                 A BSTRACT

             Real-world machine learning problems often exhibit shifts between the source and
             target distributions, in which source data does not fully convey the desired behav-
             ior on target inputs. Different functions that achieve near-perfect source accuracy
             can make differing predictions on test inputs, and such ambiguity makes robust-
             ness to distribution shifts challenging. We propose DivDis, a simple two-stage
             framework for identifying and resolving ambiguity in data. DivDis first learns a
             diverse set of hypotheses that achieve low source loss but make differing predic-
             tions on target inputs. We then disambiguate by selecting one of the discovered
             functions using additional information, for example, a small number of target la-
             bels. Our experimental evaluation shows improved performance in subpopulation
             shift and domain generalization settings, demonstrating that DivDis can scalably
             adapt to distribution shifts in image and text classification benchmarks.


1       I NTRODUCTION
Datasets are often underspecified: multiple plausible hypotheses each describe the data equally well
(D’Amour et al., 2020), and the data offers no further evidence to prefer one over another. Despite
such ambiguity, machine learning models typically choose only one of the possible explanations of
given data. Such choices can be suboptimal, causing these models to fail when the data distribution
is shifted, as common in real-world applications. For example, examination of a chest X-ray dataset
(Oakden-Rayner et al., 2020) has shown that many images of patients with pneumothorax include a
thin drain used for treating the disease. A standard classifier trained on this dataset can erroneously
identify such drains as a predictive feature of the disease, exhibiting degraded accuracy on the in-
tended distribution of patients not yet being treated. To not suffer from such failures, it is desirable
to have a model that can discover a diverse collection of alternate plausible hypotheses.
The standard empirical risk minimization (Vapnik, 1992, ERM) paradigm performs poorly on under-
specified data, because ERM tends to select the solution based on the most salient features without
considering alternatives (Geirhos et al., 2020; Shah et al., 2020; Scimeca et al., 2021). This sim-
plicity bias occurs even when training an ensemble (Hansen & Salamon, 1990; Lakshminarayanan
et al., 2017) because each model is still biased towards simple functions. While many recent meth-
ods (Ganin et al., 2016; Sagawa et al., 2020; Liu et al., 2021) improve robustness in distribution
shift settings, we find that they fail on data with more severe underspecification. This is because,
similarly to ERM, these methods only consider a single solution even in situations where multiple
explanations exist.
We propose Diversify and Disambiguate (DivDis), a two-stage framework for learning from under-
specified data. Our key idea is to learn a collection of diverse functions that are consistent with
the training data but make differing predictions on unlabeled test datapoints. DivDis operates as
follows. We train a neural network consisting of a shared backbone feature extractor with multiple
heads, each representing a different function. As in regular training, each head is trained to predict
labels for training data, but the heads are additionally encouraged to represent different functions
from each other. More specifically, the heads are trained to make disagreeing predictions on a sepa-
rate unlabeled dataset from the test distribution, a setting close to transductive learning. At test time,
we select one member of the diversified functions by querying labels for the datapoints most infor-
mative for disambiguation. We visually summarize this framework in Fig. 1. DivDis is designed for
    ∗
        Email: yoonho@cs.stanford.edu. Code is available at https://github.com/yoonholee/DivDis.


                                                       1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 1: Our two-stage framework for learning from underspecified data. In the D IVERSIFY stage, we train
each head in a multi-headed neural network to accurately predict the labels of source data while also outputting
differing predictions for unlabeled target data. In the D ISAMBIGUATE stage, we choose one of the heads by
observing labels for an informative subset of the target data.

scenarios with underspecified data and distribution shift, and its heads will not yield a set of diverse
functions in settings where only one function can achieve low training loss.
We evaluate DivDis in several settings in which underspecification limits the performance of prior
methods, such as standard subpopulation shift benchmarks (Sagawa et al., 2020) or the large-scale
CXR and Camelyon17 datasets (Wang et al., 2017; Sagawa et al., 2022). DivDis achieves an over
15% improvement in worst-group accuracy on the Waterbirds task when tuning hyperparameters
without any spurious attribute annotations, and outperforms existing semi-supervised methods on
the Camelyon17 task. We also consider challenging problem settings in which labels are completely
correlated with spurious attributes, so a classifier based on the spurious feature can achieve zero
loss. In these completely correlated settings, our experiments find that DivDis is substantially more
sample-efficient: DivDis with 4 target domain labels outperforms two fine-tuning methods that use
128 labels.

2    L EARNING F ROM U NDERSPECIFIED DATA
We consider a supervised learning setting in which we train a model f that takes input x ∈
X and predicts its corresponding label y ∈ Y. We train f with a labeled dataset DS =
{(x1 , y1 ), (x2 , y2 ), . . .} drawn from data distribution pS (x, y). The model f is selected from hy-
pothesis class f ∈ F by approximately minimizing the predictive risk EpS (x,y) [ℓ(f (x), y)] on the
data distribution. The model f is evaluated via its predictive risk on held-out samples from pS (x, y).
Standard procedures such as regularization and cross-validation encourage such generalization.
However, even if a function f generalizes to unseen data sampled from the same distribution
pS (x, y), performance often deteriorates in distribution shift conditions, when we evaluate on target
data sampled from a different distribution pT (x, y). In many distribution shift scenarios (Koh et al.,
2021), the overall data distribution can be modeled as a mixture of domains, where each domain
d ∈ D corresponds to a fixed data distribution pd (x, y). In this paper, we specifically consider a
subpopulation shift setting, wherePthe source and targetPdistributions are different mixtures of the
same underlying domains: pS = d∈D wdS pd and pT = d∈D wdT pd , where {wdS }d∈D ̸= {wdT }d∈D .
Conditions like subpopulation shift can be inherently underspecified because the generative process
underlying the data distribution, i.e. the domains and coefficients, has so many possibilities. We
formalize this intuition through a notion of near-optimal sets of hypotheses. We define the ε-optimal
set for a data distribution as follows:
Definition 1 (ε-optimal set). Let p(x, y) be a distribution over X × Y, and F a set of predictors
f : X → Y. Let Lp : F → R be the risk with respect to p(x, y). The ε-optimal set with respect to
F at level ε ≥ 0 is defined as
                                        F ε = {f ∈ F|Lp (f ) ≤ ε}.                                          (1)

Put differently, the ε-optimal set consists of all functions that generalize within the distribution
p(x, y). The constant ε controls the degree of generalization, and we consider small ε here onwards.
Note that a model’s predictions on samples from pS (x, y)—whether DS or a held-out validation
set—cannot be used to distinguish between different near-optimal functions with respect to pS (x, y).
This is because by definition, the predictions of any two models f1 , f2 ∈ F ε are nearly identical on
pS (x, y) for small ε. Based on source data alone, we have insufficient reason to prefer any member
of F ε over another. Our state of belief should therefore cover F ε as comprehensively as possible,
putting nonzero weight on many functions that embody different inductive biases. This reasoning


                                                       2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


is consistent with existing principles for reasoning under uncertainty such as the maximum entropy
principle (Keynes, 1921; Jaynes, 1957): in the absence of complete knowledge, one’s beliefs should
be appropriately spread across all possibilities that are consistent with the available information.
Unfortunately, these principles are notably difficult to implement in practice because of the size and
dimensionality of F ε . We thus incorporate a mild additional assumption into our problem statement
that substantially reduces the set of solutions to consider. We use an unlabeled target dataset DT
sampled from pT (x). The functions inside F ε can be compared based on how their predictions
differ on DT . This simplifies the initial infinite-dimensional problem of comparing functions to one
of comparing finite sets of predictions, significantly reducing the scope of search. The target set DT
can also be seen as specifying the directions of functional variation that are most important to us.
We formalize the underspecification with respect to predictions on unlabeled target data through the
following variant of ε-optimal sets:
Definition 2 (Dε-optimal set). Let D = {x1 , . . . , xn } be an unlabeled dataset, p(x, y) a data
distribution, and F a hypothesis class. Let F ε be the ε-optimal set with respect to p(x, y) and F.
The Dε-optimal set F Dε is the set of equivalence classes of F ε defined by the following relation ∼
                                                                                                      D
between two functions:
                                f ∼g     if   f (x) = g(x) ∀x ∈ D.                                  (2)
                                   D


Compared to F ε , the dataset-dependent set F Dε is typically much smaller and easier to manipulate,
since it is defined through predictions (∈ Y) rather than raw functions.
Problem statement. To summarize, we use a labeled source dataset DS = {(x1 , y1 ), . . .} along
with an unlabeled target dataset DT = {xt1 , . . .}. We assume there is subpopulation shift between
the two datasets, and our goal is to find a function that performs well in the target distribution. Such
a function will lie inside the near-optimal set F ε of pS (x, y), and the learner leverages DT to find
diverse functions inside this set.

3     D IVERSIFY AND D ISAMBIGUATE
We now describe Diversify and Disambiguate (DivDis), a two-stage framework for learning from
underspecified data. We first describe the general framework (Sec. 3.1), and then our specific imple-
mentation of the two D IVERSIFY (Sec. 3.2) and D ISAMBIGUATE (Sec. 3.3) stages.

3.1   G ENERAL F RAMEWORK

As a running example to motivate our algo-         Algorithm 1 DivDis training
rithm, consider an underspecified cow-camel
image classifiation task in which the source           Input: Source data DS , Target data DT , Initial
data includes images of cows with grass back-          parameters θ0 , Heads N , Weights λ1 , λ2
grounds and camels with sand backgrounds.              Stage one: D IVERSIFY               ▷ Sec. 3.2
We can imagine two completely different clas-          while Not converged do
sifiers each achieving perfect accuracy in the            (XS , YS ) ∼ DS , XT ∼ DT
source distribution: one that classifies by ani-          ℓxent ← Lxent (θ; XS , YS )
mal and the other by background. After iden-              ℓMI ← LMI (θ; XT )                      ▷ (3)
tifying both possible functions, we can resolve           ℓreg ← Lreg (θ; XT , XS )               ▷ (4)
the ambiguity by observing the label of a sin-            θ ← θ − α∇θ (ℓxent + λ1 ℓMI + λ2 ℓreg ) ▷ (5)
gle image of a cow in the desert.
                                                     Stage two: D ISAMBIGUATE               ▷ Sec. 3.3
With this motivation, DivDis aims to first find      DT∗ ← Top m datapoints w.r.t. disagreement
a set of diverse functions and then choose the       for Head i = 1..N do
best member of this set with minimal supervi-            Acci ← Accuracy of head i on DT∗
sion. The DivDis framework consists of two           Return arg maxi Acci
stages. In the first stage, we D IVERSIFY by
training a finite set of functions that together
approximate the Dε-optimal set for target data DT . This stage uses both the source and target
datasets for training. The source data ensures that all functions achieve low predictive loss on
pS (x, y), while the target data reveals whether or not the functions rely on different predictive fea-


                                                   3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


tures. In the second stage, we D ISAMBIGUATE by choosing the best member among this set of
functions, for example, by observing the label of a target datapoint for which the heads disagree on.

3.2   D IVERSIFY : T RAIN D ISAGREEING H EADS
As previously described, the D IVERSIFY stage learns a diverse collection of functions by compar-
ing predictions for the target set while minimizing training error. In our hypothetical cow-camel
task, diversifying predictions in this way will produce functions that disagree on ambiguous data-
points like cows in the desert. Such disagreement can cause one head to become an animal classifier
and another to be a background classifier.
We represent and train multiple functions using a multi-headed neural network with N heads. For
an input datapoint x, we denote the prediction of head i as fi (x) = ybi . We ensure that each head
achieves low predictive risk on the source domain by minimizing the cross-entropy loss for each
head Lxent (fi ) = Ex,y∼DS [l(fi (x), y)].
Ideally, each function would rely on different predictive features in the input. While the most
straightforward solution is to enforce differing predictions from each function, this does not nec-
essarily indicate that the two functions rely on different features. As an extreme example, consider a
function f for a binary classification problem and its “adversary” f¯ which outputs the exact opposite
of f on the target dataset. Even though f and f¯ disagree completely on the target distribution, they
rely on the same input features.
We train each pair of heads to produce predictions that are close to being statistically independent
from each other. Independence of prediction values directly implies disagreement in predictions: for
example, mutual information is maximized when two prediction heads completely agree with each
other. Concretely, we minimize the mutual information between each pair of predictions:
                             LMI (fi , fj ) = DKL (p(ybi , ybj ) || p(ybi ) ⊗ p(ybj )) ,              (3)
where DKL (· || ·) is the KL divergence and ybi is the prediction fi (x) for x ∼ DT . In practice, we
optimize this quantity using empirical estimates of the distributions p(ybi , ybj ) and p(ybi ) ⊗ p(ybj ).
To prevent functions from collapsing to degenerate solutions such as predicting a single label for the
entire target set while maintaining good source accuracy, we also minimize an optional regulariza-
tion loss which regularizes the marginal prediction of each head across the target dataset:
                                      Lreg (fi ) = DKL (p(ybi ) || p(y)) ,                            (4)
where p(y) is a hyperparameter. Our experiments in Fig. 14 show that DivDis is not very sensitive
to the choice of this hyperparameter. If we expect the label distribution of the source and target
datasets to be similar, we can simply set p(y) to be the label distribution in the source dataset DS .
The overall objective for the D IVERSIFY stage is a weighted sum with hyperparameters λ1 , λ2 ∈ R:
                     X                      X                      X
                           Lxent (fi ) + λ1    LMI (fi , fj ) + λ2   Lreg (fi ).               (5)
                         i                         i̸=j                          i

We note that the quantities needed for the mutual information term (3) is easily computed in parallel
across examples within a batch using modern deep learning libraries; we show a code snippet in
Appendix B. In practice, the cost of computing the objective (5) is dominated by the cost of feeding
two batches—one source and one target—to the network. The time- and space- complexity of one
step in the D IVERSIFY stage is approximately ×2 compared to a standard SGD step in optimizing
ERM with the source data, and both can be reduced by using a smaller batch size.

3.3   D ISAMBIGUATE : S ELECT THE B EST H EAD
After learning a diverse set of functions that all achieve good training performance in the D IVER -
SIFY stage, we D ISAMBIGUATE by selecting one of the functions. For example, once our model
has learned both the animal and background classifiers for the cow-camel task, we can quickly see
which is right by observing the ground-truth label of an image of a cow in the desert. As such an
example is not present in the given labeled source or unlabeled target data, this stage requires infor-
mation beyond what was used in the first stage. We now present three different strategies for head
selection during the D ISAMBIGUATE stage.


                                                          4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Active querying. To select the best head with a minimal amount of supervision, we propose an
active querying procedure, in which the model acquires labels for the most informative subset of the
unlabeled target dataset DT . Since larger difference in predictions indicates more information for
            P we sort each target datapoint x ∈ DT according to the total distance between head
disambiguation,
predictions i̸=j |fi (x) − fj (x)|. We select a small subset of the target dataset, which has the m
datapoints (i.e. m ≪ |DT |) with the highest value of this metric. We measure the accuracy of each
of the N heads with respect to this labeled set and select the head with the highest accuracy.
Random querying. A related alternative to the active querying strategy is random querying, in
which we label a random subset of the target dataset DT . Beyond its simplicity, an advantage of
this procedure is that one can perform labeling in advance, because the datapoints to be labeled do
not depend on the results of the D IVERSIFY stage. However, random querying is substantially less
label-efficient than active querying because the set will likely include unambiguous datapoints for
which labels are less informative for head selection.
Disambiguation on source data. Even if two functions are near-optimal in terms of labels, other
properties of the source data DS can distinguish between the two. Visualization techniques such as
Grad-CAM (Selvaraju et al., 2017) reveal which region of the input is relevant to each head. Such
regions can be compared against the true predictive features by a human observer. This comparison
could also be performed in an automated way using existing bounding box annotations or pixel-wise
segmentation labels, such as those available for the ImageNet and COCO datasets (Deng et al., 2009;
Lin et al., 2014). A key advantage of this method is that we do not require anything from the target
domain beyond unlabeled datapoints.
We note that the active and random query strategies do not use any information unavailable to
previous approaches: existing methods (Nam et al., 2020; Liu et al., 2021) use labeled target data to
tune hyperparameters. Unless stated otherwise, we use active querying because of its superior label
efficiency. In Appendix E, we further analyze such label efficiency through a generalization bound
that depends only on the number of heads and the difference between the best and second best head.
In our experiments, the active strategy required as little as a single label. We emphasize that as long
as the best head is selected, the choice of disambiguation method only affects label efficiency, and
the final performance of the selected head is the same for all three methods. We summarize the
overall structure of DivDis in Algorithm 1.
4     E XPERIMENTS
Through our experimental evaluation, we aim to answer the following questions. (1) What functions
does the D IVERSIFY stage discover on simple, low-dimensional problems? (2) Can DivDis tackle
image and language classification problems with severe underspecification, in which simplicity bias
hinders the performance of existing approaches? (3) How sensitive is DivDis to hyperparameters,
and what data assumptions are needed to tune them? (4) How does DivDis compare to unsupervised
domain adaptation algorithms, which also leverage unlabeled data from the target domain?
Unless stated otherwise, DivDis uses a network with 2 heads and the D ISAMBIGUATE stage uses
the active querying strategy with 16 labels, which we found suffices to recover the best between two
heads. We closely follow the experimental settings of previous works, and all experimental details
including datasets, architectures, and hyperparameters are in the appendix.

4.1   I LLUSTRATIVE T OY TASK

2D classification task. We start with a synthetic 2D binary classification problem to see what
functions the D IVERSIFY stage discovers. The task is shown in Fig. 2 (left): inputs are points on
a plane, and the source distribution includes points in the second and fourth quadrants while the
target distribution covers all four quadrants. By design, the labels for the points in the first and third
quadrants are ambiguous. We train a network with two heads and measure target accuracy of each
head throughout the D IVERSIFY stage. We visualize learning curves and decision boundaries in
Fig. 3, which show that while the two heads initially learn to fit the source data, they later diverge
to functions based on different predictive features. We also show an extended visualization with
additional metrics in the appendix (Fig. 8).
Coverage of near-optimal set. To further understand how well DivDis can cover the set of near-
optimal functions, we trained a 20-head model on the same 2D classification task, where each head


                                                    5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


      Class 1    Class 2     Unlabeled

Figure 2: Left: synthetic 2D classi-
fication task with underspecification.    Figure 3: Learning curves for DivDis with 2 heads trained on the
Right: decision boundaries of 20 linear   synthetic 2D classification task. We show the target domain accu-
functions discovered by the D IVER -      racy of each head, along with that of ERM for comparison. The
SIFY stage. Together, these functions     two heads initially represent similar functions, but later on diverge
span the set of linear decision bound-    to represent classifiers that rely on entirely different features while
aries consistent with the data.           remaining consistent with the source data. Head 2 achieves substan-
                                          tially higher accuracy than ERM.

is a linear classifier. Results in Fig. 2 (right) show that the heads together span the set of linear
classifiers consistent with the source data. Note that this set includes the function with the diagonal
decision boundary (y = x). This result suggests that given enough heads, the set of functions learned
by DivDis can sufficiently cover the set of near-optimal functions, including the simplest function
learned by existing methods.
Comparison with ensembles. We compare the diversity of the functions produced by the D I -
VERSIFY stage to that of independently trained models on a 3-dimensional version of the binary
classification task. We measure how much each function relies on each of the three input dimensions
through the Pearson correlation coefficient between each input dimension and the prediction. Visu-
alizations in Fig. 9 of Appendix D show that the functions learned by DivDis depend on different
input features, whereas independently trained models use a roughly equal mix of all features. This
experiment demonstrates that the diversity in a vanilla ensemble cannot effectively cover the set of
near-optimal functions, and is therefore insufficient for underspecified problems.

4.2    TASKS WITH C OMPLETE S PURIOUS C ORRELATION

We evaluate DivDis on datasets with a complete correlation, where the source distribution has a
spuriously correlated attribute that can predict the label perfect accuracy. To make this problem
tractable, we leverage unlabeled target data DT for which the spurious attribute is not completely
correlated with labels, as in the toy classification task (Fig. 2). Introducing complete correlations
makes the problem considerably harder than existing subpopulation shift problems, because even
the ε-optimal set with ε = 0 includes classifiers based on the spurious attribute.
Real data with complete correlation. We evaluate DivDis on several benchmarks for spurious
correlation (Waterbirds, CelebA, MultiNLI) that we modified to exhibit a complete correlation be-
tween the label and the spurious attribute. Speficially, we alter the source dataset to include only the
majority groups (e.g. waterbird with water background) and (e.g. landbird with land background).
We use the original target validation set as the unlabeled data for the D IVERSIFY stage. We denote
these tasks as Waterbirds-CC etc., to distinguish from the original benchmarks. These tasks are con-
siderably more difficult than the original, and they introduce a specific challenge not addressed in
the existing literature: leveraging the difference in source and target data distribution to encode and
subsequently disambiguate tasks with high degrees of underspecification. To our best knowledge,
no prior methods are designed to address such complete correlations.
To examine the sample efficiency of the additional label queries used by DivDis during the D IS -
AMBIGUATE stage, we experiment with N = {4, 8, 16, 32, 64, 128} labeled target examples on
the Waterbirds-CC and CelebA-CC tasks, evaluating the performance using both active and random
querying. We consider two baseline methods which similarly use N datapoints from the target distri-
bution in addition to the completely correlated source data: (1) ERM on the Waterbirds-CC training
dataset with N additional minority datapoints and (2) Deep Feature Reweighting (Kirichenko et al.,
2022, DFR), which first trains an ERM model on the training dataset and then fine-tunes the last
layer on a group-balanced set of size N . Fig. 4 shows that while DFR is substantially more sample-
efficient than ERM, possibly due to its two-stage nature, even DivDis with random querying shows


                                                       6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023

                                   Waterbirds                                  CelebA
                      90                                     90                                                                85
                      80                                     80                                                                80
                      70                                     70                                                                75


Worst-group Acc (%)
                                                                                                                                                                     DivDis


                                                                                                                Accuracy (%)
                      60                                                                                                       70                                    ERM
                                                             60
                      50                                                                                                       65                                    GDRO
                                                             50                                                                                                      JTT
                      40                                                                                                       60
                      30                   DivDis (active)   40                                                                55
                                           DivDis (random)                                                                                       Random Guessing
                                           DFR               30                                                                50
                      20
                                           ERM + Minority                                                                      45
                      10                                     20                                                                     0.0   0.2    0.4     0.6   0.8       1.0
                           4   8     16 32 64          128        4   8     16 32 64                  128                                         Mix Ratio
                                   Target Labels                          Target Labels
                                                                                                                                    (a) Accuracy vs mix ratio.                 (b) Grad-CAM visualization.

Figure 4: Worst-group accuracy on Waterbirds-CC                                                                 Figure 5: (a) Accuracy of DivDis, ERM, Group DRO,
and CelebA-CC data, given different numbers of la-                                                              and JTT on MNIST-CIFAR data with different correla-
beled target examples. DivDis is significantly more                                                             tion ratios. (b) Grad-CAM visualization of two learned
label-efficient than other methods in learning from                                                             heads on a random datapoint from the MNIST-CIFAR
non-majority labels.                                                                                            source dataset. See Sec. 4.2 for details.

                                                                                                  Avg Acc, Source Dist                            Avg Acc, Target Dist               Worst Acc, Target Dist
                                                     Worst (%)                             1e-1 84.1 83.4 83.9 77.0 50.2                        87.3 86.8 86.6 80.4 50.1           72.8 72.5 74.5 60.0 1.4

                 Ensemble                            34.8 ± 1.0                            1e0 85.0 88.3 88.4 86.4 54.2                         88.0 90.1 90.7 89.8 58.3           74.0 83.2 81.0 84.4 23.4
                                                                          MI loss weight

                 Teney et al. (2021)                 33.4 ± 1.6                            1e1 83.4 83.5 89.2 85.4 53.7                         89.3 89.5 89.9 88.9 59.0           81.0 85.6 84.7 83.9 18.9
                 Ensemble + Dis                      36.0 ± 1.2                            1e2 71.5 82.4 78.2 82.1 54.5                         80.4 87.5 90.2 88.3 58.0           47.1 70.6 80.9 75.2 18.0
                 DivDis (ours)                       82.4 ± 1.9
                                                                                           1e3 51.2 66.4 72.2 64.1 53.2                         52.7 76.7 77.9 68.6 55.1            1.0 44.0 54.6 34.2 9.2
Table 1: Worst-group accuracy of                                                                1e-2 1e-1 1e0 1e1 1e2                           1e-2 1e-1 1e0 1e1 1e2              1e-2 1e-1 1e0 1e1 1e2
                                                                                                     Regularizer weight                              Regularizer weight                 Regularizer weight
various ensemble methods on the
Waterbirds-CC dataset. All meth-                                          Figure 6: Hyperparameter grids for DivDis on the Waterbirds dataset.
ods use two heads or ensemble                                             We show three metrics: average accuracy on the source and target dis-
members.                                                                  tributions and worst-group accuracy on the target distribution. The high
                                                                          correlation between the three metrics indicates that we can tune the hy-
                                                                          perparameters of DivDis using only held-out labeled source data.


substantially higher sample efficiency. This indicates that the small set of diverse functions learned
during the D IVERSIFY stage is critical for quickly learning from additional minority data.
As an additional naïve point of comparison in the complete correlation setting, we evaluate the per-
formance of existing methods for addressing spurious correlations: ERM, JTT (Liu et al., 2021),
and Group DRO (Sagawa et al., 2020)). As these methods are designed for settings with a milder
spurious correlation and do not leverage additional information through unlabeled target data, they
are expected to fail in the complete correlation setting. Results for the Waterbirds-CC, CelebA-CC,
and MultiNLI-CC tasks in Tab. 6 of Appendix D show that these methods show subpar performance:
their worst-group accuracy is worse than that of random guessing in some settings, and have a per-
formance gap with DivDis of up to 35% in worst-group accuracy. In Tab. 1, we also compare DivDis
to a vanilla ensemble and our implementation of Teney et al. (2021), where we observe no further
benefits from these ensemble methods in our complete correlation setting. This experiment also
shows that DivDis achieves substantially higher worst-group accuracy compared to applying the Dis
stage to an independent ensemble, demonstrating that that the Div stage is critical for performance.
Overcoming simplicity bias on MNIST-CIFAR data. In the MNIST-CIFAR task (Shah et al.,
2020), each datapoint is a concatenation of one MNIST image and one CIFAR image, and labels are
binary. The source dataset is completely correlated: the first class consists of (MNIST zero, CIFAR
car) images, and the second class is (MNIST one, CIFAR truck). The unlabeled target dataset is
constructed from the validation sets of MNIST and CIFAR, and has no such correlation. By design,
the unseen combinations are ambiguous. We evaluate on variants of MNIST-CIFAR with different
levels of underspecification. We denote the mix ratio of DS as r ∈ [0, 1], where r = 0 indicates
completely correlated data as described above, and r = 1 indicates the distribution of the target set.
Fig. 5a shows the target domain accuracy of DivDis, ERM, Group DRO (Sagawa et al., 2020), and
JTT (Liu et al., 2021) after training with various mix ratios. Existing methods fail to do better than
random guessing (50%) in the completely correlated setting (ratio= 0.0), whereas DivDis achieves
over 75% accuracy. Higher ratios make the problem closer to an i.i.d. setting where the source and
target distributions are identical, and the two methods achieve similar accuracy.
Comparison of D ISAMBIGUATE strategies on MNIST-CIFAR data. Using MNIST-CIFAR
data with a complete correlation, we plot the average final accuracy after the D ISAMBIGUATE


                                                                                                            7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023



                     Waterbirds Worst Acc       CelebA Worst Acc                                Test Acc
    Tuned with:      Worst       Average        Worst       Average          Pseudo-Label      67.7 ± 8.2
    CVaR DRO         75.9%        62.0%         64.4%        36.1%           DANN              68.4 ± 9.2
    LfF              78.0%        44.1%         77.2%        24.4%           FixMatch          71.0 ± 4.9
    JTT              86.7%        62.5%         81.1%        40.6%           CORAL             77.9 ± 6.6
                                                                             NoisyStudent      86.7 ± 1.7
    DivDis (ours)    85.6%        81.0%         55.0%       55.0%
                                                                             DivDis (ours)     90.4 ± 1.8
Table 2: Worst-group test accuracies in the Waterbirds and CelebA tasks,
when tuning hyperparameters with respect to average and worst-group        Table 3: OOD test accuracy on
accuracies. DivDis is substantially more robust to hyperparameter choice   Camelyon17-WILDS. All meth-
in both tasks, allowing us to tune hyperparameters without group labels.   ods leverage unlabeled target data.

stage for both the active query and random query strategies, for different number of labels used.
Fig. 11 of Appendix D shows that active querying in particular is very efficient, and one label
suffices for finding the head with highest target data accuracy. We further verify the possibility of
disambiguation on source data: Fig. 5b shows Grad-CAM (Selvaraju et al., 2017) visualizations of
two heads on a randomly sampled image from the source dataset. Even though the two heads predict
the same label, they respectively focus on distinct features of the data: the MNIST region and the
CIFAR region. Since we know that the true predictive feature is the CIFAR image, we can select the
second head based on this single datapoint, and nothing beyond what was used during training.

4.3    U NDERSPECIFICATION FROM D ISTRIBUTION S HIFT

Comparison with unsupervised domain adaptation methods. Finally, we evaluate DivDis on the
Camelyon17-WILDS dataset (Sagawa et al., 2022), a large-scale tumor classification dataset con-
sisting of 455, 954 labeled source datapoints and 600, 030 unlabeled target datapoints. The target
datapoints are collected from a hospital not seen in the source data. As the unlabeled set for DivDis,
we use the official val_unlabeled set provided by Sagawa et al. (2022). We compare against several
approaches that can also leverage this unlabeled data: Pseudo-Label (Lee et al., 2013), FixMatch
(Sohn et al., 2020), CORAL (Sun et al., 2016), and NoisyStudent (Xie et al., 2019). All results other
than DivDis are from Sagawa et al. (2022). Quantitative results in Tab. 3 show that DivDis outper-
forms these methods, achieving over 90% OOD test set accuracy. This experiment demonstrates
that the approach of DivDis scales to large datasets, effectively capturing the implicit ambiguity in-
side large unlabeled datasets from a related but different distribution. This experiment demonstrates
that DivDis can effectively leverage unlabeled data for underspecification arising from variation in
real-world data collection conditions.
Do we need group labels for hyperparameter tuning? Existing methods for learning from data
with subpopulation shift typically tune hyperparameters using group label annotations (Levy et al.,
2020; Nam et al., 2020; Liu et al., 2021), making them deployable only in scenarios where group
labels are available. To examine the dataset assumptions required to successfully tune DivDis’s
hyperparameters, we ran a hyperparameter sweep over (λ1 , λ2 ). For each setting, we measure three
metrics using held-out data: (1) average accuracy on DS , (2) average accuracy on DT , and (3)
worst-group accuracy on DT . These metrics correspond to different assumptions about available
information: (1) labeled source data, (2) labeled target data, and (3) labeled target data with group
annotations, respectively.
Results in Fig. 6 show that the three metrics have a clear correlation. Notably, this implies that
that tuning the hyperparameters of DivDis with respect to average accuracy on DS yields close an
optimal model for worst-group accuracy on the target distribution. Additional experiments on the
CelebA dataset exhibit a similar trend, as shown in Appendix D. In Tab. 2, we compare DivDis to
existing methods as reported by Liu et al. (2021). Note that the “Average” columns here correspond
to our second weakest data assumption of labeled target data, whereas Fig. 6 implies that we can
tune DivDis’s hyperparameters using only labeled source data. This experiment demonstrates that
compared to previous methods for distribution shift, DivDis’s hyperparameters require substantially
less information to tune.
5     R ELATED W ORK
Underspecification. Prior works have discussed the underspecified nature of many datasets
(D’Amour et al., 2020; Oakden-Rayner et al., 2020). Underspecification is especially problem-


                                                     8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


atic when the bias of deep neural networks towards simple functions (Arpit et al., 2017; Gunasekar
et al., 2018; Shah et al., 2020; Geirhos et al., 2020; Pezeshki et al., 2021;?) is not aligned with the
true function. Yet, these works do not present a general solution. As we find in Section 4, DivDis
can address underspecified datasets, even when one viable solution is much simpler than another,
since only one of the heads can represent the simplest solution. Our notion of near-optimal sets can
be seen as an extension of Rashomon sets (Fisher et al., 2019; Semenova et al., 2019) to the unsuper-
vised domain adaptation setting. Active learning methods (Cohn et al., 1996; Hanneke et al., 2014)
are also related in that they handle underspecification by reducing ambiguity. Our MI-based diver-
sity term resembles a common active learning criterion (Houlsby et al., 2011), but a key difference
is that we directly optimize a set of models with respect to our criterion.
Ensemble methods. Our approach is related to ensemble methods (Hansen & Salamon, 1990; Diet-
terich, 2000; Lakshminarayanan et al., 2017), which aggregate the predictions of multiple learners.
Ensembles have been shown to perform best when each member produces errors independently of
one another (Krogh et al., 1995), a property we exploit by maximizing disagreement on unlabeled
test data. Previous works have extended ensembles by learning a diversified set of functions (Pang
et al., 2019; Parker-Holder et al., 2020; Wortsman et al., 2021; Rame & Cord, 2021; Sinha et al.,
2021). While the D IVERSIFY stage similarly learns a collection of diverse functions, our approach
differs in that we directly optimize for diversity on a separate target dataset. Prior works have learned
a diverse set of reinforcement learning policies both with an underlying task Mouret & Clune (2015);
Conti et al. (2018); Kumar et al. (2020) and with no task at all Lehman & Stanley (2011); Eysenbach
et al. (2019); Sharma et al. (2020). While similarly motivated, these works operate in a very different
setting, since we consider supervised learning with underspecification. So-called quality diversity
methods aim to balance performance and novelty in a population Lehman & Stanley (2011); Mouret
& Clune (2015); Cully & Demiris (2017).
Two recent works leverage unlabeled target data to learn a set of diverse functions. Teney et al.
(2021) introduces a gradient orthogonality constraint with respect to features from a pre-trained
backbone. We provide further experimental comparison to this method in Appendix A. Concurrently
to our work, Pagliardini et al. (2022) propose to sequentially train a set of functions with a diversity
loss on target data. In contrast, DivDis requires a single network and training loop regardless of the
number of heads. Furthermore, Sec. 4 demonstrates that DivDis scales to larger datasets.
Robustness and causality. Many recent methods aim to produce robust models that succeed even in
conditions of distribution shift (Tzeng et al., 2014; Ganin et al., 2016; Arjovsky et al., 2019; Sagawa
et al., 2020; Nam et al., 2020; Creager et al., 2021; Liu et al., 2021). While our work is similarly
motivated, we address a class of problems that these previous methods fundamentally cannot handle.
By nature of learning only one function, these robustness methods cannot disambiguate problems
where the true function is truly ambiguous, in the sense that functions based on two different fea-
tures can both be near-optimal. DivDis handles such scenarios by learning multiple functions in the
D IVERSIFY stage and then choosing the correct one in the D ISAMBIGUATE stage with minimal
added supervision. This research direction is also related to inferring the causal structure (Pearl,
2000; Schölkopf, 2019) of observed attributes. Although many causality works focus on situations
in which interventions are impossible, we explore inherently ambiguous problems where some form
of intervention is necessary to succeed. Additionally, recent methods for extracting causality from
observational data have been most successful in low-dimensional settings (Louizos et al., 2017;
Goudet et al., 2018; Ke et al., 2019), whereas our method easily scales to large convolutional net-
works for image classification problems.

6   C ONCLUSION
We proposed Diversify and Disambiguate (DivDis), a two-stage framework for learning from un-
derspecified data. Our experiments show that DivDis has substantially higher performance when
learning from datasets with high degrees of underspecification, at the modest cost of unlabeled tar-
get data and a few corresponding labels. To our knowledge, our method is the first to address this
problem setting in the context of underspecification. An appealing property of DivDis is its auto-
matic discovery of meaningful complementary features, as demonstrated in Fig. 6 and Tab. 2. This
capability is related to that of disentangled feature learning (Chen et al., 2016; Higgins et al., 2017;
Kim & Mnih, 2018; Chen et al., 2018), which is often posed as an unsupervised problem. Our
experiments show the alternative possibility of learning different possible meanings of labels in an
underspecified supervised learning setting.


                                                   9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We thank Damien Teney for help in reproducing the published Collages task experiments. We also
thank Pang Wei Koh, Henrik Marklund, Annie S. Chen, other members of the IRIS and RAIL labs,
and anonymous reviewers for helpful discussions and feedback. This work was supported in part by
KFAS, Google, Apple, Juniper Networks, and Open Philanthropy. Chelsea Finn is a fellow in the
CIFAR Learning in Machines and Brains program.

R EFERENCES
Martin Arjovsky, Léon Bottou, Ishaan Gulrajani, and David Lopez-Paz. Invariant risk minimization.
 arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.02893, 2019.
Devansh Arpit, Stanisław Jastrz˛ebski, Nicolas Ballas, David Krueger, Emmanuel Bengio, Maxin-
  der S Kanwal, Tegan Maharaj, Asja Fischer, Aaron Courville, Yoshua Bengio, et al. A closer look
  at memorization in deep networks. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2017.
Ricky TQ Chen, Xuechen Li, Roger Grosse, and David Duvenaud. Isolating sources of disentangle-
  ment in variational autoencoders. Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, 2018.
Xi Chen, Yan Duan, Rein Houthooft, John Schulman, Ilya Sutskever, and Pieter Abbeel. Infogan:
  Interpretable representation learning by information maximizing generative adversarial nets. In
  Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, 2016.
David A Cohn, Zoubin Ghahramani, and Michael I Jordan. Active learning with statistical models.
  Journal of artificial intelligence research, 4:129–145, 1996.
Edoardo Conti, Vashisht Madhavan, Felipe Petroski Such, Joel Lehman, Kenneth O Stanley, and
  Jeff Clune. Improving exploration in evolution strategies for deep reinforcement learning via a
  population of novelty-seeking agents. Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems,
  2018.
Elliot Creager, Jörn-Henrik Jacobsen, and Richard Zemel. Environment inference for invariant
  learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2021.
Antoine Cully and Yiannis Demiris. Quality and diversity optimization: A unifying modular frame-
  work. IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computation, 22(2):245–259, 2017.
Alexander D’Amour, Katherine Heller, Dan Moldovan, Ben Adlam, Babak Alipanahi, Alex Beu-
  tel, Christina Chen, Jonathan Deaton, Jacob Eisenstein, Matthew D Hoffman, et al. Under-
  specification presents challenges for credibility in modern machine learning. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2011.03395, 2020.
Jia Deng, Wei Dong, Richard Socher, Li-Jia Li, Kai Li, and Li Fei-Fei. Imagenet: A large-scale hi-
   erarchical image database. In 2009 IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition,
   pp. 248–255, 2009.
Li Deng. The mnist database of handwritten digit images for machine learning research. IEEE
  Signal Processing Magazine, 29(6):141–142, 2012.
Thomas G Dietterich. Ensemble methods in machine learning. In International workshop on multi-
  ple classifier systems, pp. 1–15. Springer, 2000.
Benjamin Eysenbach, Abhishek Gupta, Julian Ibarz, and Sergey Levine. Diversity is all you need:
  Learning skills without a reward function. Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems,
  2019.
Aaron Fisher, Cynthia Rudin, and Francesca Dominici. All models are wrong, but many are useful:
  Learning a variable’s importance by studying an entire class of prediction models simultaneously.
  J. Mach. Learn. Res., 20(177):1–81, 2019.
Yaroslav Ganin, Evgeniya Ustinova, Hana Ajakan, Pascal Germain, Hugo Larochelle, François
  Laviolette, Mario Marchand, and Victor Lempitsky. Domain-adversarial training of neural net-
  works. The journal of machine learning research, 17(1):2096–2030, 2016.


                                                10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Robert Geirhos, Jörn-Henrik Jacobsen, Claudio Michaelis, Richard Zemel, Wieland Brendel,
  Matthias Bethge, and Felix A Wichmann. Shortcut learning in deep neural networks. Nature
  Machine Intelligence, 2(11):665–673, 2020.
Olivier Goudet, Diviyan Kalainathan, Philippe Caillou, Isabelle Guyon, David Lopez-Paz, and
  Michele Sebag. Learning functional causal models with generative neural networks. In Explain-
  able and interpretable models in computer vision and machine learning, pp. 39–80. Springer,
  2018.
Suriya Gunasekar, Jason D Lee, Daniel Soudry, and Nati Srebro. Implicit bias of gradient descent
  on linear convolutional networks. In S. Bengio, H. Wallach, H. Larochelle, K. Grauman, N. Cesa-
  Bianchi, and R. Garnett (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2018.
Suchin Gururangan, Swabha Swayamdipta, Omer Levy, Roy Schwartz, Samuel R Bowman,
  and Noah A Smith. Annotation artifacts in natural language inference data. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1803.02324, 2018.
Steve Hanneke et al. Theory of disagreement-based active learning. Foundations and Trends® in
  Machine Learning, 7(2-3):131–309, 2014.
Lars Kai Hansen and Peter Salamon. Neural network ensembles. IEEE transactions on pattern
  analysis and machine intelligence, 12(10):993–1001, 1990.
Irina Higgins, Loic Matthey, Arka Pal, Christopher Burgess, Xavier Glorot, Matthew Botvinick,
   Shakir Mohamed, and Alexander Lerchner. beta-vae: Learning basic visual concepts with a
   constrained variational framework. International Conference on Learning Representations, 2017.
Neil Houlsby, Ferenc Huszár, Zoubin Ghahramani, and Máté Lengyel. Bayesian active learning for
  classification and preference learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1112.5745, 2011.
Edwin T Jaynes. Information theory and statistical mechanics. Physical review, 106(4):620, 1957.
Nan Rosemary Ke, Olexa Bilaniuk, Anirudh Goyal, Stefan Bauer, Hugo Larochelle, Bernhard
  Schölkopf, Michael C Mozer, Chris Pal, and Yoshua Bengio. Learning neural causal models
  from unknown interventions. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.01075, 2019.
John Maynard Keynes. A treatise on probability. Macmillan and Company, limited, 1921.
Hyunjik Kim and Andriy Mnih. Disentangling by factorising. In International Conference on
  Machine Learning, 2018.
Polina Kirichenko, Pavel Izmailov, and Andrew Gordon Wilson. Last layer re-training is sufficient
  for robustness to spurious correlations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.02937, 2022.
Pang Wei Koh, Shiori Sagawa, Sang Michael Xie, Marvin Zhang, Akshay Balsubramani, Weihua
  Hu, Michihiro Yasunaga, Richard Lanas Phillips, Irena Gao, Tony Lee, et al. Wilds: A benchmark
  of in-the-wild distribution shifts. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 5637–
  5664. PMLR, 2021.
Alex Krizhevsky, Geoffrey Hinton, et al. Learning multiple layers of features from tiny images.
  2009.
Anders Krogh, Jesper Vedelsby, et al. Neural network ensembles, cross validation, and active learn-
  ing. Advances in neural information processing systems, 1995.
Saurabh Kumar, Aviral Kumar, Sergey Levine, and Chelsea Finn. One solution is not all you need:
  Few-shot extrapolation via structured maxent rl. Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 2020.
Balaji Lakshminarayanan, Alexander Pritzel, and Charles Blundell. Simple and scalable predic-
  tive uncertainty estimation using deep ensembles. Conference on Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 2017.
Dong-Hyun Lee et al. Pseudo-label: The simple and efficient semi-supervised learning method for
  deep neural networks. In Workshop on challenges in representation learning, ICML, 2013.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Joel Lehman and Kenneth O Stanley. Novelty search and the problem with objectives. In Genetic
  programming theory and practice IX, pp. 37–56. Springer, 2011.
Daniel Levy, Yair Carmon, John C Duchi, and Aaron Sidford. Large-scale methods for distribution-
  ally robust optimization. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2020.
Tsung-Yi Lin, Michael Maire, Serge Belongie, James Hays, Pietro Perona, Deva Ramanan, Piotr
  Dollár, and C Lawrence Zitnick. Microsoft coco: Common objects in context. In European
  conference on computer vision, pp. 740–755. Springer, 2014.
Evan Z Liu, Behzad Haghgoo, Annie S Chen, Aditi Raghunathan, Pang Wei Koh, Shiori Sagawa,
  Percy Liang, and Chelsea Finn. Just train twice: Improving group robustness without training
  group information. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 6781–6792. PMLR,
  2021.
Ziwei Liu, Ping Luo, Xiaogang Wang, and Xiaoou Tang. Deep learning face attributes in the wild.
  In Proceedings of International Conference on Computer Vision, 2015.
Christos Louizos, Uri Shalit, Joris Mooij, David Sontag, Richard Zemel, and Max Welling. Causal
  effect inference with deep latent-variable models. Conference on Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 2017.
Jean-Baptiste Mouret and Jeff Clune. Illuminating search spaces by mapping elites. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1504.04909, 2015.
Junhyun Nam, Hyuntak Cha, Sungsoo Ahn, Jaeho Lee, and Jinwoo Shin. Learning from failure:
  Training debiased classifier from biased classifier. Conference on Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 2020.
Yuval Netzer, Tao Wang, Adam Coates, Alessandro Bissacco, Bo Wu, and Andrew Y. Ng. Reading
  digits in natural images with unsupervised feature learning. In NIPS Workshop on Deep Learning
  and Unsupervised Feature Learning 2011, 2011.
Luke Oakden-Rayner, Jared Dunnmon, Gustavo Carneiro, and Christopher Ré. Hidden stratification
  causes clinically meaningful failures in machine learning for medical imaging. In Proceedings of
  the ACM conference on health, inference, and learning, pp. 151–159, 2020.
Matteo Pagliardini, Martin Jaggi, François Fleuret, and Sai Praneeth Karimireddy. Agree to dis-
 agree: Diversity through disagreement for better transferability. arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.04414,
 2022.
Tianyu Pang, Kun Xu, Chao Du, Ning Chen, and Jun Zhu. Improving adversarial robustness via
  promoting ensemble diversity. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2019.
Jack Parker-Holder, Luke Metz, Cinjon Resnick, Hengyuan Hu, Adam Lerer, Alistair Letcher, Alex
  Peysakhovich, Aldo Pacchiano, and Jakob Foerster. Ridge rider: Finding diverse solutions by
  following eigenvectors of the hessian. Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems,
  2020.
Adam Paszke, Sam Gross, Francisco Massa, Adam Lerer, James Bradbury, Gregory Chanan, Trevor
  Killeen, Zeming Lin, Natalia Gimelshein, Luca Antiga, Alban Desmaison, Andreas Kopf, Edward
  Yang, Zachary DeVito, Martin Raison, Alykhan Tejani, Sasank Chilamkurthy, Benoit Steiner,
  Lu Fang, Junjie Bai, and Soumith Chintala. Pytorch: An imperative style, high-performance deep
  learning library. Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, 2019.
Judea Pearl. Causality: models, reasoning and inference, volume 19. Cambridge university press,
  2000.
Mohammad Pezeshki, Sékou-Oumar Kaba, Yoshua Bengio, Aaron Courville, Doina Precup, and
 Guillaume Lajoie. Gradient starvation: A learning proclivity in neural networks. In A. Beygelz-
 imer, Y. Dauphin, P. Liang, and J. Wortman Vaughan (eds.), Advances in Neural Information
 Processing Systems, 2021.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Alexandre Rame and Matthieu Cord. Dice: Diversity in deep ensembles via conditional redundancy
  adversarial estimation. International Conference on Learning Representations, 2021.

Alex Rogozhnikov. Einops: Clear and reliable tensor manipulations with einstein-like notation. In
  International Conference on Learning Representations, 2022.

Shiori Sagawa, Pang Wei Koh, Tatsunori B Hashimoto, and Percy Liang. Distributionally robust
  neural networks for group shifts: On the importance of regularization for worst-case generaliza-
  tion. International Conference on Learning Representations, 2020.

Shiori Sagawa, Pang Wei Koh, Tony Lee, Irena Gao, Sang Michael Xie, Kendrick Shen, Ananya
  Kumar, Weihua Hu, Michihiro Yasunaga, Henrik Marklund, Sara Beery, Etienne David, Ian
  Stavness, Wei Guo, Jure Leskovec, Kate Saenko, Tatsunori Hashimoto, Sergey Levine, Chelsea
  Finn, and Percy Liang. Extending the WILDS benchmark for unsupervised adaptation. In Inter-
  national Conference on Learning Representations, 2022.

Bernhard Schölkopf. Causality for machine learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1911.10500, 2019.

Luca Scimeca, Seong Joon Oh, Sanghyuk Chun, Michael Poli, and Sangdoo Yun. Which short-
  cut cues will dnns choose? a study from the parameter-space perspective. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2110.03095, 2021.

Ramprasaath R Selvaraju, Michael Cogswell, Abhishek Das, Ramakrishna Vedantam, Devi Parikh,
  and Dhruv Batra. Grad-cam: Visual explanations from deep networks via gradient-based local-
  ization. In Proceedings of the IEEE international conference on computer vision, pp. 618–626,
  2017.

Lesia Semenova, Cynthia Rudin, and Ronald Parr. A study in rashomon curves and volumes: A
  new perspective on generalization and model simplicity in machine learning. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1908.01755, 2019.

Harshay Shah, Kaustav Tamuly, Aditi Raghunathan, Prateek Jain, and Praneeth Netrapalli. The
  pitfalls of simplicity bias in neural networks. Conference on Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 2020.

Archit Sharma, Shixiang Gu, Sergey Levine, Vikash Kumar, and Karol Hausman. Dynamics-aware
  unsupervised discovery of skills. International Conference on Learning Representations, 2020.

Samarth Sinha, Homanga Bharadhwaj, Anirudh Goyal, Hugo Larochelle, Animesh Garg, and Flo-
  rian Shkurti. Dibs: Diversity inducing information bottleneck in model ensembles. In Proceedings
  of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 2021.

Kihyuk Sohn, David Berthelot, Chun-Liang Li, Zizhao Zhang, Nicholas Carlini, Ekin D. Cubuk,
  Alex Kurakin, Han Zhang, and Colin Raffel. Fixmatch: Simplifying semi-supervised learning
  with consistency and confidence. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2020.

Baochen Sun, Jiashi Feng, and Kate Saenko. Correlation alignment for unsupervised domain adap-
  tation. arXiv preprint arXiv: Arxiv-1612.01939, 2016.

Damien Teney, Ehsan Abbasnejad, Simon Lucey, and Anton van den Hengel. Evading the simplicity
  bias: Training a diverse set of models discovers solutions with superior ood generalization. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2105.05612, 2021.

Damien Teney, Maxime Peyrard, and Ehsan Abbasnejad. Predicting is not understanding: Recogniz-
  ing and addressing underspecification in machine learning. In European Conference on Computer
  Vision, pp. 458–476. Springer, 2022.

Eric Tzeng, Judy Hoffman, Ning Zhang, Kate Saenko, and Trevor Darrell. Deep domain confusion:
  Maximizing for domain invariance. arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.3474, 2014.

Vladimir Vapnik. Principles of risk minimization for learning theory. In Advances in neural infor-
  mation processing systems, pp. 831–838, 1992.


                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Xiaosong Wang, Yifan Peng, Le Lu, Zhiyong Lu, Mohammadhadi Bagheri, and Ronald M Sum-
  mers. Chestx-ray8: Hospital-scale chest x-ray database and benchmarks on weakly-supervised
  classification and localization of common thorax diseases. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference
  on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 2097–2106, 2017.
Mitchell Wortsman, Maxwell Horton, Carlos Guestrin, Ali Farhadi, and Mohammad Rastegari.
 Learning neural network subspaces. International Conference on Machine Learning, 2021.
Han Xiao, Kashif Rasul, and Roland Vollgraf. Fashion-mnist: a novel image dataset for benchmark-
  ing machine learning algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1708.07747, 2017.
Qizhe Xie, Minh-Thang Luong, Eduard Hovy, and Quoc V. Le. Self-training with noisy student
  improves imagenet classification. Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2019.
Bolei Zhou, Agata Lapedriza, Aditya Khosla, Aude Oliva, and Antonio Torralba. Places: A 10 mil-
  lion image database for scene recognition. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine
  Intelligence, 2017.


                                               14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


     Method                                  Parameters      MNIST       SVHN       FMNIST        CIFAR
     Upper bound oracle                      -                 99.7       89.7         77.4        68.7
     Evading (N=8)                           27152             97.3       82.1         59.6        55.8
     Evading (N=16)                          54304             96.6       72.1         64.6        58.4
     Evading (N=16, weight sharing)          3904              99.7       50.8         50.3        50.2
     Evading (N=32, weight sharing)          4448              99.6       50.7         50.1        50.2
     DivDis (N=2)                            3428              98.1       66.5         62.5        51.5
     DivDis (N=4)                            3496              99.4       75.1         66.1        53.4

Table 4: Accuracies for the 4-way collage task. We denote the method in Teney et al. (2021) as “Evading”.
DivDis with 4 heads shows competitive performance to the Evading method with up to 16 independent models.
We note that by default, Evading uses separate models, meaning parameter count and computation scales
linearly with N . The Evading method fails when the N networks share backbone parameters.


Figure 7: Samples from the original 16 × 16 collage dataset from Teney et al. (2021) (left) and the higher-
resolution 32 × 32 dataset used in Tab. 5 (right). A substantial amount of visual detail is lost in the original
dataset, especially in harder datasets such as FashionMNIST and CIFAR.


A     T HE C OLLAGES TASK : C AN D IV D IS L EARN M ORE T HAN T WO
      F UNCTIONS ?
To further investigate whether DivDis can learn more than two functions, we evaluate DivDis on the
four-block collages dataset (Teney et al., 2021). This dataset is a binary classification task in which
four attributes have a complete spurious correlation with labels in the source dataset. Each datapoint
is constructed by concatenating one image each from the MNIST (Deng, 2012), SVHN (Netzer


                 Method                          MNIST        SVHN       FMNIST       CIFAR
                 Evading (N=8)                      97.3       82.1        59.6         55.8
                 Evading (N=16)                     96.6       72.1        64.6         58.4
                 Evading (N=8, ours)                99.5       70.0        56.3         50.9
                 Evading (N=16, ours)               99.7       86.3        65.9         60.8
                 Evading (N=8, ours, ×2)            99.5       49.7        51.6         49.7
                 Evading (N=16, ours, ×2)           99.8       49.6        52.0         49.7
                 DivDis (N=2, ×2)                   97.6       63.9        61.8         51.7
                 DivDis (N=4, ×2)                   96.5       73.0        69.2         52.7

Table 5: Collage dataset accuracies with higher resolution images (16 × 16 → 32 × 32). We re-implemented
the “Evading” method of Teney et al. (2021), and denote results from our codebase as “ours”. The Evading
method fails on 32 × 32 images, likely because input-space diversification is sensitive to input dimensionality.
In contrast, DivDis performs output-space diversification and is robust to change in input dimensionality.



                                                      15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


et al., 2011), FashionMNIST (Xiao et al., 2017), and CIFAR (Krizhevsky et al., 2009) datasets in a
2 × 2 grid. This task aims to learn the predictive patterns corresponding to each of the four datasets
based on labeled data with a complete correlation between all four. After training on the source data,
we separately test for each of the four features using de-correlated datasets labeled according to one
of the four features. We report the highest accuracy achieved among functions inside the learned
ensemble for each of the four features.
We evaluated DivDis with 2 or 4 heads on this task. For more than two heads, we minimize the
average mutual information loss (3) between all pairs of heads. As the unlabeled set for DivDis, we
use decorrelated 4-way collage data constructed from the validation split of each dataset. Results in
Tab. 4 compare feature-wise test accuracies with that of “Evading” (Teney et al., 2021). DivDis with
4 heads shows competitive performance to Evading with up to 16 independent models, indicating
that DivDis requires substantially fewer functions to achieve the same performance as Evading. We
also note that it is crucial to use the correct number of heads for DivDis. As expected, training
only N = 2 heads results in subpar performance because this dataset has 4 different features. The
two methods differ in scalability: Evading uses N independent models, meaning that the number
of parameters and computation cost scales linearly with N . In contrast, DivDis shares all weights
except for the last layer. As shown in Tab. 4, Evading fails when the N networks perform weight
sharing.
As shown in Fig. 7, the images in the original collages dataset have resolution 16 × 16, which loses
a substantial amount of visual detail because each image from (MNIST, SVHN, FMNIST, CIFAR)
is reduced to an 8 × 8 image. We evaluate both methods on larger 32 × 32 collage data in Tab. 5,
where Evading fails to discover features besides MNIST. Evading is an input-space diversification
method, making it sensitive to input dimensionality. In contrast, DivDis performs output-space
diversification, making its performance more robust to changes in input dimensionality.
Diversification is an effective approach to handling underspecification, and the two broad approaches
of input-space diversification (Teney et al., 2021; 2022) and output-space diversification (e.g., Di-
vDis) are complementary approaches with different strengths and weaknesses. As shown in Tables 4
and 5, DivDis is more scalable in terms of model count and input size. We also note that this scalabil-
ity is also reflected in results on the large-scale Camelyon dataset: DivDis achieves 90.4% accuracy
on test hospitals (Tab. 3), whereas the method in Teney et al. (2022) achieves 82.5%. Conversely,
while DivDis was shown to require fewer functions, Evading (Teney et al., 2021) achieves higher
performance on the original collage dataset when using up to 96 models. An exciting direction
for future work is understanding and consolidating these tradeoffs between input-space and output-
space diversification methods for underspecified tasks.

B    PARALLEL I MPLEMENTATION OF M UTUAL I NFORMATION O BJECTIVE
import torch
from einops import rearrange

def mutual_info_loss(probs):
    """ Input: predicted probabilites on target batch. """
    B, H, D = probs.shape # B=batch_size, H=heads, D=pred_dim
    marginal_p = probs.mean(dim=0) # H, D
    marginal_p = torch.einsum("hd,ge->hgde", marginal_p, marginal_p) # H, H, D, D
    marginal_p = rearrange(marginal_p, "h g d e -> (h g) (d e)") # H^2, D^2

     joint_p = torch.einsum("bhd,bge->bhgde", probs, probs).mean(dim=0)                             # H, H, D, D
     joint_p = rearrange(joint_p, "h g d e -> (h g) (d e)") # H^2, D^2

     kl_divs = joint_p * (joint_p.log() - marginal_p.log())
     kl_grid = rearrange(kl_divs.sum(dim=-1), "(h g) -> h g", h=H) # H, H
     pairwise_mis = torch.triu(kl_grid, diagonal=1) # Get only off-diagonal KL divergences
     return pairwise_mis.mean()


This implementation is based on the PyTorch Paszke et al. (2019) and einops Rogozhnikov (2022)
libraries. It demonstrates that the mutual information objective (3) is easily parallelized across the
input batch using standard tensor operations.


                                                  16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


C     E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP
C.1    D ETAILED DATASET D ESCRIPTIONS

Toy classification task. Our toy binary classification data is constructed as follows. The source
dataset DS has binary labels with equal aggregate probability p(y = 0) = p(y = 1) = 12 . Each
datapoint is a 2-dimensional vector, and the data distribution for each class in the source dataset is:
                                 p(x | y = 0) = Unif([−1, 0] × [0, 1])
                                 p(x | y = 1) = Unif([0, 1] × [−1, 0]).
In contrast, the data distribution for each class in the target dataset is:
                                p(x | y = 0) = Unif([−1, 0] × [−1, 1])
                                p(x | y = 1) = Unif([0, 1] × [−1, 1]).
Labels are balanced for the target dataset. Put differently, the target dataset has a larger span than
the source dataset, and the labels of the target dataset reveal that the true decision boundary is the
Y -axis.
CXR-14 pneumothorax classification. The CXR-14 dataset Wang et al. (2017) is a large-scale
dataset for pathology detection in chest radiographs. We evaluate on the binary pneumothorax clas-
sification task, which has been reported to suffer from hidden stratification: a subset of the images
with the disease include a chest drain, a common treatment for the condition Oakden-Rayner et al.
(2020).
Waterbirds dataset. Each image in the Waterbirds dataset is constructed by pasting a waterbird or
landbird image to a background drawn from the Places dataset Zhou et al. (2017). There are two
backgrounds in this dataset – water and land, where each category of birds is spuriously correlated
with one background. Specifically, there are 4,795 training samples, where 3,498 samples are from
"waterbirds in water" and 1,057 samples are from "landbirds in land". "Waterbirds in land" and
"landbirds in water" are considered as minority groups, where 184 and 56 samples are included,
respectively.
CelebA dataset. The CelebA dataset Liu et al. (2015) is a large-scale image dataset with over
200, 000 images of celebrities, each with 40 attribute annotations. We construct four different com-
pletely correlated problem settings, each based on a pair of attributes. The pair of attributes consists
of a label attribute and a spurious attribute, and we remove all examples from the two minority
groups in the source dataset. The four problem settings are summarized below. Our task construc-
tion is similar to that of Sagawa et al. (2020), which uses hair color as the label and gender as the
spurious attribute.

                                       Label attribute            Spurious attribute
                    CelebA-CC-1        Mouth_Slightly_Open        Wearing_Lipstick
                    CelebA-CC-2        Attractive                 Smiling
                    CelebA-CC-3        Wavy_Hair                  High_Cheekbones
                    CelebA-CC-4        Heavy_Makeup               Big_Lips


MultiNLI dataset. Given a hypothesis and a promise, the task of MultiNLI dataset is to predict if
the hypothesis is entailed by, neutral with, or contradicts with the promise. The spurious correla-
tion exists between contradictions and the presence of the negation words nobody, no, never, and
nothing Gururangan et al. (2018). The whole MultiNLI dataset is divided into six groups, where
each spurious attribute belongs to {"no negation", "negation"} and each label belongs to {entailed,
neutral, contradictory}. There are 206,175 samples in total, where the smallest group only has 1,521
samples (entailment with negations).
Camelyon17-WILDS dataset. This dataset is part of the U-WILDS benchmark Sagawa et al.
(2022). Input images of patches from lymph node sections are given, and the task is to classify
as either a tumor or normal tissue. Evaluation is performed on OOD hospitals for which labels are
unseen during training. The model is given unlabeled validation images from the OOD hospitals.


                                                    17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


C.2   D IV D IS H YPERPARAMETER S ETTINGS

We show below the hyperparameters used in our experiments:

      Toy Clasification   MNIST-CIFAR   Waterbirds          CXR-14   Waterbirds-CC   CelebA-CC   MultiNLI-CC
 N    2, 20               2             2                   2        2               2           2
 λ1   10                  10            1, 10, 100, 1000    10       10              10          1000
 λ2   10                  10            0.1, 1, 10, 100     10       0, 10           0, 10       0, 0.1
 m    1                   1             16                  16       16              16          16



D     A DDITIONAL E XPERIMENTS
Extended learning curves on toy task. In Fig. 8, we show an extended version of the learning
curve shown in Fig. 3. The extended plot includes cross-entropy loss and mutual information loss
during training. The learning curves show that cross-entropy loss decreases first, at which point both
of the heads represent functions similar to the ERM solution. Afterwards, the mutual information
loss decreases, causing the functions represented by the two heads to diverge.

Visualization of functions on 3D toy task. We examine the extent to which the D IVERSIFY
stage can produce different functions by visualizing which input dimension each function relies on.
We modify the synthetic binary classification task to have 3-dimensional inputs and train DivDis
with {2, 3, 5} heads. For each head, we visualize the Pearson correlation coefficient between each
input dimension and output. We normalize this 3-dimensional vector to sum to one and plot each
model as a point on a 2-simplex in Fig. 9, with independently trained functions as a baseline. The
results show that the D IVERSIFY stage acts as a repulsive force between the functions in function
space, allowing the collection of heads to explore much closer to the vertices. This experiment also
demonstrates why vanilla ensembling is insufficient for underspecified problems: the diversity due
to random seed is not large enough to effectively cover the set of near-optimal functions.

Noisy dimension. To see if DivDis can effectively combat simplicity bias, we further evaluate on
a harder variant of the 2D classification problem in which we add noise along the x-axis. This noise
makes the “correct” decision boundary have positive non-zero risk, making it harder to learn than
the other function. Results in Fig. 10 demonstrate that even in such a scenario, DivDis recovers both
the x-axis and y-axis decision boundaries, suggesting that DivDis can be effective even in scenarios
where ERM relies on spurious features due to simplicity bias.

Evaluation on completely correlated data. We evaluate DivDis on existing benchmarks modified
to exhibit complete correlation. Using the Waterbirds Sagawa et al. (2020), CelebA Liu et al. (2015),
and MultiNLI Gururangan et al. (2018) datasets, we alter the source dataset to include only majority
groups while keeping target data intact. We denote these tasks as Waterbirds-CC, MultiNLI-CC, etc
to distinguish from the original benchmarks. These -CC tasks are considerably more difficult than
the original benchmarks, and introduce a specific challenge not addressed in the existing literature:
leveraging the difference in source and target data distribution to encode and subsequently disam-
biguate tasks with high degrees of underspecification. To our best knowledge, no prior methods are
designed to address such complete correlations.
As the closest existing problem setting is subpopulation shift, we show the performance of ERM,
JTT Liu et al. (2021), and Group DRO Sagawa et al. (2020) as a naive point of comparison. We also
include a random guessing baseline as a lower bound on performance. As expected, Tab. 6 shows
that existing subpopulation shift methods show subpar performance on these tasks, notably failing
to do better than random guessing in the Waterbirds-CC task. This is hardly surprising, as methods
based on loss upweighting such as JTT and Group DRO require minority examples in the training
data to upweight. In contrast, DivDis is well-suited to this challenging setting, and can deal with
complete correlation by leveraging unlabeled target data to find different predictive features of the
labels.

CelebA hyperparameter grid. In Fig. 13, we show an additional hyperparameter grid for the
CelebA dataset. This grid shows a strong corrleation between metrics with respect to hyperparameter
choice, indicating that DivDis can be tuned using only labeled source data.


                                                       18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                    Waterbirds-CC                CelebA-CC-1                 CelebA-CC-2              MultiNLI-CC
                Avg (%)     Worst (%)      Avg (%)      Worst (%)       Avg (%)       Worst (%)    Avg (%)     Worst (%)
Random           50.0          50.0         50.0           50.0          50.0           50.0        33.3          33.3
ERM            60.5 ± 1.6   7.0 ± 1.5     70.9 ± 2.0    57.0 ± 5.8     73.1 ± 0.9    41.1 ± 2.6   53.2 ± 1.5   22.8 ± 2.5
JTT            44.6 ± 1.9   26.5 ± 1.4    71.4 ± 1.9    51.2 ± 5.4     78.7 ± 0.8    59.8 ± 1.1   80.0 ± 4.0   40.5 ± 2.3
Group DRO      55.6 ± 4.8   47.1 ± 8.9    71.6 ± 0.3    59.3 ± 2.6     71.6 ± 2.4    61.3 ± 2.3   79.1 ± 3.4   39.8 ± 1.4
DivDis - reg   87.2 ± 0.8   77.5 ± 4.7    91.0 ± 0.4   85.9 ± 1.0      79.7 ± 0.4    69.3 ± 1.9   80.3 ± 0.6   67.6 ± 4.0
DivDis         87.6 ± 1.4   82.4 ± 1.9    90.8 ± 0.4   85.6 ± 1.1      79.5 ± 0.2    68.5 ± 1.7   79.9 ± 1.2   71.5 ± 2.5

Table 6: Modified Waterbirds, CelebA, and MultiNLI datasets with complete correlation between labels and a
spurious attribute. DivDis outperforms previous methods in terms of both average and worst-group accuracy.


                                         Acc         AUC       AUC (drain)          AUC (no-drain)
                    ERM                  0.883     0.828             0.904              0.717
                    Pseudo-label         0.898     0.835             0.904              0.721
                    DivDis               0.934     0.836             0.902              0.737

Table 7: Pneumothorax classification metrics on the test set of CXR-14. In addition to overall accuracy and
AUC, we measure AUC separately on the two subsets of the positive class, drain and no-drain. DivDis shows
higher AUC on the no-drain subset, which is more indicative of the intended population of patients not yet
being treated. Performance gains on the no-drain subset also contribute positively to the overall metrics (Acc
and AUC).


Additional Disambiguate experiments on MNIST-CIFAR data. In Fig. 11, we plot the accuracy
of the head selected by the active and random querying strategies, when using different numbers of
label queries. Notably, the active querying strategy successfully chooses the best head with even one
label query. In Fig. 12, we show additional Grad-CAM plots for MNIST-CIFAR data, on 6 more
random datapoints from the source dataset. Compared to the example given in the main text, these
examples are just as informative in terms of which head is better.


Effect of ratio. We test various values between 0 and 1 for the regularizer loss (4), on the Wa-
terbirds benchmark. Fig. 14 shows that even using a ratio of 0.1 yields close to 80% worst-group
accuracy, demonstrating that the performance of DivDis is not very sensitive to this hyperparameter.
CXR pneumothorax classification. To investigate whether DivDis can disambiguate naturally oc-
curring spurious correlations, we consider the CXR-14 dataset Wang et al. (2017), a large-scale
dataset for pathology detection in chest radiographs. We evaluate on the binary pneumothorax clas-
sification task, which has been reported to suffer from hidden stratification: a subset of the images
with the disease include a chest drain, a common treatment for the condition Oakden-Rayner et al.
(2020). We train DivDis with two heads to see whether it can disambiguate between the visual fea-
tures of chest drains and lungs as a predictor for pneumothorax. The unlabeled data for DivDis is a
subset of validation data sampled so that the ratio of drain to no drain is 1:1. In addition to ERM,
we compare against the semi-supervised learning method Pseudo-label Lee et al. (2013), to see how
much of the performace gain of DivDis can be attributed to the unlabeled target set alone. In Tab. 7,
we show test split accuracy and AUC, along with AUC for the subset of positive samples with and
without a chest drain. Our experiments show that DivDis achieves higher AUC in the no-drain split
while doing marginally worse on the drain split, indicating that the chosen head is relying more on
the visual features of the lung. The overall metrics (Acc and AUC) indicate that this performance
gain in the no-drain subset also leads to better performance in overall metrics.

E    F INITE - HYPOTHESIS G ENERALIZATION B OUND FOR H EAD S ELECTION
Proposition 1. Let the N heads have risk l1 ≤ l2 . . . ≤ lN ∈ R on the target dataset, and let
∆ = l2 − l1 . The required number of i.i.d. labels from the target set to select the best head with
                                    −log δ)
probability ≥ 1 − δ is m = 2(log 2N
                                  ∆2        .


                                                           19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 8: Extended visualization for the 2D classification task (Fig. 2), with additional curves for the cross-
entropy and mutual information losses. Note that only accuracy is measured with target data, and the cross-
entropy and mutual information losses are the training metrics for D IVERSIFY measured on source data. Until
around iteration 100, the model initially decreases cross-entropy at the cost of increasing mutual information.
The decision boundaries at this stage are similar for the two heads. Afterwards, both the mutual information
and cross-entropy decrease, leading to the heads having very different decision boundaries.

Table 8: CelebA dataset with complete correlation between 4 different pairs of attributes. DivDis outperforms
previous methods in all but one setting.

                      CelebA-CC-1               CelebA-CC-2               CelebA-CC-3               CelebA-CC-4
                  Avg (%)     Worst (%)     Avg (%)     Worst (%)     Avg (%)     Worst (%)      Avg (%)     Worst (%)
ERM              70.9 ± 2.0   57.0 ± 5.8   73.1 ± 0.9   41.1 ± 2.6   87.0 ± 0.7   71.9 ± 2.6    63.9 ± 3.5   23.0 ± 1.4
JTT              44.6 ± 1.9   26.5 ± 1.4   71.4 ± 1.9   51.2 ± 5.4   64.8 ± 4.4   34.0 ± 10.2   67.4 ± 1.4   49.3 ± 8.2
GDRO             71.6 ± 0.3   59.3 ± 2.6   71.6 ± 2.4   61.3 ± 2.3   88.2 ± 0.6    83.7 ± 0.8   65.0 ± 1.6   21.7 ± 1.5
DivDis w/o reg   91.0 ± 0.4   85.9 ± 1.0   79.7 ± 0.4   69.3 ± 1.9   79.5 ± 0.6   62.0 ± 2.6    84.7 ± 0.5   67.4 ± 1.8
DivDis           90.8 ± 0.4   85.6 ± 1.1   79.5 ± 0.2   68.5 ± 1.7   80.6 ± 0.4   67.1 ± 1.9    84.8 ± 0.4   73.5 ± 2.6



Proof. Given m i.i.d. samples, Hoeffding’s inequality gives us for all ϵ > 0,
                                 h          i
                                P l − ˆl > ϵ ≤ 2 exp −2mϵ2 .

                                                                                                                   (6)

The event of failing to select the best head is a superset of the following event, for which we can
bound the probability as:
                                                                                          m∆2

                   ∆                     ∆                            ∆
 P     l1 − l1 >
            b           ∨ l2 − l2 >
                                  b          ∨ . . . ∨ lN − lN >
                                                              c            ≤ 2N exp −            .
                   2                     2                            2                     2
                                                                                                (7)


                                                         20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 9: Visualization of {2, 3, 5} functions trained independently (top row) and with DivDis (bottom row).
Vertices of the 2-simplex represent the three dimensions of the input data. The functions learned by DivDis are
much more diverse compared to independent training.

                                      Head #1                      Head #2


Figure 10: Functions learned by DivDis on a variant of the synthetic classification task, where the labeled
source dataset has noise along the x-axis. The second head recovers the Y -axis decision boundary even though
it is harder to learn due to the noise. This indicates that DivDis can successfully overcome simplicity bias and
learn functions that ERM would not consider.

                            2

Solving for δ = 2N exp − m∆
                          2     , we get the sample size bound

                                                  2(log 2N − log δ)
                                         m∗ =                       .                                       (8)
                                                         ∆2


                                     Table 9: CXR dataset test set metrics


                            Accuracy                AUC           AUC (drain)        AUC (no-drain)
         ERM              0.883 ± 0.006         0.828 ± 0.001    0.904 ± 0.008       0.717 ± 0.005
         Pseudolabel      0.898 ± 0.015         0.835 ± 0.004    0.904 ± 0.007       0.721 ± 0.007
         DivDis           0.934 ± 0.014         0.836 ± 0.007    0.902 ± 0.006       0.737 ± 0.001


                                                       21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                          75

                                          70

                                          65


                           Accuracy (%)
                                          60

                                          55
                                                                          Active
                                          50                              Random
                                               20   21     22       23    24   25
                                                         Number of labels
Figure 11: CIFAR label accuracy of chosen head in DivDis vs label used for the Disambiguate stage. The active
querying strategy chooses the best head with even one label query, and the random query strategy similarly
works with a modest budget of 32 queries.


Figure 12: Additional GradCAM visualizations of two learned heads on 6 examples from the source dataset of
the MNIST-CIFAR task. These examples sufficiently differentiate the best of the two heads, demonstrating the
viability of the source data inspection strategy for the D ISAMBIGUATE stage.


                                                            22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                         Avg Acc, Source Dist                                   Avg Acc, Target Dist            Worst Acc, Target Dist
                  1e-2   82.3                          85.0        84.3         81.8      84.5     83.4          44.6     53.7   49.6

                  1e-1   82.2                          84.5        83.0         81.6      84.2     82.5          43.7     52.4   46.5

                  1e0    82.3                          82.6        76.8         80.8      81.5     75.3          44.6     45.0   28.3

                         1e0                           1e1         1e2          1e0       1e1      1e2           1e0      1e1    1e2

Figure 13: Grids for DivDis’s two hyperparameters (λ1 , λ2 ) on the CelebA dataset. Rows indicate λ1 and
columns indicate λ2 . We show three metrics measured with held-out datapoints: average accuracy on the
source and target distributions and worst-group accuracy on the target distribution. We average each metric
across three random seeds. The high correlation between the three metrics indicates that we can tune the
hyperparameters of DivDis using only held-out labeled source data.


                                                      1.0

                                                      0.9
                               Worst-group Accuracy


                                                      0.8

                                                      0.7

                                                      0.6

                                                      0.5
                                                             0.1    0.2   0.3      0.4     0.5    0.6     0.7    0.8    0.9
                                                                                          Ratio

Figure 14: Worst-group accuracy on the Waterbirds benchmark when using different ratio values for p(y) in the
regularizer loss (4). The plot shows that the performance of DivDis is not very sensitive to this hyperparameter.


                                                                                         23
