Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A DVERSARIAL C HEAP TALK
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                             A BSTRACT
         Adversarial attacks in reinforcement learning (RL) often assume highly-privileged
         access to the victim’s parameters, environment, or data. Instead, this paper proposes
         a novel adversarial setting called a Cheap Talk MDP in which an Adversary can
         merely append deterministic messages to the Victim’s observation, resulting in a
         minimal range of influence. The Adversary cannot occlude ground truth, influence
         underlying environment dynamics or reward signals, introduce non-stationarity,
         add stochasticity, see the Victim’s actions, or access their parameters. Additionally,
         we present a simple meta-learning algorithm called Adversarial Cheap Talk (ACT)
         to train Adversaries in this setting. We demonstrate that an Adversary trained with
         ACT can still significantly influence the Victim’s training and testing performance,
         despite the highly constrained setting. Affecting train-time performance reveals a
         new attack vector and provides insight into the success and failure modes of existing
         RL algorithms. More specifically, we show that an ACT Adversary is capable of
         harming performance by interfering with the learner’s function approximation, or
         instead helping the Victim’s performance by outputting useful features. Finally, we
         show that an ACT Adversary can manipulate messages during train-time to directly
         and arbitrarily control the Victim at test-time.


1    I NTRODUCTION
Learning agents are often trained in settings where adversaries are not able to influence underlying
environment dynamics or reward signals, but may influence part of the agent’s observations. For
instance, adversaries may append arbitrary tags to content that will be used to train recommender
systems. Similarly, they may rent space on interactive billboards near busy traffic intersections to
influence data sets used for training self-driving cars. In financial markets, adversaries can alter the
state of the order-book by submitting orders far out of the money (essentially for free). While these
features are ‘useless’ from an information-theoretic point of view, it is common practice in end-to-end
deep learning to include them as part of the input and let the model learn which features matter. For
instance, self-driving cars typically do not omit useless parts of the visual input but instead learns
to ignore them through training. Surprisingly, this paper demonstrates that an actor can still heavily
influence the behaviour and performance of learning agents by controlling information only in these
‘useless’ channels, without knowing anything about the agent’s parameters or training state.
Most past work in adversarial RL assumes that adversaries can influence environment dynamics
(Huang et al., 2017; Gleave et al., 2020). For example, perturbing images and observations could
obscure or alter relevant information, such as the ball’s location in a Pong game (Kos and Song, 2017).
Furthermore, many attacks require access to the trained agent’s weights and parameters to generate
the adversarial inputs (Wang et al., 2021). Finally, most of these attacks only cause the victim’s policy
to fail arbitrarily instead of giving the adversary full control over the victim’s policy at test time (Gu
et al., 2017; Kiourti et al., 2020; Salem et al., 2020; Ashcraft and Karra, 2021; Zhang et al., 2021).
Instead, we propose a novel minimum-viable setting called Cheap Talk MDPs. Adversaries are only
allowed to modify ‘useless’ features that are appended to the Victim’s observation as a deterministic
function of the current state. These features represent parts of an agent’s observations that are
unrelated to rewards or transition dynamics. In particular, our model applies to Adversaries adding
tags to content in recommender systems, or renting space on interactive billboards, or submitting
orders far out of the money in financial markets. The setting is minimal in that Adversaries cannot
use these features to occlude ground truth, influence environment dynamics or reward signals, inject
stochasticity, introduce non-stationarity, see the Victim’s actions, or access their parameters.


                                                    1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Cheap Talk MDPs are formalised in Section 4, and we further justify minimality by proving in
Proposition 1 that Adversaries cannot influence tabular Victims whatsoever in Cheap Talk MDPs. In
particular, it follows that Adversaries can only influence Victims by interfering with their function
approximator. We also prove more generally in Proposition 2 that Adversaries cannot prevent Victims
with optimal convergence guarantees to converge to optimal rewards, even in non-tabular settings.
Despite these restrictions, we show that Adversaries can still heavily influence agents parameterised
by neural networks. In Section 5, we introduce a new meta-learning algorithm called Adversarial
Cheap Talk (ACT) to train the Adversary. With an extensive set of experiments, we demonstrate in
Section 6 that an ACT Adversary can manipulate a Victim to achieve a number of outcomes:

      1. An ACT Adversary can prevent the Victim from solving a task, resulting in low rewards
         during training. We provide empirical evidence that the Adversary successfully sends
         messages which induce catastrophic interference in the Victim’s neural network.
      2. Conversely, an ACT Adversary can learn to send useful messages that improve the Victim’s
         training process, resulting in higher rewards during training.
      3. Finally, we introduce a training scheme that allows the ACT Adversary to directly and
         arbitrarily control the Victim directly at test-time.

2     R ELATED W ORK
2.1   T EST-T IME A DVERSARIAL ATTACKS

Most work investigating adversarial attacks on deep RL systems focuses on attacks at test-time, i.e.
those that attack a fully trained, static policy. Huang et al. (2017), Kos and Song (2017), and Zhang
et al. (2021) investigate adversarial attacks that influence test-time performance by directly perturbing
the observation space. Unlike in Cheap Talk MDPs, such perturbations can influence the underlying
dynamics by obscuring relevant information. Gleave et al. (2020) investigate adversarial attacks
that influence test-time performance of reinforcement learning agents that were trained in self-play.
In contrast to our method, the adversarial agent can directly interact with the environment and the
victim agent. The aforementioned test-time attacks largely work by generating perturbations that
push the observations out of the Victim’s training distribution. In contrast, in Cheap Talk MDPs, the
Victim trains directly with the static adversarial features; thus, by definition, the Adversary cannot
generate out-of-distribution or non-stationary inputs. Furthermore, these test-time attacks also assume
the ability to directly train against a pre-trained static agent. In contrast, in Cheap Talk MDPs, the
adversary is influences a learning agent with random initial parameters.

2.2   T RAIN -T IME A DVERSARIAL ATTACKS

In contrast to train-time adversarial attacks in RL, in test-time adversarial attacks the dversary
interacts with a learning victim. Pinto et al. (2017) simultaneously trains an adversary alongside
a reinforcement learning agent to robustify the victim’s policy. Unlike in this work, the adversary
is able to directly apply perturbation forces to the environment. We make further comparisons in
Section 6.1. Backdoor attacks in reinforcement learning aim to introduce a vulnerability during
train-time, which can be triggered at test-time. Kiourti et al. (2020) and Ashcraft and Karra (2021)
assume the adversary can directly and fully modify the victim’s observations and rewards in order to
discretely insert a backdoor that triggers on certain inputs. This is unlike Cheap Talk MDPs, in which
only ‘useless’ parts of the observations can be modified. Wang et al. (2021) considers the multi-agent
setting where the adversary inserts a backdoor using its behaviour in the environment. Unlike in this
work, the adversary can influence the underlying environment dynamics. Furthermore, each of these
backdoor attacks simply cause the victim to fail when triggered. In contrast, we use the backdoor to
fully control the victim.

2.3   FAILURE M ODES IN D EEP R EINFORCEMENT L EARNING

Previous works have shown that using neural networks as function approximators in reinforcement
learning often results in multiple failure modes due to the non-stationarity of value function boot-
strapping (van Hasselt et al., 2018). In particular, works have shown that catastrophic interference


                                                   2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


(Bengio et al., 2020) and capacity loss (Lyle et al., 2022) often occur, even within a single episode
of an environment (Fedus et al., 2020). Song et al. (2020) shows that deep reinforcement learning
algorithms can often overfit to spurious correlations in the observation space. By appending to the
observation space, we learn to induce the observational failure modes described in these works.

2.4    O PPONENT S HAPING / C HEAP TALK

Our method is closely related to the field of opponent shaping. Originally, most opponent shaping
algorithms assumed white-box access to their opponents to shape the flow of the opponent’s gradient
(Foerster et al., 2018; Letcher et al., 2019a;b; Willi et al., 2022). Instead, Lu et al. (2022) introduce
a method to shape opponents without white-box access. However, they still deploy an agent to
interact directly in the environment. In contrast, we propose a method to shape other agents without
having to interact in the environment, solely by appending messages through a cheap talk channel. In
reinforcement learning, a cheap talk channel is a part of the state space which can be observed by other
agents but does not alter transition dynamics or reward functions. Cheap talk channels (Crawford
and Sobel, 1982) in deep reinforcement learning have been used to learn emergent communication
(Foerster et al., 2016) and to solve coordination problems (Cao et al., 2018). To the best of our
knowledge, this paper is the first to use a cheap talk channel (and only a cheap talk channel) to shape
the behaviour of learning agents.

3     BACKGROUND
3.1    R EINFORCEMENT L EARNING

A Markov decision process (MDP) consists of a tuple D = ⟨S, A, P, R, γ⟩, where S denotes the state
space, A represents the action space, P : S × A × S 7→ [0, 1] denotes the state transition probability
function, R : S × A 7→ R is the reward function and γ ∈ [0, 1) denotes the discount factor. At every
timestep t, an agent samples an action from its stochastic policy at ∼ πθ (· | st ), where at ∈ A,
st ∈ S and θ denotes the policy parameterisation. The agent then receives a reward based on the action
taken in the current state: rt = R (st , at ). Finally, a new state is sampled according to the transition
function st+1 ∼ P (· | st , at ), resulting in a trajectory τθ := ((s0 , a0 , r0 ) , (s1 , a1 , r1 ) , . . .). The
agent’s goal is to maximise its expected discounted return under policy πθ :
                                                      "∞         #
                                                        X
                                                             t
                                        J(θ) = Eπθ          γ rt .                                              (1)
                                                            t=0


3.2    E VOLUTION S TRATEGIES

Evolution Strategies (Salimans et al., 2017, ES) is a derivative-free optimisation method. Let
F : Rd → R be some function we want to optimise over. Instead of optimising F (x) directly, we
first blur the objective to
                                          Eϵ∼N (0,Id ) [F (x + σϵ)] ,
where σ is a hyper-parameter dictating the amount of Gaussian noise we add. This is useful because
                                                                      hϵ           i
                       ∇x Eϵ∼N (0,Id ) [F (x + σϵ)] = Eϵ∼N (0,Id )       F (x + σϵ) ,
                                                                       σ
which allows us to optimise a non-differentiable function using gradient descent techniques in a
highly scalable manner.

4     P ROBLEM S ETTING
The setting we propose is of two agents interacting in a Cheap Talk MDP ⟨S, A, P, R, γ, M, f, J ⟩,
which is effectively an MDP with an augmented state space, whereby features (messages) from
a Cheap Talk channel M are appended to states. We refer to the agent observing the augmented
state as the Victim, with transition and reward functions P, R assumed to be independent from M.
Formally, this means that P(· | s, m, a) = P(· | s, m′ , a) and R(s, m, a) = R(s, m′ , a) for all
messages m, m′ ∈ M. The agent appending the message is called the Adversary, and is endowed


                                                        3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


with a deterministic policy f : S → M to append messages m = f (s) and an objective function J
to optimise (details below).
The Victim is a standard reinforcement learning agent, selecting actions according to its policy
at ∼ πθ (· | s, f (s)), where a ∈ A, s ∈ S. The Victim optimises its policy πθ with respect to
parameters θ in order to maximise its expected return J as defined in Equation 1.
By contrast, the Adversary may only act by modifying the cheap talk channel features fϕ (s) at s at
every step, where fϕ : S → M is a deterministic policy (function) of the current state and ϕ are the
Adversary’s parameters. These parameters may only be updated between full training/testing episodes
of the Victim; the function remains static during episodes to avoid introducing non-stationarity and
thus restrict the Adversary’s range of influence. The Adversary’s objective function J may be picked
arbitrarily, and need not be differentiable if it is optimised using ES.
In our train-time experiments we focus on the fully-adversarial setting where objectives are zero-sum,
J = −J, and the allied setting where objectives are equal, J = J. In test-time experiments we use
an entirely different objective, such as reaching for an arbitrary circle in Reacher (see Figure 5c).
This incentivises the Adversary to manipulate the Victim into maximising J , even if this comes at
the cost of the Victim’s original objective J.

4.1   M INIMALITY OF C HEAP TALK MDP S

To justify our introductory claim that Cheap Talk MDPs only allow for a minimal range of influence,
we first prove that Adversaries cannot influence Victims whatsoever in the tabular setting, irrespective
of the Victim’s learning algorithm. It follows that Adversaries can only attack Victims by interfering
with their function approximator.
Proposition 1. In any Cheap Talk MDP, the policy of a tabular Victim is independent from its
Adversary provided uniform initialisation along M, namely π0 (· | si , mj ) = π0 (· | si , mj ′ ) ∀ j, j ′ .

Proof (Sketch). The main intuition is that policy updates for different states do not interfere with
each other in tabular settings. Assuming uniform initialisation and noticing that the only states
encountered in the environment are of the form (s, f (s)), we deduce that the Victim’s policy updates
are independent from the Adversary’s choice of function f . Formal proof in Appendix A.1.

We also prove more generally that Adversaries cannot prevent Victims with optimal convergence
guarantees to converge to optimal rewards, even in non-tabular settings. They may however still harm
the Victim by slowing down their convergence rate significantly.
Proposition 2. A Victim which is guaranteed to converge to optimal policies in MDPs will also
converge to optimal policies in Cheap Talk MDPs, with an expected return equal to the optimal return
for the corresponding no-channel MDP.

Proof (Sketch). Cheap Talk MDPs are just MDPs with augmented state spaces and transition / reward
functions; a Victim will therefore converge regardless. Optimality of the expected return follows
from the Bellman equation and independence of transition and reward functions from Adversaries.
Formal proof in Appendix A.2.

Finally, we further justify minimality in Appendix A.3 by elaborating informally on the Adversaries’
range of influence. We also discuss the possibility of further weakening Cheap Talk MDPs and
conclude that all such variations either bring no advantage or reduce to regular MDPs.

5     M ETHOD

5.1   M ETA -T RAINING P ROCEDURE

Our method, Adversarial Cheap Talk (ACT), treats the problem setting as a meta-learning problem.
The Adversary’s parameters ϕ are only updated after a full training (and testing) run of the Victim’s
parameters θ. In other words, ϕ is static during the whole training run (inner loop) of θ and only gets


                                                     4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


updated once the inner loop completes, which prevents the introduction of non-stationarity. In the
outer loop, we optimise the Adversary’s objective J with respect to ϕ using ES as a black-box opti-
misation technique. Details, including the Cheap Talk channel sizes and the Victims hyperparameters
can be found in Appendix E.

5.2   T RAIN -T IME I NFLUENCE
                                                    Algorithm 1 Train-time ACT
When influencing train-time performance, we         1: Set c = ±1 for allied / adversarial
set J to be the agent’s mean reward throughout      2: Initialise Adversary parameters ϕ
its entire training trajectory. We consider both    3: for m = 0 to M do
“Adversarial” and “Allied” versions of ACT,         4:    Sample ϕn ∼ ϕ + σϵn with ϵn ∼ N (0, I)
whereby Adversaries try to minimise or max-         5:    for n = 0 to N do
imise J respectively (J = ±J). Pseudocode is        6:       Initialise Victim parameters θ
provided in Algorithm 1, where E is the num-        7:       rewards = []
ber of Victim training episodes and N is the ES     8:       for e = 0 to E do
population size.                                    9:          s = env.reset()
                                                   10:          while not done do
5.3 T EST-T IME M ANIPULATION                      11:             a ∼ πθ (· | s, fϕn (s))
                                                   12:             r, s, done = env.step(a)
When manipulating test-time behaviour, the goal 13:                rewards.append(r)
of the Adversary is to use the cheap talk features 14:          end while
to maximise some arbitrary objective J during 15:               Update θ with PPO to maximise J
the Victim’s test-time; however, the Adversary 16:           end for
may also communicate messages during the Vic- 17:            Jn = c · sum(rewards)/len(rewards)
tim’s training. Note that J can be any objective, 18:     end for
including minimising or maximising the Victim- 19:        Update ϕ using ES to maximise J
sreturn. Because the train-time and test-time 20: end for
behaviour of the Adversary differ significantly,
we parameterise them separately (as ϕ and ψ respectively), but optimise them jointly.
As an example, consider the Reacher environment (see 5c), where the Victim is trained to control
a robot arm to reach for the blue circle. During the Victim’s training, the train-time Adversary
(parameterised by ϕ) manipulates the cheap talk features to encode spurious correlations in the
Victim’s policy. At test-time, the test-time Adversary (parameterised by ψ) manipulates the cheap
talk features to take advantage of the spurious correlations and control the Victim to have it reach for
the yellow circle instead (the Adversary’s objective J ). More concisely, the train-time Adversary
wants to create a backdoor to make the Victim susceptible to manipulation at test-time. The test-time
Adversary wants to use this backdoor to control the Victim. The train-time and test-time Adversaries
(ϕ and ψ) are trained end-to-end to maximise J . While such optimisation would be difficult for
gradient-based methods due to the long-horizon nature of the problem, ES is agnostic to the length of
optimisation horizon.
Note that the test-time Adversary ψ only gets a single shot to maximise J at the end of the Victim’s
training and does not have access to (and thus cannot train against) the test-time parameters of
the Victim θ′ . To describe this formally, let T (θ | ϕ) denote the distribution induced by the inner
loop training with the train-time Adversary ϕ over Victim θ. Then, in each meta-episode, the test-
time Adversary ψ has to interact with an unseen sample θ′ of the distribution over trained Victims
θ′ ∼ T (· | ϕ). In Section 6, we show that the distribution T (θ | ϕ) has non-trivial variance,
suggesting that it is difficult to train against. Moreover, in Figure 9 (Section 6), we provide empirical
evidence that the train-time Adversary learns to reduce the variance of T (θ | ϕ) to help the test-time
Adversary. Pseudocode is provided in Algorithm 2, Appendix B.

6     E XPERIMENTS AND R ESULTS
We evaluate ACT on three different simple gym environments: Cartpole, Pendulum, and Reacher
(Brockman et al., 2016). We also evaluate ACT on Minatar Breakout Young and Tian (2019); Lange
(2022b) to test ACT’s ability to scale to higher-dimensional environments. The Victim is trained
with Proximal Policy Optimisation (Schulman et al., 2017, PPO). The Adversary is trained using ES
(Salimans et al., 2017).


                                                   5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                (a)                             (b)                              (c)

Figure 1: Visualisations of the training curves of the Victim across different Adversaries for (a)
Cartpole, (b) Pendulum, and (c) Reacher. Error bars denote the standard error across 10 seeds of
Victims trained against a single trained Adversary.


                           (a)                                        (b)

Figure 2: (a) Visualisations of the training curves of the Victim in Breakout-Minatar, a higher-
dimensional environment, against different Adversaries. (b) Comparing Adversarial ACT to RARL.
Eventually, the Victim learns to overcome the RARL adversary.


We train thousands of agents per minute on a single V100 GPU by vectorising both the PPO algorithm
itself and the environments using Jax (Bradbury et al., 2018). This allows us to JIT-compile the
full training pipeline and perform end-to-end deep RL training completely on GPUs. We adapt the
environment implementations from Brockman et al. (2016) and Lenton et al. (2021) and use the ES
implementation from Lange (2022a). This compute setup allows us to efficiently perform outer-loop
ES on the full training trajectories of inner-loop PPO agents. For example, in Cartpole, we can
simultaneously train 8192 PPO agents at a time on a single V100 GPU. Over 1024 generations of ES,
this results in training 8,388,608 PPO agents from scratch in 2 hours on 4 V100 GPUs. The longest
training time, which was the test-time Reacher setting, took 20 hours to train 1024 generations on 4
V100 GPUs. Training details are provided in Appendix E. We also include videos of the Victim’s
performance and visualisations of the Adversary’s outputs in the Supplementary Materials.

6.1   T RAIN -T IME I NFLUENCE

Figure 1 and Figure 2a show the results of training Victims alongside four different Adversaries.

      1. Ally: meta-trained to maximise the Victim’s mean reward throughout training.
      2. Adversary: meta-trained to minimise the Victim’s mean reward throughout training.
      3. Random Adversary: randomly initialise and fix the Adversary’s parameters ϕ using LeCun
         Uniform initialisation (LeCun et al., 2012).
      4. Zeroes Adversary: appends only zeroes as messages.

Ally. The Ally manages to assist the Victim to learn and converge faster – this is likely done by
appending useful features of the environment. We do further analysis in Appendix C Figure 7b.

Adversary. The Victims trained alongside the Adversaries are vastly outperformed by the baselines,
even though the Adversary cannot change the dynamics of the underlying MDP, and cannot add


                                                 6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                 (a)                               (b)                                (c)

Figure 3: Visualisations of the cosine distance between gradient updates on different environment
segments in cartpole. We collected each Victim’s experience buffer before the agents converge
in training and split each into 10 bins, ordered by the time-step within the environment. We then
calculate the gradient update the agents perform on each of these bins. This is the technique used in
Fedus et al. (2020). For the adversary (a), gradient updates on the early timesteps in an environment
interfere with gradient updates on the ending timesteps. For the ally (c), they are positively correlated.


non-stationarity or stochasticity. Moreover, since Adversaries cannot influence tabular Victims by
Proposition 1, this must be accomplished through learnt interference with the Victim’s function
approximator. We hypothesise that the Adversary may be inducing catastrophic interference within
the environment, which was observed by Fedus et al. (2020) in Atari 2600 games. They show that
features useful in the early phases of an environment episode can interfere with learning features for
performing well in the later phases of an episode.
Figure 3 suggests that, in the Adversarial setting, the gradient updates performed for transitions
sampled early in an episode can interfere with the gradient updates performed for transitions later
in an episode. Meanwhile, those gradient updates are positively correlated in the Allied setting,
suggesting that the gradient updates aid each other.
We also compare our evolutionary meta-optimisation procedure to Robust Adversarial Reinforcement
Learning (RARL) (Pinto et al., 2017) in Figure 2b, which updates the adversary’s parameters online
using reinforcement learning. We include training details in Appendix F. In both settings, the
Adversary can only communicate over the cheap talk channel; however, RARL is given a larger
range of influence. Firstly, RARL introduces non-stationarity since it is updated online during the
opponent’s learning, unlike ACT. Secondly, RARL is parameterised by a stochastic policy, meaning
that it can inject stochasticity into the environment, unlike ACT. Thirdly, RARL is able to train
directly against the Victim’s policy online, unlike ACT which cannot view the Victim’s policy or
actions. However, RARL ultimately underperforms ACT in the adversarial setting since it is unable
to consider the long-term evolution of the opponent’s policy (it takes greedy updates against the
Victim’s online parameters). Thus, the Victim learns to simply ignore the cheap talk channel. Note
that RARL is intended to be overcome in order to robustify the Victim’s policy.

6.2   T EST-T IME M ANIPULATION

In test-time manipulation, the Adversary’s objective is to maximise the score of the goal-conditioned
objectives described in 4 at test-time. The Adversary needs to learn to introduce a backdoor during
train-time and use the backdoor during test-time to fully control the Victim as explained in 5.3. To
better understand the capability of our model, we investigate four different Adversary-Victim settings.
These four settings serve as ablations to study the individual and joint performance of the train- and
test-time Adversaries.

      1. Test-Time Adversary ψ with Train-Time Adversary ϕ: This is the algorithm described in
         2. First, we train a Victim θ alongside a train-time Adversary ϕ. We then evaluate the return
         of the test-time Adversary ψ according to the goal-conditioned return. Both the train- and
         test-time Adversaries are trained using ES. The test-time Adversary ψ only gets a single
         shot against a Victim and is thus represented by a horizontal line in Figure 5.


                                                    7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                (a)                              (b)                              (c)

Figure 4: Visualisations of our goal-conditioned environments (a) In Cartpole, the Adversary’s target
is a randomly selected point on the x-axis (the yellow box). (b) In Pendulum, the Adversary’s goal is
a randomly selected angle (the yellow pole). (c) In Reacher, the Adversary’s goal is a random point,
(the yellow circle). The Victim’s goal is the blue circle.


                (a)                              (b)                              (c)

Figure 5: Training curves of the different agents in (a) Goal-Conditioned Cartpole (b) Goal-
Conditioned Pendulum (c) Goal-Conditioned Reacher. The ablations show that the train- and
test-time Adversary learn near-optimal performance in comparison to the oracles. Error bars denote
the standard error of the mean across 10 seeds of Victim trained against a single trained Adversary.


      2. Test-Time Oracle ψ ∗ with Train-Time Adversary ϕ: First, we optimise the Victim θ by
         training it alongside the above train-time Adversary ϕ. Then, instead of ES, we use PPO
         to train the test-time Adversary ψ ∗ against the Victim θ. Unlike the test-time Adversary,
         the oracle ψ ∗ is allowed to train against the pretrained and fixed Victim θ to maximise its
         returns, as described in Algorithm 4 in Appendix B.
      3. Test-Time Oracle ψ ∗ with Random Train-Time Adversary ϕrandom : First, we obtain a
         Victim θ by training it alongside a random train-time Adversary, ϕrandom , with randomly
         initialised and fixed parameters. Next, we use PPO to train the test-time Adversary ψ ∗ to
         maximise the goal-conditioned return.
      4. Direct Oracle: In this baseline, there is no cheap talk or Victim. We simply train a PPO
         agent to maximise the goal-conditioned return J. It can observe the full state and directly
         output actions in the environment.

All results are shown in Figure 5. We can compare (1) and (4) to measure how effective the train-time
Adversary ϕ and test-time Adversary ψ are at achieving the maximal possible return jointly. As
Figure 5 shows, the train- and test-time Adversaries perform near-optimally.
By comparing (2) and (3), we can observe how effective ϕ is at shaping θ. In reacher, we can see that
the test-time Oracle ψ ∗ cannot achieve max performance with a random train-time Adversary.
We can compare (1) and (2) to see how effective the test-time Adversary ψ is exploiting a given
Victim θ. We can see that ψ achieves near-optimal performance even though it has never trained
against the specific Victim θ or had access to its parameters. In Figure 9 we show that it can do this


                                                  8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                             (a)                                      (b)


                             (c)                                      (d)

Figure 6: We train 10 different Victims alongside the Learned ϕ (a & c), and 10 different Victims
alongside a randomly generated ϕ (b & d) in the Pendulum environment. (a) and (b) show the mean
of the policy output across the 10 Victims as we vary the value of the message in a fixed randomly
selected state. The policies trained with the learned ϕ achieve a much wider range of outputs. (c)
and (d) show the variance of the policy output across the 10 Victims. The policies trained with the
learned ϕ display very little variance.
because the train-time Adversary ϕ not only maximises the range of outputs that the cheap talk can
achieve, but it also does so in a consistent and low-variance way.

7   C ONCLUSION & F UTURE W ORK

In this paper, we propose a novel, minimum-viable, adversarial setting for RL agents, where the
Adversary can only influence the Victim over messages, and can only do so with a deterministic
function that only depends on the current state. By training an Adversary with adversarial cheap talk
(ACT), we show that appending to the observations of a learning agent, even with strong constraints,
is sufficient to drastically improve or decrease a learning agent’s train-time performance or introduce
a backdoor to control the learning agent at test time completely. Furthermore, we provide an in-
depth analysis of the behaviour of our Adversaries. At train-time, the Adversary learns to induce
something akin to catastrophic interference to decrease training performance. In the instant test-time
manipulation setting, the train-time Adversary learns to reduce the variance of the training process to
reduce variance of potential Victims the test-time Adversary could face.
As RL models become more widespread, we believe practitioners should consider this new class
of minimum viable attacks. Therefore, we propose using domain knowledge to identify and filter
out potentially controllable information as the first defence measure. Identifying these channels
without domain knowledge would be challenging: While there has been past work in identifying
task-irrelevant features in reinforcement learning (Vischer et al., 2021), ACT features still contain
task-relevant information since they are functions of the state. To defend against the test-time
Adversary, one can detect when the input goes out-of-distribution (Lin et al., 2017). Future work
would be required to build more robust and practical defences.


                                                  9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


R EFERENCES
C. Ashcraft and K. Karra. Poisoning deep reinforcement learning agents with in-distribution triggers.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.07798, 2021.
E. Bengio, J. Pineau, and D. Precup. Interference and generalization in temporal difference learn-
  ing. In Proceedings of the 37th International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 119 of
  Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pages 767–777, 2020.
J. Bradbury, R. Frostig, P. Hawkins, M. J. Johnson, C. Leary, D. Maclaurin, G. Necula, A. Paszke,
   J. VanderPlas, S. Wanderman-Milne, and Q. Zhang. JAX: composable transformations of
   Python+NumPy programs, 2018.
G. Brockman, V. Cheung, L. Pettersson, J. Schneider, J. Schulman, J. Tang, and W. Zaremba. Openai
  gym, 2016.
K. Cao, A. Lazaridou, M. Lanctot, J. Z. Leibo, K. Tuyls, and S. Clark. Emergent communication
  through negotiation. In 6th International Conference on Learning Representations, 2018.
V. P. Crawford and J. Sobel. Strategic information transmission. Econometrica, 50(6):1431–1451,
  1982.
W. Fedus, D. Ghosh, J. D. Martin, M. G. Bellemare, Y. Bengio, and H. Larochelle. On catastrophic
  interference in atari 2600 games. arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.12499, 2020.
J. Foerster, R. Y. Chen, M. Al-Shedivat, S. Whiteson, P. Abbeel, and I. Mordatch. Learning with
   opponent-learning awareness. In Proceedings of the 17th International Conference on Autonomous
   Agents and MultiAgent Systems, pages 122–130, 2018.
J. N. Foerster, Y. M. Assael, N. de Freitas, and S. Whiteson. Learning to communicate with deep
   multi-agent reinforcement learning. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
   volume 29, pages 2137–2145, 2016.
A. Gleave, M. Dennis, C. Wild, N. Kant, S. Levine, and S. Russell. Adversarial policies: Attacking
  deep reinforcement learning. In 8th International Conference on Learning Representations, 2020.
T. Gu, B. Dolan-Gavitt, and S. Garg. Badnets: Identifying vulnerabilities in the machine learning
   model supply chain. arXiv preprint arXiv:1708.06733, 2017.
S. H. Huang, N. Papernot, I. J. Goodfellow, Y. Duan, and P. Abbeel. Adversarial attacks on neural
   network policies. In 5th International Conference on Learning Representations, Workshop Track
   Proceedings, 2017.
P. Kiourti, K. Wardega, S. Jha, and W. Li. Trojdrl: Evaluation of backdoor attacks on deep reinforce-
   ment learning. In 57th ACM/IEEE Design Automation Conference, pages 1–6, 2020.
J. Kos and D. Song. Delving into adversarial attacks on deep policies. In 5th International Conference
   on Learning Representations, Workshop Track Proceedings, 2017.
R. T. Lange. evosax: Jax-based evolution strategies, 2022a.
R. T. Lange. gymnax: A JAX-based reinforcement learning environment library, 2022b. URL
  http://github.com/RobertTLange/gymnax.
Y. LeCun, L. Bottou, G. B. Orr, and K. Müller. Efficient backprop. In G. Montavon, G. B. Orr, and
   K. Müller, editors, Neural Networks: Tricks of the Trade - Second Edition, volume 7700 of Lecture
  Notes in Computer Science, pages 9–48. Springer, 2012. doi: 10.1007/978-3-642-35289-8\ 3.
   URL https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-35289-8_3.
D. Lenton, F. Pardo, F. Falck, S. James, and R. Clark. Ivy: Templated deep learning for inter-
  framework portability. arXiv preprint arXiv:2102.02886, 2021.
A. Letcher, D. Balduzzi, S. Racanière, J. Martens, J. N. Foerster, K. Tuyls, and T. Graepel. Differen-
  tiable game mechanics. J. Mach. Learn. Res., 20:84:1–84:40, 2019a.


                                                 10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A. Letcher, J. N. Foerster, D. Balduzzi, T. Rocktäschel, and S. Whiteson. Stable opponent shaping in
  differentiable games. In 7th International Conference on Learning Representations, 2019b.
Y. Lin, M. Liu, M. Sun, and J. Huang. Detecting adversarial attacks on neural network policies
  with visual foresight. CoRR, abs/1710.00814, 2017. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1710.
  00814.
C. Lu, T. Willi, C. Schroeder de Witt, and J. Foerster. Model-free opponent shaping. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2205.01447, 2022.
C. Lyle, M. Rowland, and W. Dabney. Understanding and preventing capacity loss in reinforcement
  learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.09560, 2022.
L. Pinto, J. Davidson, R. Sukthankar, and A. Gupta. Robust adversarial reinforcement learning. In
   D. Precup and Y. W. Teh, editors, Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on Machine
  Learning, ICML 2017, Sydney, NSW, Australia, 6-11 August 2017, volume 70 of Proceedings of
  Machine Learning Research, pages 2817–2826. PMLR, 2017. URL http://proceedings.
   mlr.press/v70/pinto17a.html.
A. Salem, R. Wen, M. Backes, S. Ma, and Y. Zhang. Dynamic backdoor attacks against machine
  learning models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.03675, 2020.
T. Salimans, J. Ho, X. Chen, and I. Sutskever. Evolution strategies as a scalable alternative to
   reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1703.03864, 2017.
J. Schulman, F. Wolski, P. Dhariwal, A. Radford, and O. Klimov. Proximal policy optimization
   algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347, 2017.
X. Song, Y. Jiang, S. Tu, Y. Du, and B. Neyshabur. Observational overfitting in reinforcement
  learning. In 8th International Conference on Learning Representations, 2020.
H. van Hasselt, Y. Doron, F. Strub, M. Hessel, N. Sonnerat, and J. Modayil. Deep reinforcement
  learning and the deadly triad. arXiv preprint arXiv:1812.02648, 2018.
M. A. Vischer, R. T. Lange, and H. Sprekeler. On lottery tickets and minimal task representations
 in deep reinforcement learning. CoRR, abs/2105.01648, 2021. URL https://arxiv.org/
 abs/2105.01648.
L. Wang, Z. Javed, X. Wu, W. Guo, X. Xing, and D. Song. BACKDOORL: backdoor attack against
   competitive reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the Thirtieth International Joint Conference
   on Artificial Intelligence, pages 3699–3705, 2021.
T. Willi, J. Treutlein, A. Letcher, and J. Foerster. COLA: consistent learning with opponent-learning
   awareness. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.04098, 2022.
K. Young and T. Tian. Minatar: An atari-inspired testbed for thorough and reproducible reinforcement
  learning experiments. arXiv preprint arXiv:1903.03176, 2019.
H. Zhang, H. Chen, D. S. Boning, and C. Hsieh. Robust reinforcement learning on state observations
  with learned optimal adversary. In 9th International Conference on Learning Representations,
  ICLR 2021, Virtual Event, Austria, May 3-7, 2021. OpenReview.net, 2021. URL https://
  openreview.net/forum?id=sCZbhBvqQaU.


                                                 11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A     M INIMALITY OF C HEAP TALK MDP S
A.1    P ROOF OF P ROPOSITION 1

Proposition 1. In any Cheap Talk MDP, the policy of a tabular Victim is independent from its
Adversary provided uniform initialisation along M, namely π0 (· | si , mj ) = π0 (· | si , mj ′ ) ∀ j, j ′ .

Proof. In a Cheap Talk MDP ⟨S, A, P, R, γ, M, f, J ⟩, a tabular Victim arbitrarily orders states
as {s1 , . . . , sd } and messages as {m1 , . . . , mk }, where d = |S| and k = |M|, and stores policies
πt (· | si , mj ) at time t of the learning process for all i ∈ [d], j ∈ [k]. The argument follows
identically for value functions. Assuming uniform initialisation along the M axis means that
                                        π0 (· | si , mj ) = π0 (· | si , mj ′ )
              ′
for all j, j ∈ [k]. Now consider any two Adversaries f, g and their influence on two copies of the
same Victim V, W with respective policies π, χ. The only states encountered in the environment are
of the form (s, f (s)) and (s, g(s)) respectively, so Victims only update the corresponding policies
                               πt (· | si , f (si ))      and     χt (· | si , g(si )) .
We prove by induction that these quantities are equal for all t. The base case holds by uniform
initialisation along M; assume the claim holds for all fixed 0 ≤ t ≤ T . The Victims update their
policies at time T + 1 according to the same learning rule, as a function of the transitions and returns
under current and past policies πt and χt respectively. Transitions take the form (s, f (s), a, s′ , f (s′ ))
for V and (s, g(s), a, s′ , g(s)) for W , which have identical probabilities and returns because
                                     πt (a | si , f (si )) = χt (a | si , g(si )) ;
                             P(s′ , f (s′ ) | s, f (s), a) = P(s′ , g(s′ ) | s, g(s), a) ;
                                          R(s, f (s), a) = R(s, g(s), a)
by inductive assumption and independence of P, R from M. This implies that the Victims’ policies
πT (· | si , f (si )) = χT (· | si , g(si )) are updated identically to
                                    πT +1 (· | si , f (si )) = χT +1 (· | si , g(si ))
as required to complete induction. Note that this would not necessarily hold in non-tabular settings,
where updating parameters θ of the function approximator for some state (si , f (si )) may alter the
policy on some other state (sj , f (sj )). It now follows that trajectories τ = (sk , f (sk ), ak )k for V
and ω = (sk , g(sk ), ak )k for W have identical probabilities and hence produce identical returns
                                          Eτ ∼πt [R(τ )] = Eω∼χt [R(ω)]
at any timestep t of the learning process, concluding independence from Adversaries.

A.2    P ROOF OF P ROPOSITION 2

Proposition 2. A Victim which is guaranteed to converge to optimal policies in MDPs will also
converge to optimal policies in Cheap Talk MDPs, with an expected return equal to the optimal return
for the corresponding no-channel MDP.

Proof. By assumption, the Victim is guaranteed to converge to an optimal policy π̄ in any given Cheap
Talk MDP ⟨S, A, P, R, M, f, J , γ⟩, since a Cheap Talk MDP is itself an MDP with an augmented
state space S × M and augmented transition/reward functions that are defined to be independent from
M. Now π̄ naturally induces a policy π on the no-channel MDP, given by π(· | s) := π̄(· | s, f (s)),
and in particular Q(s, a) = Q̄(s, f (s), a) by independence of transitions and rewards from M.
Optimality of π follows directly from the Bellman equation

                                                                                ′      ′    ′
           Q(s, a) = Q̄(s, f (s), a) = Es′ ∼P(·|s,a),r∼R(·|s,a) r + γ max   Q̄(s , f (s ), a )
                                                                      a′ ∈A

                                                                                ′ ′
                                     = Es′ ∼P(·|s,a),r∼R(·|s,a) r + γ max
                                                                       ′
                                                                            Q(s , a ) .
                                                                         a ∈A

Now trajectories τ̄ = (sk , f (sk ), ak )k and τ = (sk , ak )k have identical probability and return under
π and π̄ respectively, so the Victim has expected return
                                       Eτ̄ ∼π̄ [R(τ̄ )] = Eτ ∼π [R(τ )]
which is the optimal expected return of the original no-channel MDP.


                                                    12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A.3   F URTHER I NFORMAL D ISCUSSION

Consider a Cheap Talk MDP ⟨S, A, P, R, γ, M, f, J ⟩. For a fixed training / testing run of the Victim
on the MDP, the Adversary outputs a message f (s) at each step according to a fixed deterministic
function f : S → M. Below we elaborate informally on the claims that Adversaries cannot (1)
occlude the ground truth, (2) influence the environment dynamics / reward functions, (3) see the
Victim’s actions or parameters, (4) inject stochasticity, or (5) introduce non-stationarity.

(1) The message is appended to the state s and the Victim acts with full visibility of the ground
    truth (state) s according to its policy: a ∼ π(· | s, f (s)).

(2) The transition and reward functions P, R are defined to be independent from M. Formally we
    have P(· | s, m, a) = P(· | s, m′ , a) for all m, m′ ∈ M (similarly for R), so the Adversary’s
    choice of message m = f (s) cannot influence P or R.

(3) f : S → M is defined as a function of S only, so the Adversary cannot condition its policy
    based on the Victim’s actions or parameters (i.e. it cannot see or influence them).

(4) f is a deterministic function, so π(· | s, f (s)) is a distribution only on actions A. The transition
    and reward functions are independent from f , so they are distributions only on state-action pairs
    S × A. It follows that the Adversary injects no further stochasticity into the MDP.

(5) f is static for a fixed training / testing run, so st = st′ implies f (st ) = f (st′ ) for all timesteps
    t, t′ in the run. It follows that any given Victim policy π is stationary, namely π(· | st , f (st )) =
    π(· | st′ , f (st′ )) for all st = st′ . Since P and R are stationary (as defined by a standard MDP)
    and independent from M, their stationarity is also preserved.

Finally, we discuss the possibility of further weakening components of a Cheap Talk MDP, and
conclude that all such variants (A-E) bring no advantage or reduce to regular MDPs.

(A) Removing the channel M or the policy f : S → M would result in the Victim being completely
    independent from the Adversary, so no adversarial influence could be exerted whatsoever.

(B) Restricting the capacity of M to a certain number of bits would further restrict an Adversary’s
    range of influence, so one could say that the truly minimum-viable setting is to impose a set of
    size |M| = 1. However, cheap talk is still cheap talk when varying capacity, and there is no
    reason to arbitrarily restrict the size to 1 if we are to apply our setting to complex environments
    likely requiring more than a single bit of communication to witness interesting results.

(C) Not allowing Adversaries to see states, namely removing S as inputs to f , yields a function
    f : {0} → M which always outputs the same messagef (0) = m ∈ M. This is equivalent to the
    previous restriction of imposing a set M of size 1, since in this case any function f : S → M
    would have to output the unique element f (s) = m for all input states s.

(D) The Adversary must have some objective function J in order for an adversarial setting to make
    sense – removing it would remove the Adversary’s reason to exist, since it would have no
    incentive to learn parameters that influence the Victim according to some goal.

(E) Restricting the function class of objectives J is a valid minimisation of the setting, but simply
    restricts our interest in the setting itself. The setting should at the very least allow for adversarial
    objectives of the form J = ±J, as we consider in the train-time setting. In test-time, our aim is
    to show how Adversaries can exert arbitrary control over Victims despite cheap talk restrictions,
    and we therefore consider more general objective functions.



                                                    13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


B   P SEUDOCODE


Algorithm 2 Test-time ACT
 1: Initialize train-time ACT parameters ϕ
 2: Initialize test-time ACT parameters ψ
 3: for m = 0 to M do
 4:    Sample ϕn ∼ ϕ + σϵn where ϵ1 , ..., ϵN ∼ N (0, I)
 5:    Sample ψn ∼ ψ + σϵn where ϵ1 , ..., ϵN ∼ N (0, I)
 6:    for n = 0 to N do
 7:       Initialize policy params θ
 8:       rewards = []
 9:       for e = 0 to E do
10:          s = env.reset()
11:          while not done do
12:             m = fϕn (s)
13:             s̄ = [s, m]
14:             a ∼ πθ (· | s̄)
15:             r, s = env.step(a)
16:          end while
17:          Update θ using PPO to maximise J
18:       end for
19:       for i = 0 to I do
20:          s = env.reset()
21:          while not done do
22:             m = fψn (s)
23:             s̄ = [s, m]
24:             a ∼ πθ (· | s̄)
25:             r, s, done = env.step(a)
26:             rtS = RS (s, a)
27:             rewards.append(rtS )
28:          end while
29:       end for
30:    end for
31:    Update ϕ using ES to maximise J
32:    Update ψ using ES to maximise J
33: end for


                                              14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Algorithm 3 Test-time Oracle PPO ACT
 1: Initialize train-time ACT parameters ϕ
 2: Obtain trained ϕ, θ from Algorithm 2
 3: Initialize test-time ACT parameters ψ ∗
 4: for i = 0 to I do
 5:    s = env.reset()
 6:    while not done do
 7:       m ∼ πψ∗ (· | s)
 8:       s̄ = [s, m]
 9:       a ∼ πθ (· | s̄)
10:       r, s, done = env.step(a)
11:       rtS = RS (s, a)
12:       rewards.append(rtS )
13:    end while
14:    Update ψ ∗ using PPO to maximise J
15: end for


                                              15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Algorithm 4 Test-time Random Shaper
 1: Initialize train-time ACT parameters ϕrandom
 2: Initialize policy params θ
 3: rewards = []
 4: for e = 0 to E do
 5:    s = env.reset()
 6:    while not done do
 7:       m = fϕrandom (s)
 8:       s̄ = [s, m]
 9:       a ∼ πθ (· | s̄)
10:       r, s = env.step(a)
11:    end while
12:    Update θ using PPO to maximise J
13: end for
14: Initialize test-time ACT parameters ψ ∗
15: for i = 0 to I do
16:    s = env.reset()
17:    while not done do
18:       m ∼ πψ∗ (· | s)
19:       s̄ = [s, m]
20:       a ∼ πθ (· | s̄)
21:       r, s = env.step(a)
22:       rtS = RS (s, a)
23:       rewards.append(rtS )
24:    end while
25:    Update ψ ∗ using PPO to maximise J
26: end for


                                                   16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


C    A BLATIONS


                        (a)                                                  (b)

Figure 7: (a) Ablations on the different number of cheap talk dimensions for the Adversary in
Cartpole. We find that for a low-dimensional environment like Cartpole, the Adversary does not
achieve much marginal improvement from increasing the number of channels, suggesting that there
may be some limit to the amount that it can harm performance. (b) Comparing the ally with an
Adversary that outputs pre-trained logits in Cartpole. We find that the allied ACT still performs
better, implying that it is outputting features that are more useful than logits from a pre-trained policy.
Error bars denote the standard error across 10 seeds of a Victim trained against a single meta-trained
Adversary.


                                                   17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


D    P ENDULUM A BLATION


Figure 8: Interestingly, it seems like random network features improved performance in Pendulum.
To make sure this was not due to network initialisation effects, we ran an ablation where we removed
the cheap talk channel. It achieves about the same performance as a channel with zeros, which implies
that the performance difference is not due to network initialisation.


                                                18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


E   H YPERPARAMETER D ETAILS


We report the hyperparameter values used for each environment in our experiments. Our PPO
implementation uses observation normalisation (a common design choice for PPO), which means
that the attack is invariant to the range of values outputted over the cheap talk channel.


                  Table 1: Important parameters for the Cartpole environment

                       Parameter                               Value
                       State Size                              4
                       message Size                            2
                       message Range                           -2π, 2π
                       Number of Environments                  4
                       Maximum Grad Norm                       0.5
                       Number of Updates                       32
                       Update Period                           256
                       Outer Discount Factor γ                 0.99
                       Number of Epochs per Update             16
                       PPO Clipping ϵ                          0.2
                       General Advantage Estimation λ          0.95
                       Critic Coefficient                      0.5
                       Entropy Coefficient                     0.01
                       Learning Rate                           0.005
                       Population Size                         1024
                       Number of Generations                   2049
                       Outer Agent (OA) Hidden Layers          2
                       OA Size of Hidden Layers                64
                       OA Hidden Activation Function           ReLU
                       OA Output Activation Function           Tanh
                       Inner Agent (IA) Actor Hidden Layers    2
                       IA Size of Actor Hidden Layers          32
                       IA Number of Critic Hidden Layers       2
                       IA Size of Critic Hidden Layers         32
                       IA Activation Function                  Tanh
                       Number of Rollouts                      4


                                             19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                 Table 2: Important parameters for the Pendulum environment

                       Parameter                              Value
                       State Size                             3
                       message Size                           2
                       message Range                          -2π, 2π
                       Number of Environments                 16
                       Maximum Grad Norm                      0.5
                       Number of Updates                      128
                       Update Period                          256
                       Outer Discount Factor γ                0.95
                       Number of Epochs per Update            16
                       PPO Clipping ϵ                         0.2
                       General Advantage Estimation λ         0.95
                       Critic Coefficient                     0.5
                       Entropy Coefficient                    0.005
                       Learning Rate                          0.02
                       Population Size                        768
                       Number of Generations                  2049
                       Outer Agent (OA) Hidden Layers         2
                       OA Size of Hidden Layers               64
                       OA Hidden Activation Function          ReLU
                       OA Output Activation Function          Tanh
                       Inner Agent (IA) Actor Hidden Layers   1
                       IA Size of Actor Hidden Layers         32
                       IA Number of Critic Hidden Layers      1
                       IA Size of Critic Hidden Layers        32
                       IA Activation Function                 Tanh
                       Number of Rollouts                     4

                  Table 3: Important parameters for the Reacher environment

                       Parameter                              Value
                       State Size                             10
                       message Size                           4
                       message Range                          -2π, 2π
                       Number of Environments                 32
                       Maximum Grad Norm                      0.5
                       Number of Updates                      256
                       Update Period                          128
                       Outer Discount Factor γ                0.99
                       Number of Epochs per Update            10
                       PPO Clipping ϵ                         0.2
                       General Advantage Estimation λ         0.95
                       Critic Coefficient                     0.5
                       Entropy Coefficient                    0.0005
                       Learning Rate                          0.004
                       Population Size                        128
                       Number of Generations                  2049
                       Outer Agent (OA) Hidden Layers         2
                       OA Size of Hidden Layers               64
                       OA Hidden Activation Function          ReLU
                       OA Output Activation Function          Tanh
                       Inner Agent (IA) Actor Hidden Layers   2
                       IA Size of Actor Hidden Layers         128
                       IA Number of Critic Hidden Layers      2
                       IA Size of Critic Hidden Layers        128
                       IA Activation Function                 ReLU
                       Number of Rollouts                     4


                                             20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                  Table 4: Important parameters for the Minatar environments

                       Parameter                               Value
                       State Size                              400
                       message Size                            32
                       message Range                           -2π, 2π
                       Number of Environments                  64
                       Maximum Grad Norm                       0.5
                       Number of Updates                       1024
                       Update Period                           256
                       Outer Discount Factor γ                 0.99
                       Number of Epochs per Update             32
                       PPO Clipping ϵ                          0.2
                       General Advantage Estimation λ          0.95
                       Critic Coefficient                      0.5
                       Entropy Coefficient                     0.01
                       Learning Rate                           3e-4
                       Population Size                         128
                       Number of Generations                   256
                       Outer Agent (OA) Hidden Layers          2
                       OA Size of Hidden Layers                64
                       OA Hidden Activation Function           ReLU
                       OA Output Activation Function           Tanh
                       Inner Agent (IA) Actor Hidden Layers    2
                       IA Size of Actor Hidden Layers          256
                       IA Number of Critic Hidden Layers       2
                       IA Size of Critic Hidden Layers         256
                       IA Activation Function                  ReLU
                       Number of Rollouts                      1


                                             21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


F   RARL H YPERPARAMETER D ETAILS


                             Table 5: RARL Cartpole Parameters

               Parameter                                             Value
               State Size                                            4
               message Size                                          2
               message Range                                         -2π, 2π
               Maximum Grad Norm                                     0.5
               Total Number of Adversary and Learner Updates         100
               Number of Learner Update Steps per Adversary Update   8
               Number of Adversary Update Steps per Learner Update   8
               Update Period                                         256
               Outer Discount Factor γ                               0.99
               Number of Epochs per Update                           16
               PPO Clipping ϵ                                        0.2
               General Advantage Estimation λ                        0.95
               Critic Coefficient                                    0.5
               Entropy Coefficient                                   0.01
               Learning Rate                                         0.005
               Population Size                                       1024
               Number of Generations                                 2049
               Outer Agent (OA) Hidden Layers                        2
               OA Size of Hidden Layers                              64
               OA Hidden Activation Function                         ReLU
               OA Output Activation Function                         Tanh
               Inner Agent (IA) Actor Hidden Layers                  2
               IA Size of Actor Hidden Layers                        32
               IA Number of Critic Hidden Layers                     2
               IA Size of Critic Hidden Layers                       32
               IA Activation Function                                Tanh
               Number of Rollouts                                    16


                                             22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


G    E XTRA V ISUALISATIONS


                            (a)                                       (b)


                            (c)                                       (d)


                            (e)                                       (f)


                            (g)                                       (h)

Figure 9: We train 10 different Victims alongside the Learned ϕ (left column), and 10 different
Victims alongside a randomly generated ϕ (right column) in the Pendulum environment. We show
the mean of the policy output across the 10 Victims as we vary the value of the message in multiple
randomly selected states. The learned ϕ consistently generates similar policy outputs across different
states with respect to the cheap talk channel.


                                                 23
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


H    A DDITIVE P ERTURBATIONS


                 (a)                               (b)                                (c)

Figure 10: Visualisations of the training curves of the Victim across different Adversaries for (a)
Cartpole, (b) Pendulum, and (c) Reacher. Error bars denote the standard error across 10 seeds of
Victims trained against a single trained Adversary. In this setting, the Adversary adds the perturbation
to the input rather than appending. Note that this allows the Adversary to conflate states and influence
the optimal policy. Thus, the Adversary can harm performance far more.


                                                   (a)

Figure 11: Visualisations of the training curves of the Victim across different Adversaries for
Cartpole. Error bars denote the standard error across 10 seeds of Victims trained against a single
trained Adversary. In this setting, the Adversary adds the perturbation to the useless features identified
in (Vischer et al., 2021) rather than appending. It achieves similar performance to the cheap talk
channel attacks.


                                                   24
