Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


I MPOSSIBLY G OOD E XPERTS
A ND H OW TO F OLLOW T HEM
 Aaron Walsman1 , Muru Zhang1 , Sanjiban Choudhury2 , Ali Farhadi1 , Dieter Fox1,3
 Computer Science and Engineering, University of Washington1
 Computer Science, Cornell University2
 NVIDIA3
 {awalsman,nanami17,ali,fox}@cs.washington.edu
 sanjibanc@cornell.edu



                                            A BSTRACT

         We consider the sequential decision making problem of learning from an expert
         that has access to more information than the learner. For many problems this extra
         information will enable the expert to achieve greater long term reward than any
         policy without this privileged information access. We call these experts вҖңImpossi-
         bly GoodвҖқ because no learning algorithm will be able to reproduce their behavior.
         However, in these settings it is reasonable to attempt to recover the best policy pos-
         sible given the agentвҖҷs restricted access to information. We provide a set of neces-
         sary criteria on the expert that will allow a learner to recover the optimal policy in
         the reduced information space from the expertвҖҷs advice alone. We also provide a
         new approach called ELF Distillation (Explorer Learning from Follower) that can
         be used in cases where these criteria are not met and environmental rewards must
         be taken into account. We show that this algorithm performs better than a variety
         of strong baselines on a challenging suite of Minigrid and Vizdoom environments.



1   I NTRODUCTION

Sequential decision making is one of the most important problems in modern machine learning
theory and practice. Reinforcement learning from an environmental reward signal is a powerful but
unwieldy tool for attacking these problems. In contrast, imitation learning can be much more sample
efficient and empirically easier to train than reinforcement learning, but requires a powerful expert
that can either provide an offline dataset of instructions or online supervision. In many practical
settings, these experts have access to more information than the learning agent. This can occur when
using human demonstrators to train robots that have inferior sensors, or in simulated environments
where a synthetic expert uses hidden simulator information to train an agent. In these settings, it
is possible that the expertвҖҷs additional information makes it more powerful than any learning agent
that does not have access to the hidden information. We call these experts вҖңImpossibly GoodвҖқ and
show that learning from them using techniques that do not incorporate environmental rewards can
cause the agent to drastically under perform the optimal policy in the reduced information space.
For example, consider a simulated robot tasked with retrieving a cell phone in an unknown apartment
consisting of multiple rooms. The robot observes the world using a camera and is not given the
location of the phone in advance, so it must explore each room in order to find it. Because this is a
simulated environment, we can construct an expert that knows not only the location of the phone,
but also the exact layout of each room and can compute the shortest path from the robot to the
phone. We can then use this expert to construct a large corpus of training data across any number of
apartments and phone locations. While these demonstrations may be optimal according to the expert
that knows the phoneвҖҷs location, they crucially do not provide any demonstrations of the exploratory
behavior that is necessary for the robot which must rely on its more limited sensors. At test time, the
robot may need to explore many empty rooms before finding the one that contains the phone, but the
expert has always walked directly to the goal and so it has never shown the robot what to do when
encountering an empty room. In this case the expert is impossibly good because on average, it can
reach the phone much faster than any agent that does not have access to the map, but must explore
each room one by one. While we may be able to learn some important skills from this expert, we


                                                   1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


are crucially missing demonstrations of other necessary behavior, and so learning from this expertвҖҷs
advice alone may cause the robot to fail.
Our goal in these settings is to find an algorithm that retains the efficiency of imitation learning, while
incorporating just enough reward feedback from the environment to achieve success. To address this,
we introduce a new technique called ELF Distillation (Explorer Learning from Follower). The key
insight of this approach is to train one follower policy using the advice of the impossibly good
expert alone, and then use the estimated long-term value of this policy to drive exploration of a
second explorer policy using reward shaping. These two policies are trained jointly so that the
explorer policy can be used to inform the distribution of states from which the follower must learn.
In order to study these problems, we have constructed a suite of Minigrid(Chevalier-Boisvert et al.,
2018) and Vizdoom(Wydmuch et al., 2019) environments that clearly demonstrate the challenges of
learning from impossibly good experts. While these are toy problems, they are quite challenging
for many strong baselines and related approaches, and allow us to clearly demonstrate the necessary
concepts in a setting that avoids confounding implementation details. Code for these experiments
can be found at https://github.com/aaronwalsman/impossibly-good/.


2    R ELATED W ORK

Recently many authors have identified the problem of learning from experts that have access to
more information than the learning agent. This can occur in the self-driving domain, where a human
expert may be able to see more than the carвҖҷs perception system (de Haan et al., 2019; Bansal et al.,
2018; Chen et al., 2019). It can also occur robot exploration, where the expert may already know
a map of the world (Choudhury et al., 2017; Jain et al., 2021), or in heuristic search where the
expert may know which graph edges are valid (Bhardwaj et al., 2017). In some cases it is possible
to overcome these issues by considering a history of recent observations instead a single step, but
unfortunately this exacerbates the вҖңlatchingвҖқ behavior identified by several practitioners in both
self-driving (Muller et al., 2006; Kuefler et al., 2017; Bansal et al., 2018; Codevilla et al., 2019)
and natural language processing (Ortega et al., 2021) in which an agent becomes overly fixated on
repeating recent actions.
In these partial information settings, Choudhury et al. (2018) showed that interactive imitation learn-
ing converges to the QMDP approximation of the expertвҖҷs policy (Littman et al., 1995). This likely
explains the empirical success (Chen et al., 2019; Lee et al., 2020) of such techniques in settings
where information naturally reveals itself over time. These interactive imitation learning techniques
were originally designed to address covariate shift, a condition in which compounding single-step
errors drive the learning agent into states not seen during test time. This effect was first noted
by (Pomerleau, 1989) and has long been recognized as one of the most important challenges in
imitation learning (Bagnell, 2015). Several approaches have been proposed to address this such as
SEARN DaumeМҒ et al. (2009), DAgger (Ross et al., 2011) and AggreVaTe (Ross & Bagnell, 2014;
Sun et al., 2017). Recent work (Spencer et al., 2021) has shown that covariate shift can be broken
into realizable settings where off-policy methods such as behavior cloning work well with increas-
ing data, and non-realizable settings where on-policy methods with an interactive expert (Ross et al.,
2010) or an interactive simulator(Ziebart et al., 2008; Swamy et al., 2021) are necessary.
Some authors (Zhang et al., 2020; Kumor et al., 2021; Ortega et al., 2021) have proposed to address
learning in partial information settings using the causal reasoning framework of Pearl et al. (2016),
while Swamy et al. (2022) has recently shown that on-policy imitation learning methods can be more
effective at recovering the expertвҖҷs behavior than off-policy approaches in these situations, and has
provided conditions under which an agent can asymptotically recover the expertвҖҷs behavior.
However, in settings where information does not reveal itself, the learner has to actively gather
information (Lee et al., 2021). Tennenholtz et al. (2021) examine similar settings but give the
learner access to the confounder at test time. Warrington et al. (2021) proposes an asymmetric
DAgger algorithm for this setting, but it requires a differentiable model of the expert, which is fre-
quently unavailable. Nguyen et al. (2022) replaces the entropy term in Soft Actor Critic (Haarnoja
et al., 2018) with a divergence between the agent and expert policies at each visited state. Weihs
et al. (2021) interpolates between the policy gradient and an imitation learning signal using an
estimate of how well the agent is able to follow the expert in each state. Our work builds on
these ideas by encouraging the agent to visit states where following the expert leads to long term
success rather than short-term ability to mimic the expert. This technique uses the tools of pol-


                                                    2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


icy distillation (Rusu et al., 2015; Czarnecki et al., 2019) where an agent may learn from a mix of
single-step imitation and multi-step reward signals.
Imitation learning from impossibly good experts requires exploratory behavior to find access to
hidden information. Deciding how to conduct effective exploration in unknown environments is a
problem with a rich history (Kao et al., 1996; Albers & Henzinger, 1997; Yang et al., 2021). Our
approach is compatible with a wide range of exploration techniques, but we use the exploration
inherent to training stochastic policies with PPO Schulman et al. (2017) in this paper for simplicity.

3   I MPOSSIBLY G OOD E XPERTS
In order to study learning from an expert with more information than the learning agent, we use
the framework of Partially Observable Markov Decision Processes (POMDPs), (Kaelbling et al.,
1998), a generalization of Markov Decision Processes (MDPs) (Sutton & Barto, 2018) to situations
where an agent must make decisions using limited observations. The goal in these settings is to
sequentially make decisions in discrete time based on feedback from the environment in order to
maximize a reward signal. As in an MDP, a POMDP contains an underlying state space S and action
space A. In an MDP, the agent receives the state s from the environment at each time step, but in a
POMDP, the learning agent instead receives some possibly lossy and non-Markovian observation o
that is a function of the state o = O(s). Because the observations themselves are non-Markovian,
the agent must reason over the history of past observations, actions and rewards up until the current
time step П„i = {(o1 , a1 , r1 ) . . . (oiвҲ’1 , aiвҲ’1 , riвҲ’1 ), oi } referred to as a trajectory.
A learning agentвҖҷs policy ПҖL is a differentiable function mapping a trajectory to a normalized distri-
bution over actions. We define ПҖL (П„ ) as the agentвҖҷs action distribution after witnessing the history
П„ . We also define the model class О L to be the set of all possible learnable policies. During training
we assume access to an expert policy ПҖE which is a non-differentiable function that also maps a
trajectory to a normalized distribution over actions.
In order to reason about agents and experts that have different information, we consider a POMDP
with two separate observation functions. The first oL = OL (s) produces an observation that the
agent sees, while the second oE = OE (s) produces an observation that the expert sees. This allows us
to reason about a trajectory in the underlying state space П„S and map it to a corresponding trajectory
of observations for the agent П„L and a separate trajectory of observations for the expert П„E .
                                  П„S = {(s1 , a1 , r1 ) . . . (sN , aN , rN )}
                            П„L = {(OL (s1 ), a1 , r1 ) . . . (OL (sN ), aN , rN )}
                            П„E = {(OE (s1 ), a1 , r1 ) . . . (OE (sN ), aN , rN )}
The observational trajectory П„L represents what the learning agent observes while interacting with
the environment, while the state trajectory П„S represents the ground truth state of the world which is
unknown. For non-deterministic observation functions we use OL (oL |s) and OL (П„L |П„S ) to repre-
sent the probability of a state s or state space trajectory П„S producing an observation oL or observa-
tion trajectory П„L .
We assume a model-free setting in which the states, observation functions, transition dynamics and
reward dynamics are all unknown to the learning algorithm. Instead during training, the algorithm
interacts with the environment, and receives observations and a scalar reward in the form {oL , oE , r}
with the assumption that oL and oE were generated from the same unknown state s. The learning
algorithm also has access to an expert ПҖE that can produce advice in the form of a suggested action
aE вҲј ПҖE (П„E ). At test time the agent will not receive the expertвҖҷs observations oE or have access to
the expertвҖҷs advice aE , and so it must learn to make decisions using trajectories of oL alone.
We consider the episodic setting with a set of terminal states sterm . When a terminal state is reached,
the environment informs the agent that the episode has ended using a special observation oterm and
resets s using an unknown initial state distribution S init . We write П„L вҲј ПҖL to refer to a trajectory
generated by initializing according to S init and repeatedly sampling actions from ПҖL until a terminal
state is reached. We also write ПҒПҖL (oL ) and ПҒПҖL (П„L ) as the probability of observing oL and П„L
respectively when acting according to ПҖL from the initial state distribution. We will also use PПҖL to
refer to the set of trajectories П„ that have nonzero probability when acting according to ПҖL from the
initial state distribution.
                                      P|П„ |
The return of a trajectory G(П„ ) = i=1 ri is the sum of all rewards encountered during that trajec-
tory. The value function of a policy VПҖL (s) = EП„ вҲјПҖL |s1 =s G(П„ ) is the expected value of the return of


                                                   3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


a trajectory that starts in state s and continues by sampling actions according to ПҖL . We write VПҖinitL
to be EsвҲјS init VПҖL (s), the expected value when acting according to ПҖL after starting from states sam-
pled from the initial state distribution. The goal of the learning algorithm is to learn a policy ПҖL (П„L )
using the reward signal r and expert advice aE during training in order to maximize VПҖinit     L
                                                                                                   during
                                        вҲ—
test time. An agent-optimal policy ПҖL     is one that achieves the greatest value when starting from the
initial state distribution compared to all other policies in the model class VПҖinit
                                                                                вҲ—   вүҘ VПҖinit
                                                                                         L
                                                                                             вҲҖ ПҖ L вҲҲ О L .
                                                                                L
Note that while this agent-optimal policy is the best policy achievable with limited information, it
may still underperform the expert ПҖE that has more information.
We now have the tools to formally state the impossibly good criterion. We say an expert ПҖE is
impossibly good iff
                                              VПҖinit
                                                 E
                                                     > VПҖinit
                                                          вҲ—
                                                          L
                                                                                                        (1)

This means that an expert is impossibly good if in expectation it achieves a greater value from the
initial state distribution than the best policy in the model class О L .


4    H OW N OT T O F OLLOW T HEM

In this section we consider learning from an impossibly good expert using Behavior Cloning and
DAgger, two common techniques that use expert demonstrations as a learning signal. We first de-
scribe these methods, then show examples designed to demonstrate their success and failure modes
when learning from impossibly good experts. We then provide formal criteria for determining when
                                                                 вҲ—
these methods are capable of finding the agent-optimal policy ПҖL    from demonstrations provided by
ПҖE . Note that Swamy et al. (2022) have also recently provided conditions under which an agent with
restricted information may achieve expert level performance from demonstrations. Rather than con-
sidering cases where expert performance may be achieved, our goal is instead to give conditions for
learning the best policy possible in cases where achieving expert performance is impossible. Finally
                                                                  вҲ—
we show that in some environments, the agent-optimal policy ПҖL       cannot be recovered from expert
advice alone.
Behavior Cloning is an off-policy technique in which the expert ПҖE generates a static dataset of
trajectories prior to training. The algorithm then iteratively samples batches of state-action transi-
tions from this dataset and trains the learning agent to match the expertвҖҷs demonstrations. Behavior
Cloning is known to suffer from covariate shift (Ross et al., 2011), a condition in which errors made
by the model during test time can quickly take the agent outside of the distribution of states encoun-
tered during training. Despite this limitation, Behavior Cloning enjoys widespread popularity due
to its simplicity and ability to perform well on some problems (Spencer et al., 2021).
DAgger Ross et al. (2011) is an on-policy method designed to overcome the covariate shift of Be-
havior Cloning. Recently Swamy et al. (2022) has shown that on-policy methods such as DAgger
can improve an agentвҖҷs performance when learning from an expert with more information. Instead of
generating a static dataset by acting according to the expert ПҖE , DAgger iteratively collects batches
of data by acting according to the learning agent ПҖL and simultaneously recording the expertвҖҷs ad-
vice in each visited state. After collecting a batch of data, the agent is trained to replicate the expertвҖҷs
advice on all data collected so far. This allows the agent to train on states that may not be visited by
the expert, but are necessary to recovering from mistakes made by the learner.
Diagrams of the examples in this section are found in Figure 1. In these environments, the state
space, action space and state-action transition function consist of a directed graph of nodes repre-
senting the location of the agent. The state space also contains a random variable X that is uniformly
sampled from {0, 1} at the start of each episode and remains fixed until termination. The expert ob-
serves the value of X at the start of the episode, while the agent only observes X after reaching
certain nodes in the graph. Transitions between nodes are deterministic, and both expert and agent
observe the node they currently occupy. In all examples there are two terminal nodes, one which
produces a reward of 1 when X = 0 and the other which produces a reward of 1 when X = 1. The
agent also receives a small reward penalty вҲ’Пө at each step to encourage faster solutions.
Due to the deterministic transition function and the fact that X is fixed for each episode, we can
simplify ПҖL to be a function of the current node and the remembered value of X вҲҲ {0, 1, ?} rather
than an entire trajectory of observations. We also assume the expert ПҖE acts optimally according to
its observations.


                                                     4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                    Example I                    Example II                  Example III
                      Legend:                                                                                                              E
                                                                                                                                 B         x=0
   A Starting State
                          B
                                  Indicates the value
                                                                                    C                B        D
                                  of X is revealed to
                                                                                                                     A           C         F
                                                            A          B                 A
   B Nonterminal State    X                                                     x=0                           x=0
                                  the agent when
                                                                                                                                           x=1
                                  visiting this position
                          agent


   X A hidden variable     C Terminal State, a                                      D                C        E      X           D
      sampled uniformly
      from {0,1} at the
                           x=0
                                reward is given if          X          X        x=1      X                    x=1
                                                                                                                    expert
                                X matches the value
      beginning of each
      episode.
                                shown
                                                           expert     agent             expert
                                                                                                     X                           X
                                                                                                    agent                       agent


Figure 1: Three example environments. An agent may travel through states by taking actions as
indicated by the arrows. The reward when reaching a terminal state depends on a hidden variable X
that is revealed to the agent if it visits the indicated locations.

First consider Example I. Here, the agent sees the value of X as soon as it visits B. This allows
                           вҲ—
the agent-optimal policy ПҖL  to always know which terminal reward to transition to from B. An
agent in this example must learn distributions for observations ПҖL (A, ?), ПҖL (B, 0) and ПҖL (B, 1).
Because the expert ПҖE takes the same path as the agent-optimal policy, it will generate correct
training examples for these distributions. Using Behavior Cloning to match these examples will
          вҲ—
recover ПҖL  .
Example II in Figure 1 shows a case where Behavior Cloning fails. To see this, note that when
generating data, the expert will travel from A to B when X = 0 and from A to C when X = 1. Under
the agentвҖҷs observation function OL , these correspond to (A, ?), (B, 0) and (C, 1). Now consider the
agent-optimal behavior in this example. Because of its limited information, the agent must take the
first step blindly, and so it will sometimes reach either (B, 1) or (C, 0). In these cases, the optimal
behavior is to backtrack to A where it will encounter either (A, 0) or (A, 1), remembering the value
of X. From these observations, the agent now has enough information to guarantee reaching (B, 0)
or (C, 1) and achieve the terminal reward. Note though that data generated by acting according to
the expert did not provide demonstrations for what to do when observing (B, 1) or (C, 0) so we
cannot hope to recover this optimal behavior.
                                                              вҲ—
On the other hand, we can show that DAgger can recover ПҖL       in this example. Now data is generated
by the learning agent ПҖL , and as we just saw, it has no way to decide whether to transition to B or
C at the first step. This means that unlike Behavior Cloning, the observations (B, 1) and (C, 0) will
exist in the training set. For these observations, the optimal behavior according to the expert ПҖE is to
backtrack to A and continue down the opposite branch so these labels will be provided along with
                                                                                  вҲ—
the corresponding observations. These labels are also optimal according to ПҖL       , so this extra data
will allow DAgger to recover the agent-optimal policy.
                                                                                вҲ—
Finally Example III in Figure 1 shows a case where DAgger will fail to recover ПҖL . Now the problem
is not only data coverage, but also the instructions received by the expert. Similar to Example II,
the expert will always tell the learner to transition to B or C from the initial observation (A, ?).
                                                                         вҲ—
However, due to the information asymmetry, the agent-optimal policy ПҖL     must first visit D in order
to discover the value of X before backtracking to A and continuing to B or C as appropriate. Even
if some uncertainty in the agentвҖҷs policy causes it to visit D while generating data, the labels for
(A, ?) will never tell the agent that this is the correct behavior.
These examples have given us two intuitive conditions that must be met in order for these methods
              вҲ—
to recover ПҖL   . The first is that all observations that are encountered when acting according to the
                          вҲ—
agent-optimal policy ПҖL      must be encountered during training. The second condition is that the
                                                                           вҲ—
expert ПҖE must instruct the agent to take correct actions according to ПҖL    . We now generalize these
intuitions into a formal set of conditions that must be met in order for these methods to recover the
                         вҲ—
agent-optimal policy ПҖL     in a simplified learning model.
Consider a dataset D generated by acting according to an arbitrary generation policy ПҖD and sam-
pling labels aE from ПҖE . Also consider a learning policy ПҖ
                                                          eL that memorizes the empirical distribu-
tion of expert recommendations for each trajectory П„L in the dataset D.
                                              P|D|
                                                    1П„ =П„ ,a =a
                                 eL (a|П„L ) = iP|D|Li L Ei
                                 ПҖ                                                              (2)
                                                    i  1П„Li =П„L
                                                 вҲ—
Theorem 1. The empirical policy ПҖ
                                eL will recover ПҖL as |D| вҶ’ вҲһ iff the following conditions hold:


                                                                                5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


      1. (Coverage) ПҒПҖD (П„LвҲ— ) Мё= 0 вҲҖ П„LвҲ— вҲҲ PПҖLвҲ—

      2. (Correctness) EП„S вҲјПҖD ПҖE (OE (П„S ))OL (П„LвҲ— |П„S ) = ПҖL
                                                             вҲ—
                                                               (П„LвҲ— ) вҲҖ П„LвҲ— вҲҲ PПҖLвҲ—

The proof is in Appendix A.
The first condition states that all policy input trajectories that have nonzero probability of being
                                            вҲ—
visited under the agent-optimal policy ПҖL      must also have non-zero probability under the dataset
sampling policy ПҖD . This corresponds to the intuition developed from the examples above that
during training we must visit all states that the agent-optimal policy needs to learn about.
The second condition states that the distribution of expert advice for the state trajectories П„S which
map to agent observation trajectories П„LвҲ— must be equal to ПҖL  вҲ—
                                                                 (П„LвҲ— ) for all trajectories with nonzero
                                                                 вҲ—
probability of being visited under the agent-optimal policy ПҖL     . This corresponds to the intuition
                                                                             вҲ—                      вҲ—
developed earlier that an expert must tell the agent to act according to ПҖL    in order to recover ПҖL .
                                                                          вҲ—
Next we show it may not be possible to learn the agent-optimal policy ПҖL    from expert demonstra-
tions alone regardless of the dataset generation policy ПҖD .
Theorem 2. There exist environments with impossibly good experts that violate the correctness
condition in Theorem 1 regardless of the dataset distribution policy ПҖD .

Proof. Example III in Figure 1 is a proof by example.
                     вҲ—
In this environment ПҖL (A вҶ’ D|(A, ?)) = 1.0. However, ПҖE (A вҶ’ D|П„E ) = 0 вҲҖ П„E so there is no
ПҖD that can sample states mapping to П„E that will cause ПҖE (П„E ) to produce the labels required to
        вҲ—
learn ПҖL  .                                                                                     в– 
                                                                                          вҲ—
This result shows that in some cases it is impossible to learn the agent-optimal policy ПҖL  from
the labels generated by an impossibly good expert alone, regardless of the rollout policy ПҖD that
generates the dataset.

5   H OW TO F OLLOW T HEM
In the previous section, we have shown that it is possible to construct an environment with an impos-
sibly good expert such that the learner cannot recover the agent-optimal policy when learning from
the expertвҖҷs advice, regardless of the dataset generating distribution ПҖD . Paradoxically, this means
we must treat advice from these experts as sub-optimal from the agentвҖҷs perspective, even though
they come from an expert that can achieve higher reward than any policy we can learn. In light of
this result, it is natural to ask if we can improve this situation by incorporating environmental reward
into our learning algorithm.
The literature on imitation learning (Rajeswaran et al., 2017) and policy distillation (Rusu et al.,
2015) provides many useful tools that can be used to learn from sub-optimal experts. We describe
these methods using the unifying distillation framework of Czarnecki et al. (2019). In this setting,
distillation algorithms consist of two steps. The first step rolls out a set of N state-action-reward
transitions D = {(П„1 , a1 , r1 ) . . . (П„N , aN , rN )} using a dataset generation policy ПҖD (qОё in Czar-
necki et al. (2019)). In the second step, the parameters Оё of the learnerвҖҷs policy ПҖL are then updated
in proportion to
                         пЈ®                                                                  пЈ№
                           |D|
                           X
                    EПҖD пЈ°      вҲ’вҲҮОё log ПҖL (ai |П„i )R   bt + вҲҮОё l(ПҖL (ai |П„i ), ПҖE (ai |П„i ))пЈ»         (3)
                          i=1

These steps are repeated until performance converges or some other stopping criterion is met. The
update rule in Equation 3 can be thought of as mixing a reinforcement learning objective based on
a non-differentiable multi-step return Rbt = P|П„ | rМӮi with a single-step differentiable loss function
                                                 i=t
l. The reward term rМӮi can be the environmental reward ri , or any other term we choose that assigns
greater value to some behavior that we want to encourage. The loss l is more restrictive because it
must be differentiable, but provides a powerful way to inject direct supervision into the training pro-
cess. By varying our choice of ПҖD , rbi and l we can arrive at several different distillation algorithms
as shown in Table 1. Here the functions H(ПҖE , ПҖL )i and KL(ПҖE , ПҖL )i respectively refer to the cross
entropy and KL divergence between the expert and agent for the current observational history П„i .


                                                   6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                         Table 1: Algorithms.

        Algorithm                         ПҖD           l                        rbi

        Policy Gradient                   ПҖL          0                        ri
        Teacher Distill                   ПҖE     H(ПҖE , ПҖL )i                   0
        On-Policy Distill                 ПҖL     H(ПҖE , ПҖL )i                   0
        On-Policy Distill+R               ПҖL     H(ПҖE , ПҖL )i                  ri
        N-Distill +R                      ПҖL     H(ПҖE , ПҖL )i        -H(ПҖE , ПҖL )i+1 + ri
        Expert Matching Reward +R         ПҖL          0           Оұ1ai =aEi вҲ’ ОІ1ai Мё=aEi + ri
        ADVISOR                           ПҖL    H(ПҖE , ПҖL )i wi           ri (1 вҲ’ wi )
        ELF                               ПҖL          0            ri + vF (П„i+1 ) вҲ’ vF (П„i )



Policy Gradient is a general class of reinforcement learning algorithms (Williams, 1992; Kakade,
2001; Schulman et al., 2015; 2017). Applying policy gradient methods to our problems essentially
throws away the expert advice and learns from environmental rewards alone.
Teacher Distill and On-Policy Distill are the names used by Czarnecki et al. (2019) for versions of
the Behavior Cloning and DAgger Ross et al. (2011) algorithms adapted for the distillation frame-
work where data is continually generated online. These algorithms do not include an rМӮi term, and
                                вҲ—
so will not be able to recover ПҖL in all cases.
On-Policy Distill+R Combines the single step loss term from On-Policy Distill with the environ-
mental reward used in Policy Gradient. The motivation is that if On-Policy Distill attempts to follow
the expert, and Policy Gradient seeks high environmental reward, then combining them seeks to do
both.
N-Distill+R is also from Czarnecki et al. (2019) and is similar to COSIL (Nguyen et al., 2022), but
adapted to the distillation framework. Unlike COSIL, N-Distill+R uses cross entropy rather than
the KL Divergence, but these are identical for deterministic experts, which is the setting we assume
in our experiments. The other difference is that N-Distill+R uses the cross entropy term from the
first time step as a differentiable loss rather than rolling it into the reward signal, which improves
performance. This method is also similar to On-Policy Distill+R except that it augments the reward
using future agreement with the expert. This encourages the model to not only take actions that the
expert immediately agrees with, but also to seek out states in which it is easy to agree with the expert
in the future.
Expert matching Reward+R removes the single-step loss term and instead assigns a fixed scalar
Оұ to the reward ri when the agentвҖҷs actions agree with the expert and negative reward вҲ’ОІ when the
actions disagree.
Teacher Distill + PPO is similar to DAPG (Rajeswaran et al., 2017) and first trains an agent with
Teacher Distill for a fixed number of time steps, then refines this policy using reinforcement learning.
This is a popular technique used to learn robot behavior from human demonstrations.
All methods mentioned so far that attempt to learn from both the expert advice and the reward signal
suffer from a common problem: they all attempt to balance reward seeking and expert following
behavior uniformly across all sequences of observations, and do not attempt to explicitly discover
where following the expert yields high reward and where it does not.
ADVISOR, from Weihs et al. (2021) attempts to address this by dynamically interpolating between
imitation and reinforcement learning signals using a weighting factor wi = eвҲ’ОұKL(ПҖE ,ПҖaux )i , where
ПҖaux is an auxiliary policy trained to follow the expert in every state using the information available
to the agent. This weighting factor estimates how closely the agent can follow the expert given the
information it has at the current time step. Unfortunately, the ability to follow the expert at a given
state is not strictly indicative of states that require exploration. An example demonstrating how this
can lead to suboptimal behavior is shown in Appendix E.
ELF Distillation is our new technique which overcomes the limitations of the previous methods.
Pseudocode is shown in Algorithm 1. The key insight is to train two policies jointly: a follower
ПҖF which attempts to learn how to follow the expert, and an explorer ПҖL that attempts to maximize
environmental reward using the followerвҖҷs value function as reward shaping.


                                                   7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


The follower is trained using a distillation that samples data according to a switching policy that
rolls out experience according to the explorer ПҖL for a random number of time steps, then allows the
follower ПҖF to take over. This rollout behavior is also used in AggreVaTe Ross & Bagnell (2014)
and allows us to learn to follow the expert from states visited by the explorer that would not normally
be visited by the follower. We also train a value function vF on the second half of the trajectory that
is rolled out according to the follower. The followerвҖҷs distillation uses cross entropy to the expertвҖҷs
advice as the single-step loss function l with no reward term.
The explorer is trained using policy gradients with reward shaping that encourages the explorer to
visit states with high value according to the followerвҖҷs learned value function. The reward term
rМӮi = ri + vF (П„i+1 ) вҲ’ vF (П„i ) uses the followerвҖҷs learned value function vF as potential-based
reward shaping Ng et al. (1999). This is referred to as Teacher V Reward in Czarnecki et al. (2019)
and is related to Sun et al. (2018). The single-step loss function is 0 unless the followerвҖҷs value
function vF (П„ ) is greater than a target value v in which case it uses cross-entropy to the followerвҖҷs
distribution. This accelerates learning in states where the follower has already learned to reach high
returns.
Training proceeds in an alternating fashion, first training the follower on new data generated by the
switching policy, then training the explorer on new data generated using the explorer (on-policy).
It is necessary to keep training the follower because the explorer may reach states in the middle of
training that would not be visited otherwise, and it is important to build accurate value estimates for
them as well.
At test time, the follower is no longer necessary and can be discarded. The only purpose of the
follower is to discover where the expert is reliable and where it isnвҖҷt in order to overcome the limi-
tation of trying to find good global mixing rules for reward seeking and expert following behavior.
In this way the follower policy is similar to the auxiliary policy in ADVISOR, but it is used by the
algorithm in a much different way. Rather than guiding exploration using the followerвҖҷs ability to
replicate the expert in a given state, we instead use the followerвҖҷs value estimate, which encourages
the learner to visit states where following the expert leads to high long-term reward. This avoids
important failure cases such as the one shown in Appendix E.

Algorithm 1 ELF Distillation
Require: Nsteps , Expert ПҖE , Horizon T , Dataset Sizes Nf ollow , Nexplore , Target value v.
  Initialize follower ПҖF .
  Initialize follower value estimator vF .
  Initialize explorer ПҖL .
  for i = 1 to Nsteps do
      Initialize Df ollow = {}.
      for j = 1 to Nf ollow do
           Choose a uniform random switching time t вҲҲ {1, . . . , T }.
           Add new trajectory П„ to Df ollow by sampling П„1...t вҲј ПҖL and П„t...T вҲј ПҖF .
      end for
      Train ПҖF to match ПҖE for all transitions in Df ollow using cross entropy.
      Train vF to match the returns from all transitions in Df ollow after the switching time t.
      Initialize Dexplore = {}.
      for j = 1 to Nexplore do
           Add a new trajectory П„ to Dexplore by sampling П„ вҲј ПҖL .
           Reshape all rewards in П„ to be rМӮ = r + vF (П„t+1 ) вҲ’ vF (П„t )
      end for
      Train ПҖL using policy gradient with an additional cross entropy loss to ПҖF when vF (П„t ) вүҘ v.
  end for


6   E XPERIMENTS
In order to evaluate ELF Distill, we compare it against the baselines in Section 5 on several challeng-
ing Minigrid (Chevalier-Boisvert et al., 2018) and Vizdoom (Wydmuch et al., 2019) environments
with partial information. Figure 2 shows the results with diagrams of the environments.
The goal of the Minigrid environments is to reach a door that has the same color as a set of balls
hidden in various locations in the environment. Observations are provided as a restricted top-down


                                                  8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


        Single Branch            Backtrack 1                      Backtrack 2              Open


       Early Explore 1          Early Explore 2                  Early Explore 3        Late Explore


             MonsterRoom1                         MonsterRoom2

                                                                                   PPO
                                                                                   Teacher Distill
                                                                                   On-Policy Distill
                                                                                   On-Policy Distill+R
                                                                                   N-Distill+R
                                                                                   Expert Matching+R
                                                                                   Teacher Distill then PPO
                                                                                   ADVISOR
                                                                                   ELF Distill (Ours)



Figure 2: ELF Distill compared against seven baselines on eight Minigrid and two Vizdoom envi-
ronments designed to require various levels of deviation from an impossibly good expertвҖҷs advice.
The inset image of each plot shows a diagram of the environment.


view of the gridworld. In this setting memory is handled for the agent by automatically remembering
the color of the last ball seen and presenting as an additional observation variable. See Appendix B
for details.
The goal of the Vizdoom environments is to navigate safely to an exit point without getting blown
up by a cyborg demon. Each map has two exits, one of which is randomly guarded by the monster.
The agent must find a window that allows it to see which exit the monster is guarding and take the
alternate route. Unlike Minigrid, agents in these Vizdoom environments are provided with a first-
person view from the playerвҖҷs perspective, and must remember relevant past observations using a
recurrent network. See Appendix C for details.
From the experiments shown here, we can see ELF Distill performing comparably or better than all
other baselines. Note that ADVISOR also performs quite well, except for a few environments (Early
Explore 2, Early Explore 3, Monster Room 2) where the issues pointed out in Appendix E severely
impact performance.



7   C ONCLUSION

Imitation learning remains a powerful tool for sequential decision making problems. Unfortunately
when experts have more information than the policies that learn from them, the experts may be
impossibly good, and their behavior and performance cannot be replicated by any learning algo-
rithm. We have shown that in these settings, it may still be possible to recover the optimal policy
in the limited information space using only the expertвҖҷs advice, but that this is not guaranteed as we
have shown by providing counter-examples. To address this, we have introduced ELF Distillation,
a training method that uses the estimated value function of a policy trained from expert demon-
strations to guide exploration for a second reinforcement learning agent. We have shown that this
algorithm outperforms several distillation baselines that incorporate both environmental reward and
expert demonstrations on a set of challenging minigrid and vizdoom environments.


                                                       9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


R EFERENCES
Susanne Albers and Monika R Henzinger. Exploring unknown environments. In Proceedings of the
  twenty-ninth annual ACM symposium on Theory of computing, pp. 416вҖ“425, 1997.
J Andrew Bagnell. An invitation to imitation. Technical report, Carnegie-Mellon Univ Pittsburgh
  Pa Robotics Inst, 2015.
Mayank Bansal, Alex Krizhevsky, and Abhijit S. Ogale. Chauffeurnet: Learning to drive by
 imitating the best and synthesizing the worst. CoRR, abs/1812.03079, 2018. URL http:
 //arxiv.org/abs/1812.03079.
Mohak Bhardwaj, Sanjiban Choudhury, and Sebastian Scherer. Learning heuristic search via imita-
 tion. In Conference on Robot Learning, pp. 271вҖ“280. PMLR, 2017.
Dian Chen, Brady Zhou, Vladlen Koltun, and Philipp KraМҲhenbuМҲhl. Learning by cheating, 2019.
  URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1912.12294.
Maxime Chevalier-Boisvert, Lucas Willems, and Suman Pal. Minimalistic gridworld environment
 for gymnasium. https://github.com/Farama-Foundation/MiniGrid, 2018.
Sanjiban Choudhury, Ashish Kapoor, Gireeja Ranade, Sebastian Scherer, and Debadeepta Dey.
  Adaptive information gathering via imitation learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1705.07834, 2017.
Sanjiban Choudhury, Mohak Bhardwaj, Sankalp Arora, Ashish Kapoor, Gireeja Ranade, Sebastian
  Scherer, and Debadeepta Dey. Data-driven planning via imitation learning. The International
  Journal of Robotics Research, 37(13-14):1632вҖ“1672, 2018.
Felipe Codevilla, Eder Santana, Antonio M. LoМҒpez, and Adrien Gaidon. Exploring the limitations
  of behavior cloning for autonomous driving. CoRR, abs/1904.08980, 2019. URL http://
  arxiv.org/abs/1904.08980.
Wojciech M Czarnecki, Razvan Pascanu, Simon Osindero, Siddhant Jayakumar, Grzegorz Swirszcz,
 and Max Jaderberg. Distilling policy distillation. In The 22nd International Conference on Arti-
 ficial Intelligence and Statistics, pp. 1331вҖ“1340. PMLR, 2019.
Hal DaumeМҒ, John Langford, and Daniel Marcu. Search-based structured prediction. Machine learn-
  ing, 75(3):297вҖ“325, 2009.
Pim de Haan, Dinesh Jayaraman, and Sergey Levine. Causal confusion in imitation learning. Ad-
  vances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 32:11698вҖ“11709, 2019.
Tuomas Haarnoja, Aurick Zhou, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. Soft actor-critic: Off-policy
  maximum entropy deep reinforcement learning with a stochastic actor, 2018. URL https:
  //arxiv.org/abs/1801.01290.
Unnat Jain, Iou-Jen Liu, Svetlana Lazebnik, Aniruddha Kembhavi, Luca Weihs, and Alexander G
  Schwing. Gridtopix: Training embodied agents with minimal supervision. In Proceedings of the
  IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 15141вҖ“15151, 2021.
Leslie Pack Kaelbling, Michael L Littman, and Anthony R Cassandra. Planning and acting in
  partially observable stochastic domains. Artificial intelligence, 101(1-2):99вҖ“134, 1998.
Sham M Kakade. A natural policy gradient. Advances in neural information processing systems,
  14, 2001.
Ming-Yang Kao, John H Reif, and Stephen R Tate. Searching in an unknown environment: An
 optimal randomized algorithm for the cow-path problem. Information and Computation, 131(1):
 63вҖ“79, 1996.
Alex Kuefler, Jeremy Morton, Tim Wheeler, and Mykel Kochenderfer. Imitating driver behavior
  with generative adversarial networks. In 2017 IEEE Intelligent Vehicles Symposium (IV), pp.
  204вҖ“211. IEEE, 2017.
Daniel Kumor, Junzhe Zhang, and Elias Bareinboim. Sequential causal imitation learning with
  unobserved confounders. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:14669вҖ“14680,
  2021.


                                               10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Gilwoo Lee, Brian Hou, Sanjiban Choudhury, and Siddhartha S Srinivasa. Bayesian residual pol-
  icy optimization:: Scalable bayesian reinforcement learning with clairvoyant experts. In 2021
  IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), pp. 5611вҖ“5618.
  IEEE, 2021.
Joonho Lee, Jemin Hwangbo, Lorenz Wellhausen, Vladlen Koltun, and Marco Hutter. Learning
  quadrupedal locomotion over challenging terrain. Science robotics, 5(47):eabc5986, 2020.
Michael L Littman, Anthony R Cassandra, and Leslie Pack Kaelbling. Learning policies for partially
 observable environments: Scaling up. In Machine Learning Proceedings 1995, pp. 362вҖ“370.
 Elsevier, 1995.
Urs Muller, Jan Ben, Eric Cosatto, Beat Flepp, and Yann L Cun. Off-road obstacle avoidance
  through end-to-end learning. In Advances in neural information processing systems, pp. 739вҖ“
  746. Citeseer, 2006.
Andrew Y Ng, Daishi Harada, and Stuart Russell. Policy invariance under reward transformations:
  Theory and application to reward shaping. In Icml, volume 99, pp. 278вҖ“287, 1999.
Hai Nguyen, Andrea Baisero, Dian Wang, Christopher Amato, and Robert Platt. Leveraging fully
  observable policies for learning under partial observability. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.01991,
  2022.
Pedro A Ortega, Markus Kunesch, GreМҒgoire DeleМҒtang, Tim Genewein, Jordi Grau-Moya, Joel Ve-
  ness, Jonas Buchli, Jonas Degrave, Bilal Piot, Julien Perolat, et al. Shaking the foundations:
  delusions in sequence models for interaction and control. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.10819, 2021.
Judea Pearl, Madelyn Glymour, and Nicholas P Jewell. Causal inference in statistics: A primer.
  John Wiley & Sons, 2016.
Dean A Pomerleau. Alvinn: An autonomous land vehicle in a neural network. 1989.
Aravind Rajeswaran, Vikash Kumar, Abhishek Gupta, Giulia Vezzani, John Schulman, Emanuel
  Todorov, and Sergey Levine. Learning complex dexterous manipulation with deep reinforcement
  learning and demonstrations. arXiv preprint arXiv:1709.10087, 2017.
Stephane Ross and J Andrew Bagnell. Reinforcement and imitation learning via interactive no-regret
  learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1406.5979, 2014.
Stephane Ross, Geoffrey J. Gordon, and J. Andrew Bagnell. A reduction of imitation learning and
  structured prediction to no-regret online learning, 2010. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
  1011.0686.
SteМҒphane Ross, Geoffrey Gordon, and Drew Bagnell. A reduction of imitation learning and struc-
   tured prediction to no-regret online learning. In Proceedings of the fourteenth international con-
   ference on artificial intelligence and statistics, pp. 627вҖ“635. JMLR Workshop and Conference
   Proceedings, 2011.
Andrei A Rusu, Sergio Gomez Colmenarejo, Caglar Gulcehre, Guillaume Desjardins, James Kirk-
  patrick, Razvan Pascanu, Volodymyr Mnih, Koray Kavukcuoglu, and Raia Hadsell. Policy distil-
  lation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1511.06295, 2015.
John Schulman, Sergey Levine, Pieter Abbeel, Michael Jordan, and Philipp Moritz. Trust region
  policy optimization. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 1889вҖ“1897. PMLR,
  2015.
John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy
  optimization algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347, 2017.
Jonathan Spencer, Sanjiban Choudhury, Arun Venkatraman, Brian Ziebart, and J. Andrew Bagnell.
  Feedback in imitation learning: The three regimes of covariate shift, 2021. URL https://
  arxiv.org/abs/2102.02872.
Wen Sun, Arun Venkatraman, Geoffrey J Gordon, Byron Boots, and J Andrew Bagnell. Deeply ag-
 grevated: Differentiable imitation learning for sequential prediction. In International conference
 on machine learning, pp. 3309вҖ“3318. PMLR, 2017.


                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Wen Sun, J Andrew Bagnell, and Byron Boots. Truncated horizon policy search: Combining rein-
 forcement learning & imitation learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1805.11240, 2018.
Richard S Sutton and Andrew G Barto. Reinforcement learning: An introduction. MIT press, 2018.
Gokul Swamy, Sanjiban Choudhury, J Andrew Bagnell, and Steven Wu. Of moments and match-
  ing: A game-theoretic framework for closing the imitation gap. In International Conference on
  Machine Learning, pp. 10022вҖ“10032. PMLR, 2021.
Gokul Swamy, Sanjiban Choudhury, J Andrew Bagnell, and Zhiwei Steven Wu. Sequence model
  imitation learning with unobserved contexts. arXiv preprint arXiv:2208.02225, 2022.
Guy Tennenholtz, Assaf Hallak, Gal Dalal, Shie Mannor, Gal Chechik, and Uri Shalit. On co-
  variate shift of latent confounders in imitation and reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2110.06539, 2021.
Andrew Warrington, Jonathan W Lavington, Adam Scibior, Mark Schmidt, and Frank Wood. Robust
  asymmetric learning in pomdps. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 11013вҖ“
  11023. PMLR, 2021.
Luca Weihs, Unnat Jain, Iou-Jen Liu, Jordi Salvador, Svetlana Lazebnik, Aniruddha Kembhavi,
  and Alex Schwing. Bridging the imitation gap by adaptive insubordination. Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 34:19134вҖ“19146, 2021.
Ronald J Williams. Simple statistical gradient-following algorithms for connectionist reinforcement
  learning. Machine learning, 8(3):229вҖ“256, 1992.
Marek Wydmuch, MichaЕӮ Kempka, and Wojciech JasМҒkowski. ViZDoom Competitions: Playing
 Doom from Pixels. IEEE Transactions on Games, 11(3):248вҖ“259, 2019. doi: 10.1109/TG.2018.
 2877047. The 2022 IEEE Transactions on Games Outstanding Paper Award.
Tianpei Yang, Hongyao Tang, Chenjia Bai, Jinyi Liu, Jianye Hao, Zhaopeng Meng, and Peng
  Liu. Exploration in deep reinforcement learning: a comprehensive survey. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2109.06668, 2021.
Junzhe Zhang, Daniel Kumor, and Elias Bareinboim. Causal imitation learning with unobserved
  confounders. Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:12263вҖ“12274, 2020.
Brian D Ziebart, Andrew L Maas, J Andrew Bagnell, Anind K Dey, et al. Maximum entropy inverse
  reinforcement learning. In Aaai, volume 8, pp. 1433вҖ“1438. Chicago, IL, USA, 2008.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A PPENDIX

A     P ROOF O F T HEOREM 1
Recall that the policy ПҖ
                       eL is computed using the empirical distribution of a dataset D sampled from
a rollout policy ПҖD :

                                                 P|D|
                                                   i  1П„Li =П„L ,aEi =a
                                  ПҖ
                                  eL (a|П„L ) =      P|D|                                          (4)
                                                     i   1П„Li =П„L

We want to show:
                                      вҲ—
The empirical policy ПҖ
                     eL will recover ПҖL as |D| вҶ’ вҲһ iff the following conditions hold:

      1. (Coverage) ПҒПҖD (П„LвҲ— ) Мё= 0 вҲҖ П„LвҲ— вҲҲ PПҖLвҲ—
      2. (Correctness) EП„S вҲјПҖD ПҖE (OE (П„S ))OL (П„LвҲ— |П„S ) = ПҖL
                                                             вҲ—
                                                               (П„LвҲ— ) вҲҖ П„LвҲ— вҲҲ PПҖLвҲ—

Proof. We first show that the coverage condition is necessary, and then show that the correctness
condition is necessary and sufficient when the coverage condition holds.
The coverage condition is necessary: If the coverage condition does not hold, for at least some
observation histories П„L , the denominator of Equation 4 will be:
                                           |D|
                                           X
                                                 1П„Li =П„L = 0
                                            i

This will result in an undefined distribution for ПҖ
                                                  eL at some trajectories that are encountered while
                       вҲ—                                                    вҲ—
acting according to ПҖL   . Undefined behavior is not optimal according ПҖL      so this shows that the
                                              вҲ—
coverage condition is necessary to recover ПҖL   .
The correctness condition is necessary and sufficient when the coverage condition holds: Because
the dataset D is sampled according to ПҖD , as |D| вҶ’ вҲһ, the empirical distribution of expert recom-
mendations in Equation 4 becomes:
                      eL (П„L ) = EП„S вҲјПҖD ПҖE (OE (П„S ))OL (П„L |П„S ) вҲҖ П„L вҲҲ PПҖD
                      ПҖ
If the coverage condition holds, then PПҖLвҲ— вҠҶ PПҖD . This allows us to extend the expression above to
                                                               вҲ—
PПҖLвҲ— , the set of trajectories with nonzero probability under ПҖL
                      eL (П„L ) = EП„S вҲјПҖD ПҖE (OE (П„S ))OL (П„LвҲ— |П„S ) вҲҖ П„LвҲ— вҲҲ PПҖLвҲ—
                      ПҖ
This means that if the correctness condition holds:
                 eL (П„L ) = EП„S вҲјПҖD ПҖE (OE (П„S ))OL (П„LвҲ— |П„S ) = ПҖL
                 ПҖ                                                вҲ—
                                                                    (П„LвҲ— ) вҲҖ П„LвҲ— вҲҲ PПҖLвҲ—
                                                                                                   в– 

This shows that the agent-optimal policy can only be recovered if the distribution over labels gen-
erated by the expert ПҖE under the sampling distribution of the state space, match the agent-optimal
        вҲ—
policy ПҖL  wherever the states map to П„LвҲ— .

B     M INIGRID E NVIRONMENTS , M ODEL AND T RAINING D ETAILS
B.1   E NVIRONMENT

As stated in Section 6, the goal of the minigrid environments is to reach the door that matches the
color of one or more balls placed in the scene. At the beginning of each episode all balls in the
scene set to be either blue or red, and they remain that color for the entire episode. There is one
door per color and itвҖҷs location is fixed for all time. The expert knows in advance the color of the
balls and provides the agent with direct supervision to reach the correct door, but does not consider


                                                   13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


           Single Branch         Backtrack 1            Backtrack 2           Open


           Early Explore 1      Early Explore 2        Early Explore 3     Late Explore


                                      Figure 3: Minigrid Maps



the agentвҖҷs ignorance of the ball color. Without taking further exploratory action to find the balls
first, the agent cannot determine which door to go to and will always underperform compared to the
expert. In order to succeed, the agent must deviate from the instructions provided by the expert in
order to gather the information necessary to complete the task.
The agent gets a reward of 1 вҲ’ 0.01|П„ | for entering the correct door for an episode. During training
the expert demonstrations are provided by computing a shortest line path from the agent to the
correct door without bothering to visit locations where the balls are located.
Visibility is strictly limited and the agent can only view the 3 Г— 3 tiles directly in front of them.
While these environments are small, they are quite challenging due to the sparse reward and the
need to automatically learn the color-matching behavior.


B.2   M ODEL

All minigrid methods train the same small model that takes a 3x3 grid with two channels representing
object type (wall, door, etc) and a single color. The model automatically remembers the color of
balls that it has seen in the past. The field of view of the agent is a 3x3 grid of tiles. The input
to the network is provided as integer indices, so we use three embedding layers to construct a 3x3
16-channel representation of the observed object type, another 3x3 16-channel representation of the
observed object color and a 1x1 16-channel representation of the remembered ball color (a third
вҖқgreyвҖқ color is used when the ball has not been observed yet). The feature for the remembered ball
color is tiled to 3x3 and these features are added together and flattened. The model then uses two
fully connected layers with 256 channels each and ReLU activations. A policy head consists of
another 256-channel linear layer followed by a Tanh activation and a linear projection to the number
of actions 7. A value head is the same except it projects to a single value. ELF distill trains two
policies, so it has one network for each. ADVISOR has an additional auxilliary head.


B.3   T RAINING

Each method was trained on 220 вүҲ 1M frames. When training ELF Distill, both the follower and
explorer were trained on 219 вүҲ 500K frames, so that the total frames observed during training
was equal to the other methods. All methods were trained with 10 different random seeds in each
environment. PPO (Schulman et al., 2017) was used as the loss function to maximize reward in all
algorithms with a rbi term.


                                                  14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                        Monster Room 1                   Monster Room 2


                 Window              Demon
                 Door
                                     Alternate
                 Exit                Demon
                 Agent Start         Location

                                         Figure 4: Vizdoom Maps


C     V IZ D OOM E NVIRONMENTS , M ODEL AND T RAINING D ETAILS
C.1   E NVIRONMENTS

Our two VizDoom (Wydmuch et al., 2019) were built with the free SLADE Doom editor. The goal
of these environments is to escape the room without getting destroyed by a cyborg demon. The
agent must act using first-person visual data, and memory of the past. The native resolution of the
environment is 320 Г— 240 RGB pixels which we rescale to 84x84 grayscale channels. The game
engine runs at a very high frequency, so we use a frame skip of 8 to avoid making decisions at
too fine of a granularity. The agent has access to four actions: WALK FORWARD, TURN LEFT,
TURN RIGHT and USE which both opens doors and pushes the switch to end the level. The damage
settings have been tuned so that a single hit from the monster guarantees instant death. Although the
agent can be seen carying a pistol, it is purely decorative, and the agent has no ability to fight back
against the monster.
The agent gets a reward of 2 for completing the level successfully, a reward of -2 for getting blown
up, and a reward of 0 if neither happens before the maximum number of 72 frames. We also give
the agent an exploration bonus based on how far it moves away from the nearest location it has
been before, and a small negative reward of -0.001 at each time step. We also use early-termination,
stopping an episode if the agent tries to walk forward, but makes no progress (hitting forward while
pointing directly at a wall), switches between looking left and looking right three times in a row, or
if the agent pushes the USE button twice in a row when not in front of a door or switch. These help
avoid long trajectories of meaningless behavior in early episodes. If any of these early termination
conditions are triggered, the episode ends with a small penalty of -0.05 for the agent.

C.2   T RAINING

Each method was trained on 221 вүҲ 2M frmes. As with Minigrid, we train each component of ELF
Distillwith half that number so that the total number of training frames are comparable. All methods
were trained with 3 different random seeds in each environment. As with Minigrid, PPO was used
as the loss function to maximize reward in all algorithms with a rbi term.

D     D ISCUSSION OF R ESULTS
D.1   M INIGRID

Our eight MiniGrid Environments belong to five categories. In all environments we colored the
walls so that the agents with their very limited field of view could find their way around.
Single Branch was designed to mimic Example I in Figure 1. In order to reach any door, the agent
must pass by the balls. This is the easiest case, and the only one in which Teacher Distill can do
better than 0.5. PPO is often successful here, but often takes longer to reach the goal than methods


                                                  15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


that use the expert. Here we see a common failure mode of Expert Matching+R in that the agent
learns a state-action loop for which the agent agrees with most of the expertвҖҷs actions, but disagrees
with a few of them. This allows the agent to continuously cycle and gain infinite reward according
to itвҖҷs reshaped reward objective that attempts to maximize agreement with the expert while failing
to complete the task.
Backtrack are two environments, one larger than the other designed to mimic Example II in Figure
1. This time a ball is placed near each door so that if the agent heads to the wrong one initially, it can
backtrack to the other. On-Policy Distill often reaches the correct goal, but does not perform as well
as reward seeking approaches due to ambiguous expert advice before the balls have been observed.
We also see Teacher Distill then PPO perform well in the smaller version, but it takes a long time
to learn. PPO performs much worse on this task. ELF Distill, ADVISOR, On-Policy Distill+R and
N-Distill+R all perform very well on these problems, with ELF Distill underperforming the others
in a few cases.
Early Explore are three environments of different sizes designed to mimic Example III in Figure
1. Here the ball is placed on a separate hallway that is not on the path to any door. An algorithm
must incorporate environmental rewards to be successful here. Here ELF Distill clearly dominates
all other methods, although the problem becomes more difficult the futher the agent has to explore
from states suggested by the expert. ADVISOR performs well on the first environment, but fails at
the other two due to the issues pointed out in Appendix E.
Late Explore is similar to Backtrack in that the balls are near the doors. However in this case,
they are far enough away that they will not be observed by an agent that walks directly to the door.
Here ELF Distill and ADVISOR dominate, with On-Policy Distill+R and N-Distill+R also making
progress.
Open places the balls and doors in opposite corners of the room with most of the space freely
navigable. ELF Distill outperforms all others, while ADVISOR also makes progress.

D.2    V IZDOOM

Our Vizdoom environments were designed to provide a more challenging visual scenario for training
agents from impossibly good experts.
Monster Room 1 Here the agent must exit a small room with two doors to enter a large room with
windows where the agent can check for the existence of monsters. The agent can then exit the level
by going back to the original room and opening the door to the empty room and proceeding to the
exit. Only ELF Distill and ADVISOR are able to reliably complete this task.
Monster Room 2 In the second Monster Room, the agent starts outside of the room with two doors.
Because the expert knows where the monster is, it will always tell the agent to proceed to the room
with two doors. This causes problems for ADVISOR, which will latch onto this predictable expert
signal without knowing what to do once it has to make a decision about which door to enter. ELF
Distill is the only method to reliably make progress on this task.

E     A DVISOR FAILURE C ASE

                                                     Example IV
                                                                  D
                                                                  x=0
                                                         B
                                             A                    E
                                                                  x=1
                                                         C
                                             X
                                            expert
                                                         X
                                                        agent



                                                                     вҲ—
          Figure 5: ADVISOR cannot recover the agent-optimal policy ПҖL in Example IV.

Example IV in Figure 5 provides a demonstration of a failure case for ADVISOR. In this example,
nothing prevents the auxiliary policy ПҖaux from replicating expert behavior at A, meaning the AD-
VISOR loss will strongly favor the imitation learning signal at this location which encourages the


                                                        16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


transition from A to B. Unfortunately, however, the agent-optimal action is to first travel from A to
C in order to learn the value of X, then backtrack to A and continue to the goal. Because ADVISOR
is able to reproduce the expertвҖҷs behavior at A, it will ignore the transition to C, and will be unable
to gather the necessary information.

F    L IMITATIONS
Because the explorer policy relies on value estimates from the follower policy, it is possible for
biases in those estimates to cause poor explorer performance. This is especially true early in the
training process before the followerвҖҷs value function has had time to learn to differentiate good and
bad states. This can be exacerbated by the fact that the followerвҖҷs state coverage is determined by
the explorer due to the switching policy used to collect training data for the follower. This can
lead to situations where the follower underestimates the value of a particular state, which causes the
explorer to visit it less often, which then causes the follower to get less training data for that state
and therefore fail to recover from its initial error.
This suggests that it may be beneficial to use a training schedule that devotes more samples to the
follower early on in order to provide better estimates of the value function, and more samples to the
explorer later once this value function is well modelled.
Taken to an extreme, this would suggest training the follower alone for half of the training step
budget, then freezing it and training the explorer. Unfortunately, this will not be ideal in many cir-
cumstances, as the explorerвҖҷs policy is used to determine which states are necessary for the follower
to learn. However, it may be possible to automatically decide when to allocate training resources to
the follower or the explorer if the quality of the followerвҖҷs value function can be estimated online.

G    ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We would like to thank the members of the RAIVN and Robotics and State Estimation labs at the
University of Washington for their support, discussion and feedback. We would also like to thank
Luca Weihs for a valuable discussion of the ADVISOR algorithm.


                                                  17
