Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


DADAO: D ECOUPLED ACCELERATED
D ECENTRALIZED A SYNCHRONOUS O PTIMIZATION
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                           A BSTRACT
         DADAO is a novel decentralized asynchronous stochastic first order algorithm to
         minimize a sum of L-smooth and Вө-strongly convex functions distributed over a
         time-varying connectivity network of size n. We model the local gradient updates
         and gossip communication procedures with separate independent Poisson Point
         Processes, decoupling the computation and communication steps in addition to
         making the whole approach completely asynchronous. Our method employs pri-
         mal gradients and does not use a multi-consensus inner loop nor other ad-hoc
         mechanisms such as Error Feedback, Gradient Tracking, or a Proximal operator.
         By relating the inverse of the smallest positive eigenvalue ПҮвҲ—1 and the effective
         resistance ПҮвҲ—2 of our graph to a necessary minimal communication
                                                                        q rate between
         nodes of the network, we show that our algorithm requires O(n L         1
                                                                          Вө log( З« )) local
                                p      q
         gradients and only O(n ПҮвҲ—1 ПҮвҲ—2 L        1
                                          Вө log( З« )) communications to reach a precision
         З«. If SGD with uniform noise Пғ 2 is used, we reach a precision З« with same speed,
                                      2
         up to a bias term in O( вҲҡПғВөL ). This improves upon the bounds obtained with
         current state-of-the-art approaches, our simulations validating the strength of our
         relatively unconstrained method.


1   I NTRODUCTION
With the rise of highly-parallelizable and connected hardware, distributed optimization for machine
learning is a topic of significant interest holding many promises. In a typical distributed training
framework, the goal is to minimize a sum of functions (fi )iвүӨn split across n nodes of a computer
network. A corresponding optimization procedure involves alternating local computation and com-
munication rounds between the nodes. Also, spreading the compute load is done to ideally obtain
a linear speedup in the number of nodes. In the decentralized setting, there is no central machine
aggregating the information sent by the workers: nodes are only allowed to communicate with their
neighbors in the network. In this setup, optimal methods (Scaman et al., 2017; Kovalev et al., 2021a)
have been derived for synchronous first-order algorithms, whose executions are blocked until a sub-
set (or all) nodes have reached a predefined state: the instructions must be performed in a specific
order (e.g., all nodes must perform a local gradient step before the round of communication begins),
which is one of the locks limiting their efficiency in practice.
This work attempts to simultaneously address multiple limitations of existing decentralized algo-
rithms while guaranteeing fast convergence rates. To tackle the synchronous lock, we rely on the
continuized framework (Even et al., 2021a), introduced initially to allow asynchrony in a fixed topol-
ogy setting: iterates are labeled with a continuous-time index (in opposition to a global iteration
count) and performed locally with no regards to a specific global ordering of events. This is more
practical while being theoretically grounded and simplifying the analysis. However, in Even et al.
(2021a), gradient and gossip operations are still coupled: each communication along an edge re-
quires the computation of the gradients of the two functions locally stored on the corresponding
nodes and vice-versa. As more communications steps than gradient computations are necessary to
reach an З« precision, even in an optimal framework (Kovalev et al., 2021a; Scaman et al., 2017), the
coupling directly implies an overload in terms of gradient steps. Another limitation is the restric-
tion to a fixed topology: in a more practical setting, connections between nodes should be allowed
to disappear or new ones to appear over time. The procedures of Kovalev et al. (2021c); Li & Lin


                                                  1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


(2021) are the first to obtain an optimal complexity in gradient steps while being robust to topolog-
ical change. Unfortunately, synchrony is mandatory in their frameworks as they either rely on the
Error-Feedback mechanism (Stich & Karimireddy, 2020) or the Gradient Tracking one (Nedic et al.,
2017). Moreover, they both use an inner loop to control the number of gradient steps at the cost of
significantly increasing the number of activated communication edges. To our knowledge, this is the
first work to tackle those locks simultaneously.
In this paper, we propose a novel algorithm (DADAO: Decoupled Accelerated Decentralized Asyn-
chronous Optimization) based on a combination of similar formulations to Kovalev et al. (2021a);
Even et al. (2021b); Hendrikx (2022) in the continuized framework of Even et al. (2021a). We study:
                                                                  n
                                                                  X
                                                           inf           fi (x) ,                                                       (1)
                                                           xвҲҲRd
                                                                  i=1

where each fi : Rd вҶ’ R is a Вө-strongly convex and L-smooth function computed in one of the
n nodes of a network. We derive a first-order optimization algorithm that only uses primal gra-
dients and relies on a time-varying Point-wise Poisson Processes (P.P.P.s (Last & Penrose, 2017))
modeling of the communication and gradient occurrences, leading to accelerated communication
and computation rates. Our framework is based on a simple fixed-point iteration and kept mini-
mal: it only involves primal computations with an additional momentum term and works in both the
Gradient and Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) settings. Thus, we do not add other cumbersome
designs such as the Error-Feedback or Forward-Backward used in Kovalev et al. (2021a), which are
intrinsically synchronous. While we do not consider the delays bound to appear in practice (we as-
sume instantaneous communications and gradient computations), we show that the ordering of the
gradient and gossip steps can be variable, removing the coupling lock.
Our contributions are as follows: (1) first, we propose the first primal algorithm with provable
guarantees in the context of asynchronous decentralized learning with time-varying connectivity. (2)
This algorithm reaches accelerated rates of communication and computations while not requiring ad-
hoc mechanisms obtained from an inner loop. (3) Our algorithm also leads to an accelerated rate
with SGD with a minor modification. (4) We propose a simple theoretical framework compared to
concurrent works, and (5) we demonstrate its optimality numerically.
The structure of our paper is as follows: in Sec. 3.1, we describe our work hypothesis and our
model of a decentralized environment, while Sec. 3.2 describes our dynamic. Sec. 3.3 states our
convergence guarantees whose proofs are fully detailed in the Appendix. Then, Sec. 4.1 compares
our work with its competitors, Sec. 4.2 explains our implementation of this algorithm, and finally,
Sec. 4.3 verifies our claims numerically. All our experiments are reproducible, using PyTorch
(Paszke et al., 2019) and our code can be found in Appendix.

2       R ELATED W ORK
Tab. 1 compares our contribution with other references to highlight the benefits of our method.

Table 1: This table shows the strength of DADAO compared to concurrent works. n is the number
of node, |E| the number of edges, ПҮ11 the smallest positive eigenvalue of a fixed stochastic Gossip
matrix,
вҲҡ                  вҲҡ and ПҮ2 вүӨ ПҮ1 the effective resistance. Note that under reasonable assumptions
        ПҒ the eigengap
  ПҮ1 ПҮ2 n = O(|E| ПҒ) (Sec. 4.1). Async., Comm., Grad., M.-C. and Prox. stand respectively for
Asynchrony, Communication steps, Gradient steps., Multi-consensus and Proximal operator.
    Method                             Async.    Varying    Decoupled       No Inner Loop     Primal       Total             Total
                                                Topology                   (M.-C. or Prox.)   Oracle     # Comm.            # Grad.
                                                                                                        вҲҡ      q              q
    MSDA (Scaman et al., 2017)           вң—         вң—             вң—                  вң—           вң—         ПҒ|E| L             n L
                                                                                                              qВө              qВө
    AGT (Li & Lin, 2021)                 вң—         вң“             вң—                  вң—           вң“       ПҮ1 |E| L             n L
                                                                                                              qВө              qВө
    ADOM+ (Kovalev et al., 2021a)        вң—         вң“             вң—                  вң—           вң“       ПҮ1 |E| L Вө
                                                                                                                             n L Вө
                                                                                                       вҲҡ        q        вҲҡ        q
    Continuized (Even et al., 2021a)     вң“         вң—             вң—                  вң“           вң—        ПҮ1 ПҮ2 n L         ПҮ1 ПҮ2 n L
                                                                                                        вҲҡ      q Вө            q     Вө

    ADFS (Hendrikx et al., 2021)         вң—         вң—             вң“                  вң—           вң—         ПҒ|E| L Вө
                                                                                                                             n L Вө
    TVR (Hendrikx, 2022)                 вң“         вң—             вң“                  вң“           вң“           ПҒ|E| LВөq
                                                                                                                             nL
                                                                                                       вҲҡ                     qВө
    DADAO (ours)                         вң“         вң“             вң“                  вң“           вң“          ПҮ1 ПҮ2 n L Вө
                                                                                                                            n L Вө


                                                                     2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Continuized and asynchronous algorithms. We highly rely on the elegant continuized frame-
work (Even et al., 2021a), which allows obtaining simpler proofs and brings the flexibility of asyn-
chronous algorithms. However, in our work, we significantly reduce the necessary amount of gra-
dient steps compared to Even et al. (2021a) while maintaining the same amount of activated edges.
Another type of asynchronous algorithm can also be found in Latz (2021), yet it fails to obtain
NesterovвҖҷs accelerated rates for lack of momentum. We note that Leblond et al. (2018) studies
the robustness to delays yet requires a shared memory and thus applies to a different context than
decentralized optimization. Hendrikx (2022) is a promising approach for modeling random commu-
nication on graphs yet fails to obtain acceleration in a neat framework that does not use inner-loops.

Decentralized algorithms with fixed topology. Scaman et al. (2017) is the first work to derive
an accelerated algorithm for decentralized optimization, and it links the convergence speed to the
Laplacian eigengap. The corresponding algorithm uses a dual formulation and a Chebychev accel-
eration (synchronous and for a fixed topology). Yet, as stated in Tab. 2, it still requires many edges
to be activated. Furthermore, under a relatively flexible condition on the intensity of our P.P.P.s, we
show that our work improves over bounds that depend on the spectral gap. An emerging line of work
following this formulation employs the continuized framework (Even et al., 2020; 2021a;b), but is
unfortunately not amenable to incorporating a time-varying topology by essence, as they rely on a
coordinate descent scheme in the dual (Nesterov & Stich, 2017). Finally, we note that Even et al.
(2021b) incorporates delays in their model, using the same technique as our work, yet transferring
this robustness to another setting remains unclear. Reducing the number of communication has been
studied in Mishchenko et al. (2022), only in the context of constant topology and without obtaining
accelerated rates. Hendrikx et al. (2021) allows for fast communication and gossip rates yet requires
a proximal step and synchrony between nodes to apply a momentum variable.

Decentralized algorithms with varying topology. We highlight that Kovalev et al. (2021a);
Li & Lin (2021); Koloskova et al. (2020) are some of the first works to propose a framework for
decentralized learning in the context of varying topology. However, they rely on inner-loops prop-
agating variables multiple times through a network, which imposes complete synchrony and com-
munication overheads. In addition, as noted empirically in Lin et al. (2015), inner-loops lead to
a plateau effect. Furthermore, we note that Kovalev et al. (2021b); Salim et al. (2021) employ a
formulation derived from Salim et al. (2020); Condat et al. (2022), casting decentralized learning
as a monotonous inclusion, obtaining a linear rate thanks to a preconditioning step of a Forward-
Backward like algorithm. However, being sequential by nature, these types of algorithms are not
amenable to a continuized framework.

Error feedback/Gradient tracking. A major lock for asynchrony is the use of Gradi-
ent Tracking (Koloskova et al., 2021; Nedic et al., 2017; Li & Lin, 2021) or Error Feed-
back (Stich & Karimireddy, 2020; Kovalev et al., 2021b). Indeed, gradient operations are locally
tracked by a running-mean variable which is updated at each gradient update. This is incompati-
ble with an asynchronous framework as it requires communication between nodes. Furthermore, a
multi-consensus inner-loop seems mandatory to obtain accelerated rates, again not desirable.

Decoupling procedures Decoupling subsequent steps of an optimization procedures traditionally
leads to speed-ups (Hendrikx et al., 2021; Hendrikx, 2022; Belilovsky et al., 2020; 2021). This
contrasts with methods which couple gradient and gossip updates, such that they happen in a
predefined order, i.e. simultaneously (Even et al., 2021a) or sequentially (Kovalev et al., 2021a;
Koloskova et al., 2020). In decoupled optimization procedures, inner-loops are not desirable because
they require an external procedure that can be potentially slow and need a block-barrier instruction
during the algorithmвҖҷs execution (e.g., Hendrikx et al. (2021; 2019)).

3     FAST A SYNCHRONOUS A LGORITHM FOR T IME -VARYING N ETWORKS
3.1   G OSSIP F RAMEWORK

We consider the problem defined by Eq. 1 in a distributed environment constituted by n nodes whose
dynamic is indexed by a continuous time index t вҲҲ R+ . Each node has a local memory and can
compute a local gradient вҲҮfi , as well as elementary operations, in an instantaneous manner. As


                                                  3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


said above, having no delay is less realistic, yet adding them also leads to significantly more difficult
proofs whose adaptation to our framework remains largely unclear. Next, we will assume that our
computations and gossip result from independent in-homogeneous piecewise constant P.P.P. with no
delay. For the sake of simplicity, we assume that all nodes can compute a gradient at the same rate:
Assumption 3.1 (Homogeneous gradient computations). The gradient computations are re-
normalized to fire independently at a rate of 1 computation per time unit. For the i-th worker, we
write Ni (t) the corresponding P.P.P. of rate 1, as well as N(t) = (Ni (t))iвүӨn .

Next, we model the bandwidth of each machine. For an edge (i, j) вҲҲ E(t), we write Mij (t) the P.P.P.
with rate О»ij (t) вүҘ 0. When this P.P.P. fires, both nodes can potentially share their local memories.
The rate О»ij (t) is adjustable locally by machine i, which can decide to speed or slow down its local
communication. While О»ij (t) and О»ji (t) may refer to different quantities, we highlight that this
communication process is symmetric, and we denote by EМ„(t) the corresponding undirected graph.
Given our notations, we note that if (i, j) 6вҲҲ E(t), then the connexion between (i, j) can be thought
as a P.P.P. with intensity 0. We now introduce the instantaneous expected gossip matrix of our graph:
                                         X
                              Оӣ(t) ,           О»ij (t)(ei вҲ’ ej )(ei вҲ’ ej )T .
                                      (i,j)вҲҲE(t)

                       P
We also write Оӣ(t) , (i,j)вҲҲE(t) О»ij (t)(ei вҲ’ ej )(ei вҲ’ ej )T its tensorized counter-part that will be
useful for our proofs and defining our Lyapunov potential, and Оӣ+ (t) its pseudo inverse. Following
Scaman et al. (2017), we will further compare this quantity to the centralized gossip matrix:
                                      1 T     1 X
                           ПҖ ,IвҲ’        11 =        (ei вҲ’ ej )(ei вҲ’ ej )T .
                                      n      2n i,j


We introduce the instantaneous connectivity of Оӣ(t), as in Kovalev et al. (2021a):

                                        1
                                            ,   inf    xT Оӣ(t)x .
                                      ПҮ1 (t) xвҠҘ1,kxk=1

We might also write ПҮ1 [Оӣ(t)] to avoid confusion, depending on the context. Next, we introduce the
maximal effective resistance of the network, as in Even et al. (2021a); Ellens et al. (2011):
                                      1
                           ПҮ2 (t) ,        sup (ei вҲ’ ej )T Оӣ+ (t)(ei вҲ’ ej ) .
                                      2 (i,j)вҲҲE(t)

We remind the following Lemma (proof in Appendix D.2), which will be useful to control
ПҮ1 (t), ПҮ2 (t) and compare our bounds with the ones making use of the spectral gap of a graph:
Lemma 3.1 (Bound on the connectivity constants). The spectrum of Оӣ(t) is non-negative. Further-
more, we have ПҮ1 (t) = +вҲһ iff EМ„(t) is not a connected graph. Also, if the graph is connected, then
 nвҲ’1
Tr Оӣ(t) вүӨ min(ПҮ1 (t), ПҮ2 (t)) . Furthermore, we also have 2ПҮ2 (t) inf (i,j)вҲҲE(t) О»ij (t) вүӨ 1 .


The last part of this Lemma allows to bound ПҮ2 (t) when no degenerated behavior on the graphвҖҷs
connectivity happens: we assume the networks do not contain arbitrarily slow communication edges.
The following assumption is necessary to avoid oscillatory effects due to the variations of Оӣ(t):
Assumption 3.2 (Slowly varying graphs). Assume that Оӣ(t) is piece-wise constant on time intervals.

In particular, it implies that each О»ij (t) is piece-wise constant. Next, following Kovalev et al.
(2021a), we bound uniformly the connectivity to avoid degenerated effects:
Assumption 3.3 (Strongly connected topology). Assume that there is ПҮвҲ—1 > 0 such that ПҮ1 (t) вүӨ ПҮвҲ—1 .

We might write this quantity ПҮвҲ—1 [Оӣ] to stress the dependency in Оӣ(t). From supra, itвҖҷs clear that
ПҮ2 (t) вүӨ ПҮ1 (t) so that under 3.3, ПҮ2 (t) is upper bounded by 0 < ПҮвҲ—2 вүӨ ПҮвҲ—1 .


                                                    4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


3.2   DYNAMIC TO OPTIMUM

Next, we follow a standard approach (Kovalev et al., 2021c;a; Salim et al., 2022; Hendrikx, 2022)
for solving Eq. 1 (see Appendix B for details), leading to, for 0 < ОҪ < Вө:
                n                                   n
                X                                   X                  ОҪ                  1
          inf         fi (x) =    inf      sup            fi (xi ) вҲ’     kxk2 вҲ’ hx, yi вҲ’    kПҖz + yk2 .
         xвҲҲRd
                i=1
                                 xвҲҲRnГ—d y,zвҲҲRnГ—d
                                                    i=1
                                                                       2                 2ОҪ
                Pn              ОҪ    2                      вҲ— вҲ— вҲ—
For F (x) =      i=1 fi (xi ) вҲ’ 2 kxk , the saddle points (x , y , z ) of this Lagrangian, are given by:
                                        пЈұ         вҲ—      вҲ—
                                           пЈІ вҲҮF    (x ) вҲ’ y            =0
                                             y вҲ— +ПҖz вҲ—
                                                  ОҪ    + xвҲ—            =0                                 (2)
                                             ПҖz + ПҖy вҲ—
                                                 вҲ—
                                           пЈі
                                                                       = 0.
Contrary to Kovalev et al. (2021a), we do not employ a Forward-Backward algorithm, which re-
quires both an extra-inversion step and additional regularity on the considered proximal operator.
Not only does this condition not hold in this particular case, but this is not desirable in a continuized
framework where iterates are not ordered in a predefined sequence and require a local descent at
each instant. Another major difference is that no Error-feedback is required by our approach, which
allows to unlock asynchrony while simplifying the proofs and decreasing the required number of
communications. Instead, we show it is enough to incorporate a standard fixed point algorithm,
without any specific preconditioning (see Condat et al. (2019)). We consider the following dynamic:
           пЈұ
           пЈҙ
           пЈҙ  dxt = О·(xМғt вҲ’ xt )dt вҲ’ Оі(вҲҮF (xt ) вҲ’ yМғt ) dN(t)
           пЈҙ
           пЈҙ  dxМғ = О·Мғ(xt вҲ’ xМғt )dt вҲ’ ОіМғ(вҲҮF (xt ) вҲ’ yМғt ) dN(t)
           пЈҙ t
           пЈҙ
           пЈҙ
           пЈҙ
           пЈҙ
           пЈІ dyМғt = вҲ’Оё(yt + zt + ОҪ xМғt )dt + (Оҙ + ОҙМғ)(вҲҮF (xt ) вҲ’ yМғt )dN(t)
              dyt = Оұ(yМғt вҲ’ yt )dt                                                                     (3)
           пЈҙ
           пЈҙ
           пЈҙ                            P
           пЈҙ
           пЈҙ
           пЈҙ
           пЈҙ  dzt = Оұ(zМғt вҲ’ zt )dt вҲ’ ОІ (i,j)вҲҲE(t) (ei вҲ’ ej )(ei вҲ’ ej )T (yt + zt )dMij (t)
           пЈҙ
           пЈҙ
           пЈі dzМғ = ОұМғ(z вҲ’ zМғ )dt вҲ’ ОІМғ P             (e вҲ’ e )(e вҲ’ e )T (y + z )dM (t) ,
                 t          t      t             (i,j)вҲҲE(t)    i       j   i   j     t    t    ij


where ОҪ, О·Мғ, О·, Оі, Оұ, ОұМғ, Оё, Оҙ, ОҙМғ, ОІ, ОІМғ are undetermined parameters yet. As in Nesterov (2003), variables
are paired to obtain a Nesterov acceleration. The variables (x, y) allow decoupling the gossip steps
from the gradient steps using independent P.P.P.s. Furthermore, the Lebesgue integrable path of yМғt
does not correspond to a standard momentum, as in a continuized framework (Even et al., 2021a);
however, it turns out to be a crucial component of our method. Compared to Kovalev et al. (2021a),
no extra multi-consensus step needs to be integrated. Our formulation of an asynchronous gossip
step is similar to Even et al. (2021a) which introduces a stochastic variable on edges; however, con-
trary to this work, our gossip and gradient computations are decoupled. In fact, we can also consider
SGD (Bottou, 2010), by replacing вҲҮF (x) by an estimate вҲҮF (x, Оҫ), for Оҫ вҲҲ Оһ, some measurable
space. We will need the following assumption on the bias and variance of the gradient:
Assumption 3.4 (Unbiased gradient with uniform additive noise). We assume that:
                                            EОҫ вҲҮF (x, Оҫ) = вҲҮF (x) ,
and that its quadratic error is uniformly bounded by Пғ > 0:
                                        EОҫ kвҲҮF (x, Оҫ) вҲ’ вҲҮF (x)k2 вүӨ Пғ 2 .

Next, for SGDRuse, we modify the three first lines of Eq. 3, replacing the stochastic terms (вҲҮF (xt )вҲ’
yМғt ) dN(t) by Оһ (вҲҮF (xt , Оҫ) вҲ’ yМғt ) dN(t, Оҫ), see Appendix C for the complete dynamic. Simulating
those SDEs (Arnold, 1974) can be efficiently done, as explained in Sec. 4.2 and Appendix H.

3.3   T HEORETICAL GUARANTEES

We follow the approach introduced in Even et al. (2021a) for studying the convergence of the dy-
namic 3. To do so, we introduce X , (x, xМғ, yМғ), Y , (y, z, zМғ) and the following Lyapunov potential:
            ОҰ(t, X, Y ) , At dF (x, xвҲ— ) + AМғt kxМғ вҲ’ xвҲ— k2 + Bt ky вҲ’ y вҲ— k2 + BМғt kyМғ вҲ’ y вҲ— k2
                           + Ct kz + y вҲ’ z вҲ— вҲ’ y вҲ— k2 + CМғt kzМғ вҲ’ z вҲ— k2Оӣ(t)+ ,


                                                           5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


where At , AМғt , Bt , BМғt , Ct , CМғt , Dt are non-negative functions to be defined. We will use this potential
to control the trajectories of Xt , (xt , xМғt , yМғt ), Yt , (yt , zt , zМғt ), leading to the equivalent dynamic:
                           (
                             dXt = a1 (Xt , Yt )dt + b1 (Xt )dN(t)
                                                       P
                             dYt = a2 (Xt , Yt )dt + (i,j)вҲҲE(t) bij    2 (Yt )dMij (t) ,

where a1 , a2 , b1 = (bi1 )i , (bij
                                 2 )ij are smooth functions. We prove the following in Appendix D.3.
Theorem 3.2 (Gradient Descent). Assume each fi is Вө-strongly convex and L-smooth. For any
Оӣ(t), assume 3.1-3.3, and that ПҮвҲ—1 [Оӣ]ПҮвҲ—2 [Оӣ] вүӨ 12 . Then there exists some parameters for the dynamic
Eq. 3 (given in App. H.2), such that for any initialization x0 P      вҲҲ Rd , and xМғ0 = x0 , y0 = yМғ0 =
                                                        +               n
вҲҮf (x0 ), z0 = zМғ0 = вҲ’ПҖвҲҮf (x0 ), we get for t вҲҲ R and f (x) = i=1 fi (xi ):
                                                                Вө               вҲ’ вҲҡt вҲҡ Вө
                 E[f (xt )] вҲ’ f (xвҲ— ) вүӨ 2(f (x0 ) вҲ’ f (xвҲ— )) + kx0 вҲ’ xвҲ— k2 e 8 2 L .
                                                                8
Also, the expected number of gradients is nt and the expected number of edges activated is:
                                Z t X                        Z
                                                            1 t
                             E[               О»ij (u) du] =      E[Tr Оӣ(u)] du .                     (4)
                                  0                         2 0
                                  (i,j)вҲҲE(u)


We can obtain the following corollary with a minor modification of our current proof:
Corollary 3.2.1 (SGD with additive noise). Under the same assumption as Thm. 3.2 as well as 3.4,
for the SGD-dynamic Eq. 8, the same parameters as Thm. 3.2 allows to obtain for t вҲҲ R+ :
                                                       Вө             вҲ’ вҲҡt вҲҡ Вө     5Пғ 2
          E[f (xt )] вҲ’ f (xвҲ— ) вүӨ 2(f (x0 ) вҲ’ f (xвҲ— )) + kx0 вҲ’ xвҲ— k2 e 8 2 L + вҲҡ        .
                                                       8                            ВөL

Following Even et al. (2021a), L allows to adjust the trace-off bias-variance of our descent.

4     P RACTICAL IMPLEMENTATION
4.1   E XPECTED COMPUTATIONAL COMPLEXITY

For a given graph E(t), multiple choices of Оӣ(t) are possible and would still lead to accelerated
and linear rates as long as the condition 2ПҮвҲ—1 [Оӣ]ПҮвҲ—2 [Оӣ] вүӨ 1 is verified. Thus, we discuss how to
choose our qinstantaneous expected gossip matrix to compare to concurrent work. To get a precision
З«, T = O( L           1
               Вө log( З« )) local gradient computations is required per machine. More details can be
found in Appendix F on our methodology for comparing with other methods, and particularly the
way to recover the order of magnitudes we mention. In the following, each algorithm to which we
compare ourselves is parameterized by a Laplacian matrix with various properties. Systematically,
for an update frequency f and a family of Laplacians {Lq }q (which can be potentially reduced to a
single element) given by concurrent work, we will set:
                                       q
                                Оӣ(t) = 2ПҮвҲ—1 [L]ПҮвҲ—2 [L]LвҢҠtf вҢӢ , О»вҲ— LвҢҠtf вҢӢ ,                      (5)
where О»вҲ— can be understood as a lower bound on the instantaneous expected communication rate. In
this case, Оӣ(t) satisfies the conditions of Theorem 3.2 or Corollary 3.2.1. From a physical point of
view, it allows us to relate the spatial quantities of our graphs to a necessary minimal communication
rate between nodes of the network; see Appendix E for a discussion on this topic.

Comparison with ADOM+. In ADOM+ (Kovalev et al., 2021a), one picks ПҮвҲ—1 [L] вүҘ 1 and f =
ПҮвҲ—1 [L]. Then, the number of gossip steps of our algorithm is at most:
                                          s                            s
               q                                          q
                   вҲ—    вҲ—                   L     1            вҲ—     вҲ—   L     1
                 ПҮ1 [L]ПҮ2 [L] sup Tr(Lq )     log( ) = O( ПҮ1 [L]ПҮ2 [L]n    log( ))
                               q            Вө     З«                      Вө     З«
Then, the expected communication of ADOM+ is potentially substantially higher than ours (see
Appendix F.1):                                           s
                       T                   q
                      X
                           вҲ—                 вҲ—     вҲ—       L     1
                          ПҮ1 [L]|E(t)| вүҘ O( ПҮ1 [L]ПҮ2 [L]n    log( )) .
                      t=1
                                                           Вө     З«


                                                       6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Comparison with standard Continuized. If L is a Laplacian picked such that Tr L =
2 (thus
   q f =p 0), as in Even et al. (2021a), then Even et al. (2021a) claims that at least
O( L         1     вҲ—     вҲ—
      Вө log( З« ) ПҮ1 [L]ПҮ2 [L]) gradient and gossip iterations are needed. The number of gossip it-
erations is the same as ours, yet, thanks to Lemma 3.1, the number p   of gradient iterations can be
substantially higher without any additional assumptions, as n вҲ’ 1 вүӨ 2 ПҮвҲ—1 [L]ПҮвҲ—2 [L] (see Appendix
F.2). Furthermore, the computations of Even et al. (2021a) still use the dual gradients and are for a
fixed topology.

Comparison with methods that depend on the spectral gap. For instance, MSDA relies on a
Tchebychev acceleration of the number of gossip steps (possible because Scaman et al. (2017) uses a
                                                                                 вҲҡ     q
fixed gossip matrix) which allows getting the number of edges activated of about ПҒвҲ— |E| LВө log( 1
                                                                                                З«),
        вҲ—
where ПҒ is the spectral gap. For our algorithm, the number of gossip writes (with f = 0):
                     s                                            s
                                 q                        вҲҡ
                       L      1                                      L      1
                         log( ) ПҮвҲ—1 [L]ПҮвҲ—2 [L]Tr L вүӨ O( ПҒвҲ— |E|         log( )) ,
                       Вө       З«                                     Вө      З«
where the details of this bound can be found in Appendix F.3 and relies solely on an assumption on
the ratio between the maximal and minimal weights in the Laplacian. We highlight that Scaman et al.
(2017); Kovalev et al. (2021a) claimed that their respective algorithms are optimal because they
study the number of computations and synchronized gossips on a worst-case graph; our claim is,
by nature different, as we are interested in the number of edges fired rather than the number of
synchronized gossip rounds. Tab. 2 predicts the behavior of our algorithm for various classes of
graphs encoded via the Laplacian of a stochastic matrix. It shows that systematically, our algorithm
leads to the best speed1 . We note that the graph class depicted in the Tab. 2 were used as worst-
case examples of Scaman et al. (2017); Kovalev et al. (2021a). The next section implements and
validates our ideas.
Table 2: Complexity for various graphs using a stochastic matrix. We have, respectively for a star /
line or cyclic / complete graph and the d-dimensional grid: ПҮвҲ—1 = O(1), ПҒвҲ— = O(n) / ПҮвҲ—1 = O(n2 ),
ПҒвҲ— = O(n2 ), ПҮвҲ—2 = O(1) / ПҮвҲ—1 = O(1), ПҒвҲ— = O(1) / ПҮвҲ—1 = O(n2/d ), ПҒвҲ— = O(n2/d ), ПҮвҲ—2 = O(1).

     Method                                      # edges activated                   # total gradient iterations
     Graph                               Star   Line Complete        d-grid   Star      Line Complete d-grid
     (Kovalev et al., 2021a) ADOM+        n      n3       n2         n1+2/d    n         n          n            n
     (Scaman et al., 2017) MSDA          n3/2    n 2
                                                          n2         n1+1/d    n         n          n            n
     (Even et al., 2021a) Continuized     n      n2        n         n1+1/d    n         n2         n         n1+1/d
     Centralized                          n       -        -           -       n          -         -            -
     DADAO (ours)                         n      n2        n         n1+1/d    n         n          n            n


4.2      A LGORITHM

We now describe the algorithm used to implement the dynamics of Eq. 3 and, in particular, our
                                      (i)      (i)          (i)
simulator of P.P.P.. Let us write T1 < T2 < ... < Tk < ... the time of the k-th event on the
i-th node, which is either an edge activation, either a gradient update. We remind that the spiking
times of a specific event correspond to random variables with independent exponential increments
and can thus be generated at the beginning of our simulation. They can also be generated on the
                                                                                                   (i)
fly and locally to stress the locality and asynchronicity of our algorithm. LetвҖҷs write Xt = (Xt )i
              (i)
and Yt = (Yt )i , then on the i-th node and at the k-th iteration, we integrate the linear Ordinary

                                      (i)  (i)             dXt = a1 (Xt , Yt )dt
Differential Equation (ODE) on [Tk ; Tk+1 ], given by                            , to define the values
                                                           dYt = a2 (Xt , Yt )dt
right before the spike, for A the corresponding constant matrix, we thus have:
                           пЈ« (i) пЈ¶                                пЈ«        пЈ¶
                             X (i)вҲ’                               X (i)(i)
                               Tk+1
                           пЈӯ (i) пЈё = exp (T (i) вҲ’ T (i) )A пЈӯ T(i)       k пЈё
                                                                             .                       (6)
                                                   k+1    k
                             Y (i)вҲ’                                 Y (i)
                                  Tk+1                                        Tk

1
    For the case 2-grid, the logarithmic term should appear, yet we decided to neglect them.


                                                         7
  Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


  Next, if one has a gradient update, then:

                                       (i)           (i)              (i)
                                    X (i) = X (i)вҲ’ + b1 X (i)вҲ’                     .
                                      Tk+1       Tk+1                 Tk+1

  Otherwise, if the edge (i, j) or (j, i) is activated, a communication bridge is created between both
  nodes i and j. In this case, the local update on i writes:

                                   (i)        (i)           (i)   (j)
                                 Y (i) = Y (i)вҲ’ + b2 Y (i)вҲ’ , Y (i)вҲ’ .
                                   Tk+1       Tk+1             Tk+1         Tk+1


  Note that, even if this event takes place along an edge (i, j), we can write it separately for nodes i
                                                     (i)    (j)
  and j by making sure they both have the events Tki = Tkj , for some ki , kj вҲҲ N, corresponding to
  this communication. As advocated, all those operations are local, and we summarize in the Alg. 1
  the algorithmic block which corresponds to our implementation. See Appendix H for more details.

   Algorithm 1: This algorithm block describes our implementation on each local machine. The
   ODE routine is described by Eq. 6 and Ping is an instantaneous routine.
   Input: On each machine i вҲҲ {1, ..., n}, gradient oracle вҲҮfi , parameters Вө, L, ПҮвҲ—1 , tmax .
 1 Initialize on each machine i вҲҲ {1, ..., n}:

 2     Set X (i) , Y (i) , T (i) to 0 and set A via Eq. 105;
 3 Synchronize the clocks of all machines ;
 4 In parallel on workers i вҲҲ {1, ..., n}, while t < tmax , continuously do:
 5     t вҶҗ clock() ;
 6     Ping surrounding machines and adjust О»ij (t) ;
 7     if there is an event at time t then
 8          (X (i) , Y (i) ) вҶҗ ODE(A, t вҲ’ T (i) , (X (i) , Y (i) )) ;
 9          if the event is to take a gradient step then
10               X (i) вҶҗ X (i) + b1 (X (i) ) ;
11          else if the event is to communicate with j then
12               Y (i) вҶҗ Y (i) + b2 (Y (i) , Y (j) ) ;         // Happens at j simultaneously.
              (i)
13          T вҶҗt;
               (i)
14 return (xt       )
                max 1вүӨiвүӨn
                              , the estimate of xвҲ— on each worker i.


  4.3     N UMERICAL RESULTS

  In this section, we study the behavior of our method and compare it to several settings inspired
  by Kovalev et al. (2021a); Even et al. (2021a). In our experiments, we perform the empirical risk
  minimization for both the decentralized linear and logistic regression tasks given either by:
                      m                                                                   m
                   1 X                              Вө                                  1 X вҠӨ
        fi (x) =         log(1 + exp(вҲ’bij aвҠӨ
                                           ij x)) +   kxk2         or       fi (x) =        ka x вҲ’ cij k2 ,   (7)
                   m j=1                            2                                  m j=1 ij

  where aij вҲҲ Rd , bij вҲҲ {вҲ’1, 1} and cij вҲҲ R correspond to m local data points stored at node
  i. For both varying and fixed topology settings, we follow a protocol similar to Kovalev et al.
  (2021a): we generate n independent synthetic datasets with the make_classification and
  make_regression functions of scikit-learn (Pedregosa et al., 2011), each worker storing m =
  100 data points. We recall that the metrics of interest are the total number of local gradient steps
  and the total number of individual messages exchanged (i.e., number of edges that fired) to reach an
  З«-precision. We systematically used the proposed hyper-parameters of each reference paper for our
  implementation without any specific fine-tuning.

  Comparison in the time-varying setting. We compare our method to ADOM+ (Kovalev et al.,
  2021a) on a sequence of 50 random geometric graphs of size n = 20 in Fig. 1. To construct the
  graphs, we sample n points uniformly in [0, 1]2 вҠӮ R2 and connect each of them to all at a distance
  less than some user-specified radius, which allows controlling the constant ПҮвҲ—1 (we consider values in


                                                           8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


{3, 33, 180, 233}). We ensure the connectedness of the graphs by adding a minimal number of edges,
exactly as done in Kovalev et al. (2021b). We then use the instantaneous gossip matrix introduced
in Eq. 5 with f = ПҮвҲ—1 . We compare ourselves to both versions of ADOM+: with and without
the Multi-Consensus (M.-C.). Thanks to its M.-C. procedure, ADOM+ can significantly reduce the
number of necessary gradient steps. However, consistently with our analysis in Sec. 4.1, our method
is systematically better in all settings in terms of communications.

                                           $YHUDJH GLVWDQFH WR RSW                               $YHUDJH GLVWDQFH WR RSW                                                        $YHUDJH GLVWDQFH WR RSW                               $YHUDJH GLVWDQFH WR RSW


        вҖ– 2


                                                                                                                                                                                          вҖ– 2
                               Гӯ                                                                         Гӯ
        вҖ–


                                                                                                                                                                                          вҖ–

         x


                                                                                                                                                                                           x


    вҲ‘вҖ– вҲ’


                                                                                                                                                                                      вҲ‘вҖ– вҲ’
                               Гӯ                                                                         Гӯ

                                                               $'20  0  &
         xi


                                                                                                                                                                                           xi
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Гӯ                                                                            Гӯ
                               Гӯ                             $'20                                   Гӯ
              =1


                                                                                                                                                                                                =1


    n


                                                                                                                                                                                      n
                                                               '$'$2
                  i


                                                                                                                                                                                                    i
        1
              n


                                                                                                                                                                                          1
                                                                                                                                                                                                n
                             Гӯ                                                                        Гӯ                                                                                                  Гӯ                                                                           Гӯ



                                             7RWDO QXPEHU RI JUDG                                                                                 H
                                                                                                                                7RWDO QXPEHU RI FRP                                                           7RWDO QXPEHU RI JUDG                                                                                 H
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     7RWDO QXPEHU RI FRP


Figure 1: Comparison between ADOM+ (Kovalev et al., 2021a) and DADAO, using the same data
from left to right: binary classification, linear regression) and the same sequence of random con-
nected graphs with ПҮвҲ—1 = 180 linking n = 20 workers.

Comparison with accelerated methods in the fixed topology setting. Now, we fix the Laplacian
matrix via Eq. 5 to compare simultaneously to the continuized framework (Even et al., 2021a) and
MSDA (Scaman et al., 2017). We reports in Fig. 2 results corresponding to the complete graph
with n = 250 nodes and the line graph of size n = 150. While sharing the same asymptotic
rate, we note that the Continuized framework (Even et al., 2021a) and MSDA (Scaman et al., 2017)
have better absolute constants than DADAO, giving them an advantage both in terms of the number
of communication and gradient steps. However, in the continuized framework, the gradient and
communication steps being coupled, the number of gradient computations can potentially be orders
of magnitude worse than our algorithm, which is reflected by Fig. 2 for the line graph. As for MSDA
and ADOM+, Tab. 2 showed they do not have the best communication rates on certain classes of
graphs, as confirmed to the right in Fig. 2 for MSDA and the communication plots for ADOM+.

                                     $YHUDJH GLVWDQFH WR RSW                                    $YHUDJH GLVWDQFH WR RSW                                                  $YHUDJH GLVWDQFH WR RSW                                     $YHUDJH GLVWDQFH WR RSW


        вҖ– 2


                                                                                                                                                                                          вҖ– 2
        вҖ–


                                                                                                                                                                                          вҖ–


         x


                                                                                                                                                                                           x


                                                                                                                                            $'20  0  &
    вҲ‘вҖ– вҲ’


                                                                                                                                                                                      вҲ‘вҖ– вҲ’


                                                                                                                                                $'20                                                      Гӯ                                                                                Гӯ
         xi


                                                                                                                                                                                           xi


                             Гӯ                                                                             Гӯ                                &RQWLQXL]HG
              =1


                                                                                                                                                                                                =1


    n


                                                                                                                                                                                      n


                                                                                                                                                                                                               Гӯ                                                                                Гӯ
                                                                                                                                                06'$
                  i


                                                                                                                                                                                                    i


        1
              n


                                                                                                                                                                                          1
                                                                                                                                                                                                n


                                                                                                                                                '$'$2
                             Гӯ                                                                             Гӯ                                                                                               Гӯ                                                                                Гӯ



                                           7RWDO QXPEHU RI JUDG                                                                                  H
                                                                                                                                7RWDO QXPEHU RI FRP                                                         7RWDO QXPEHU RI JUDG                                                                                  H
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     7RWDO QXPEHU RI FRP


Figure 2: Comparison between ADOM+ (Kovalev et al., 2021a), the continuized framework
(Even et al., 2021a), MSDA (Scaman et al., 2017) and DADAO, using the same data for the linear
regression task, and the same graphs (from left to right: line with n = 150, complete with n = 250).

In conclusion, while several methods can share similar convergence rates, ours is the only one to
perform at least as well as its competitors in every setting for different graphвҖҷs topology and two
distinct tasks, as predicted by Tab. 1.

5         C ONCLUSION
In this work, we have proposed a novel stochastic algorithm for the decentralized optimization of a
sum of smooth and strongly convex functions. We have demonstrated, theoretically and empirically,
that this algorithm leads systematically to a substantial acceleration compared to state-of-the-art
works. Furthermore, our algorithm is asynchronous, decoupled, primal, and does not rely on an
extra inner-loop while being amenable to varying topology settings: each of these properties makes
it suitable for real applications. In future work, we would like to explore the robustness of such
algorithms to more challenging variabilities occurring in real-life applications.


                                                                                                                                                                                  9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


R EFERENCES
Ludwig Arnold. Stochastic differential equations. New York, 1974.
Eugene Belilovsky, Michael Eickenberg, and Edouard Oyallon. Decoupled greedy learning of CNNs.
  In Hal DaumГ© III and Aarti Singh (eds.), Proceedings of the 37th International Conference on
  Machine Learning, volume 119 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 736вҖ“745.
  PMLR, 13вҖ“18 Jul 2020.
Eugene Belilovsky, Louis Leconte, Lucas Caccia, Michael Eickenberg, and Edouard Oyallon. De-
  coupled greedy learning of cnns for synchronous and asynchronous distributed learning. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2106.06401, 2021.
LГ©on Bottou. Large-scale machine learning with stochastic gradient descent. In Proceedings of
  COMPSTATвҖҷ2010, pp. 177вҖ“186. Springer, 2010.
S. Boyd, A. Ghosh, B. Prabhakar, and D. Shah. Randomized gossip algorithms. IEEE Transactions
   on Information Theory, 52(6):2508вҖ“2530, 2006. doi: 10.1109/TIT.2006.874516.
Laurent Condat, Daichi Kitahara, AndrГ©s Contreras, and Akira Hirabayashi. Proximal splitting
  algorithms for convex optimization: A tour of recent advances, with new twists, 2019.
Laurent Condat, Grigory Malinovsky, and Peter RichtГЎrik. Distributed proximal splitting algorithms
  with rates and acceleration. Frontiers in Signal Processing, pp. 12, 2022.
Wendy Ellens, Floske M Spieksma, Piet Van Mieghem, Almerima Jamakovic, and Robert E Kooij.
 Effective graph resistance. Linear algebra and its applications, 435(10):2491вҖ“2506, 2011.
Mathieu Even, Hadrien Hendrikx, and Laurent MassouliГ©. Asynchrony and acceleration in gossip
 algorithms, 2020.
Mathieu Even, RaphaГ«l Berthier, Francis Bach, Nicolas Flammarion, Hadrien Hendrikx, Pierre Gail-
 lard, Laurent MassouliГ©, and Adrien Taylor. A continuized view on nesterov acceleration for
 stochastic gradient descent and randomized gossip. In A. Beygelzimer, Y. Dauphin, P. Liang, and
 J. Wortman Vaughan (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2021a.
Mathieu Even, Hadrien Hendrikx, and Laurent Massoulie. Decentralized optimization with hetero-
 geneous delays: a continuous-time approach. arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.03585, 2021b.
Hadrien Hendrikx. A principled framework for the design and analysis of token algorithms, 2022.
Hadrien Hendrikx, Francis Bach, and Laurent MassouliГ©. An accelerated decentralized stochastic
  proximal algorithm for finite sums. In H. Wallach, H. Larochelle, A. Beygelzimer, F. d'AlchГ©-Buc,
  E. Fox, and R. Garnett (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 32.
  Curran Associates, Inc., 2019.
Hadrien Hendrikx, Francis Bach, and Laurent MassouliГ©. An optimal algorithm for decentralized
  finite-sum optimization. SIAM Journal on Optimization, 31(4):2753вҖ“2783, 2021. doi: 10.1137/
  20M134842X.
Douglas Klein and Milan Randic. Resistance distance. Journal of Mathematical Chemistry, 12:
  81вҖ“95, 12 1993. doi: 10.1007/BF01164627.
Anastasia Koloskova, Nicolas Loizou, Sadra Boreiri, Martin Jaggi, and Sebastian Stich. A unified
  theory of decentralized sgd with changing topology and local updates. In International Confer-
  ence on Machine Learning, pp. 5381вҖ“5393. PMLR, 2020.
Anastasiia Koloskova, Tao Lin, and Sebastian U Stich. An improved analysis of gradient tracking
  for decentralized machine learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:
 11422вҖ“11435, 2021.
Dmitry Kovalev, Elnur Gasanov, Alexander Gasnikov, and Peter RichtГЎrik. Lower bounds and op-
 timal algorithms for smooth and strongly convex decentralized optimization over time-varying
 networks. In A. Beygelzimer, Y. Dauphin, P. Liang, and J. Wortman Vaughan (eds.), Advances in
 Neural Information Processing Systems, 2021a.


                                               10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Dmitry Kovalev, Alexander Gasnikov, and Peter RichtГЎrik. Accelerated primal-dual gradient method
 for smooth and convex-concave saddle-point problems with bilinear coupling. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2112.15199, 2021b.
Dmitry Kovalev, Egor Shulgin, Peter RichtГЎrik, Alexander V Rogozin, and Alexander Gasnikov.
 Adom: accelerated decentralized optimization method for time-varying networks. In Interna-
 tional Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 5784вҖ“5793. PMLR, 2021c.
GГјnter Last and Mathew Penrose. Lectures on the Poisson process, volume 7. Cambridge University
  Press, 2017.
Jonas Latz. Analysis of stochastic gradient descent in continuous time. Statistics and Computing,
  31(4):1вҖ“25, 2021.
RГ©mi Leblond, Fabian Pedregosa, and Simon Lacoste-Julien. Improved asynchronous parallel opti-
  mization analysis for stochastic incremental methods. arXiv preprint arXiv:1801.03749, 2018.
Huan Li and Zhouchen Lin. Accelerated gradient tracking over time-varying graphs for decentral-
  ized optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.02596, 2021.
Hongzhou Lin, Julien Mairal, and Zaid Harchaoui. A universal catalyst for first-order optimization.
 Advances in neural information processing systems, 28, 2015.
Konstantin Mishchenko, Grigory Malinovsky, Sebastian Stich, and Peter RichtГЎrik. Proxskip: Yes!
  local gradient steps provably lead to communication acceleration! finally! arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2202.09357, 2022.
Angelia Nedic, Alex Olshevsky, and Wei Shi. Achieving geometric convergence for distributed
  optimization over time-varying graphs. SIAM Journal on Optimization, 27(4):2597вҖ“2633, 2017.
Yurii Nesterov. Introductory lectures on convex optimization: A basic course, volume 87. Springer
  Science & Business Media, 2003.
Yurii Nesterov and Sebastian U Stich. Efficiency of the accelerated coordinate descent method on
  structured optimization problems. SIAM Journal on Optimization, 27(1):110вҖ“123, 2017.
Adam Paszke, Sam Gross, Francisco Massa, Adam Lerer, James Bradbury, Gregory Chanan, Trevor
  Killeen, Zeming Lin, Natalia Gimelshein, Luca Antiga, Alban Desmaison, Andreas Kopf, Edward
 Yang, Zachary DeVito, Martin Raison, Alykhan Tejani, Sasank Chilamkurthy, Benoit Steiner,
  Lu Fang, Junjie Bai, and Soumith Chintala. Pytorch: An imperative style, high-performance
  deep learning library. In H. Wallach, H. Larochelle, A. Beygelzimer, F. d'AlchГ©-Buc, E. Fox, and
  R. Garnett (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 32, pp. 8024вҖ“8035. Curran
 Associates, Inc., 2019.
F. Pedregosa, G. Varoquaux, A. Gramfort, V. Michel, B. Thirion, O. Grisel, M. Blondel, P. Pretten-
   hofer, R. Weiss, V. Dubourg, J. Vanderplas, A. Passos, D. Cournapeau, M. Brucher, M. Perrot, and
   E. Duchesnay. Scikit-learn: Machine learning in Python. Journal of Machine Learning Research,
   12:2825вҖ“2830, 2011.
Adil Salim, Laurent Condat, Konstantin Mishchenko, and Peter RichtГЎrik. Dualize, split, randomize:
  Fast nonsmooth optimization algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.02635, 2020.
Adil Salim, Laurent Condat, Dmitry Kovalev, and Peter RichtГЎrik. An optimal algorithm for strongly
  convex minimization under affine constraints. arXiv preprint arXiv:2102.11079, 2021.
Adil Salim, Laurent Condat, Dmitry Kovalev, and Peter RichtГЎrik. An optimal algorithm for strongly
  convex minimization under affine constraints. In International Conference on Artificial Intelli-
  gence and Statistics, pp. 4482вҖ“4498. PMLR, 2022.
Kevin Scaman, Francis Bach, SГ©bastien Bubeck, Yin Tat Lee, and Laurent MassouliГ©. Optimal
  algorithms for smooth and strongly convex distributed optimization in networks. In Doina Precup
  and Yee Whye Teh (eds.), Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on Machine Learning,
  volume 70 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 3027вҖ“3036. PMLR, 06вҖ“11 Aug
  2017.


                                               11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Sebastian U. Stich and Sai Praneeth Karimireddy. The error-feedback framework: Sgd with delayed
  gradients. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 21(237):1вҖ“36, 2020.


                                              12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A         N OTATIONS

For a positive semi-definite matrix A, kxkA , xT Ax, f = O(g) means there is a constant C > 0
such that |f | вүӨ C|g|, {ei }iвүӨd is the canonical basis of Rd , d вҲҲ N, 1 is the vector of 1, I the identity,
A+ is the pseudo-inverse of A and for a smooth convex function F ,

                                     dF (x, y) , F (x) вҲ’ F (y) вҲ’ hвҲҮF (y), x вҲ’ yi

is its Bregman divergence. We further write ei , ei вҠ— I.

B         S ADDLE P OINT R EFORMULATION

With 0 < ОҪ < Вө and introducing an extra dual variable xМӮ, we get:
          n                             n
          X                             X                  ОҪ       ОҪ
    inf          fi (x) =      inf            fi (xi ) вҲ’     kxk2 + kxМӮk2
 xвҲҲRd
           i=1
                            x,xМӮвҲҲRnГ—d
                                        i=1
                                                           2       2
                            x=xМӮ,ПҖ xМӮ=0
                                                   n
                                                   X                    ОҪ       ОҪ
                       =       inf        sup              fi (xi ) вҲ’     kxk2 + kxМӮk2 + hy, xМӮ вҲ’ xi + hz, ПҖxМӮi
                            x,xМӮвҲҲRnГ—d   y,zвҲҲRnГ—d i=1                    2       2
                                                             n
                                                             X                  ОҪ       ОҪ
                       =      inf       sup         inf            fi (xi ) вҲ’     kxk2 + kxМӮk2 + hy, xМӮ вҲ’ xi + hz, ПҖxМӮi
                            xвҲҲRnГ—d y,zвҲҲRnГ—d xМӮвҲҲRnГ—d
                                                             i=1
                                                                                2       2
                                                 n
                                                 X                   ОҪ                  1
                       =      inf       sup            fi (xi ) вҲ’      kxk2 вҲ’ hx, yi вҲ’    kПҖz + yk2 .
                            xвҲҲRnГ—d y,zвҲҲRnГ—d
                                                 i=1
                                                                     2                 2ОҪ


C         SGD DYNAMIC

The dynamic considered when using stochastic gradients is given by:
         пЈұ                             R
         пЈҙ  dxt = О·(xМғt вҲ’ xt )dt вҲ’ Оі Оһ (вҲҮF (xt , Оҫ) вҲ’ yМғt ) dN(t, Оҫ)
         пЈҙ
         пЈҙ                             R
         пЈҙ
         пЈҙ
         пЈҙ  dxМғt = О·Мғ(xt вҲ’ xМғt )dt вҲ’ ОіМғ Оһ (вҲҮF (xt , Оҫ) вҲ’ yМғt ) dN(t, Оҫ)
         пЈҙ
         пЈҙ                                            R
         пЈҙ
         пЈІ dyМғt = вҲ’Оё(yt + zt + ОҪ xМғt )dt + (Оҙ + ОҙМғ) (вҲҮF (xt , Оҫ) вҲ’ yМғt )dN(t, Оҫ)
                                                                          Оһ
                                                                                                                     (8)
                 пЈҙ
                 пЈҙ dyt = Оұ(yМғt вҲ’ yt )dt
                 пЈҙ
                 пЈҙ                            P
                 пЈҙ
                 пЈҙ
                 пЈҙ dzt = Оұ(zМғt вҲ’ zt )dt вҲ’ ОІ (i,j)вҲҲE(t) (ei вҲ’ ej )(ei вҲ’ ej )T (yt + zt )dMij (t)
                 пЈҙ
                 пЈҙ                            P
                 пЈі
                   dzМғt = ОұМғ(zt вҲ’ zМғt )dt вҲ’ ОІМғ (i,j)вҲҲE(t) (ei вҲ’ ej )(ei вҲ’ ej )T (yt + zt )dMij (t)

D         P ROOF OF THE THEOREM

D.1       P ROPERTIES AND ASSUMPTIONS

The following properties will be used all along the proofs of the Lemmas and Theorems and are
related to the communication of our nodes.
Lemma D.1. Under the assumptions of Theorem 3.2, if z0 , zМғ0 вҲҲ span(ПҖ), then zt , zМғt вҲҲ span(ПҖ)
almost surely.

Proof. ItвҖҷs clear that for any i, j, we get:
                                     ПҖ(ei вҲ’ ej )(ei вҲ’ ej )T = (ei вҲ’ ej )(ei вҲ’ ej )T .
Thus, the variations of (zt , zМғt ) belong to span(ПҖ), and so is the trajectory.

We derive the following Lemma, similar to a result from Boyd et al. (2006):


                                                                   13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Lemma D.2 (Spiking contraction). Under the assumptions of Theorem 3.2, we have:
     X                                                                        1
           О»ij (t) k(ei вҲ’ ej )(ei вҲ’ ej )T x вҲ’ ПҖxk2 вҲ’ kПҖxk2 = вҲ’xT Оӣ(t)x вүӨ вҲ’ вҲ— kПҖxk2 .
                                                                             ПҮ1
     (i,j)вҲҲE(t)


Proof. If i = j, then О»ii = 0. For a given (i, j), we get if i 6= j:
             k(ei вҲ’ ej )(ei вҲ’ ej )T x вҲ’ ПҖxk2 = kПҖxk2 + kxi вҲ’ xj k2                                  (9)
                                                                                      T
                                                   вҲ’ 2hПҖ(x), (ei вҲ’ ej )(ei вҲ’ ej ) xi
                                                   = kПҖ(x)k2 вҲ’ hx, (ei вҲ’ ej )(ei вҲ’ ej )T xi .      (10)
And this allows conclusion by sum.
Lemma D.3 (Effective resistance contraction). For i, j and any x вҲҲ Rd , we have:
                     k(ei вҲ’ ej )(ei вҲ’ ej )T xk2Оӣ(t)+ вүӨ ПҮвҲ—2 k(ei вҲ’ ej )(ei вҲ’ ej )T xk .

Proof. Indeed, we note that:
     k(ei вҲ’ ej )(ei вҲ’ ej )T xk2Оӣ(t)+ = xT (ei вҲ’ ej )(ei вҲ’ ej )T Оӣ(t)+ (ei вҲ’ ej )(ei вҲ’ ej )T x      (11)
                                        вүӨ 2ПҮвҲ—2 xT (ei вҲ’ ej )(ei вҲ’ ej )T x                          (12)
                                        = ПҮвҲ—2 k(ei вҲ’ ej )(ei вҲ’ ej )T xk2                           (13)


Lemma D.4 (Min and max voltage values, see, e.g., Klein & Randic (1993).). For any i, j, k,
       +                    +
eT                    T
 i Оӣ(t) (ei вҲ’ ej ) вүҘ ek Оӣ(t) (ei вҲ’ ej ).


Proof. Let us call v , Оӣ(t)+ (ei вҲ’ ej ), and for a vertex k, N (k) the set its neighbors in E(t). Note
that k 6вҲҲ N (k). We want to prove that vi , eT      i v is greater than vk . In fact, we will prove that
вҲҖk, vi вүҘ vk вүҘ vj . Recall that Оӣ(t)Оӣ(t)+ = I вҲ’ ПҖ, meaning that Оӣ(t)v = ei вҲ’ ej . Thus, вҲҖk 6вҲҲ {i, j},
we have (Оӣ(t)v)k = 0, leading to:
                        X                                  X
               0 = vk          (О»kkвҖІ (t) + О»kвҖІ k (t)) вҲ’         (О»kkвҖІ (t) + О»kвҖІ k (t))vkвҖІ .
                         kвҖІ вҲҲN (k)                           kвҖІ вҲҲN (k)

This allows us to write:                P
                                            kвҖІ вҲҲN (k) (О»kkвҖІ (t) + О»kвҖІ k (t))vkвҖІ
                                 vk =     P                                       ,
                                              kвҖІ вҲҲN (k) О»kkвҖІ (t) + О»kвҖІ k (t)
meaning that vk is a convex combination of the values of v of its neighbors. As such, for any
k 6вҲҲ {i, j}, the value vk is inside the convex hull of the {vkвҖІ , k вҖІ вҲҲ N (k)} and cannot be strictly
superior to the maximal nor strictly inferior to the minimal value of v among its neighbors. The
only case where vk is maximal or minimal is when the {vkвҖІ , k вҖІ вҲҲ N (k)} are all equal. This means
that the only two coordinates of v that are allowed to be strictly maximal or minimal among their
neighbors are i and j. Thus, the graph being connected, there is a path beginning at any k and
leading to i or j made by iterating arg maxkвҖІ вҲҲN (k) vkвҖІ or arg minkвҖІ вҲҲN (k) vkвҖІ steps, hence maxk vk
and mink vk are in {vi , vj }. But, we have vi вҲ’ vj = (ei вҲ’ ej )T Оӣ(t)+ (ei вҲ’ ej ) вүҘ 0 and vi вүҘ vj .
Thus, maxk vk = vi and mink vk = vj .

Lemma D.5 (Bound effective resistance). For any i, j, we have О»ij (t)(ei вҲ’ ej )T Оӣ(t)+ (ei вҲ’ ej ) вүӨ 1.

Proof. As Оӣ(t)Оӣ(t)+ = I вҲ’ ПҖ, for any i, j, we write:
                  2 = (ei вҲ’ ej )T Оӣ(t)Оӣ(t)+ (ei вҲ’ ej )                                             (14)
                         X
                    =           О»kl (t)(ei вҲ’ ej )T (ek вҲ’ el )(ek вҲ’ el )T Оӣ(t)+ (ei вҲ’ ej ) .        (15)
                      (k,l)вҲҲE(t)



                                                       14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


As we have, for any i, j, k, l:
                                                пЈұ
                                                пЈҙ  1               if k = i and l 6= j
                                                пЈҙ
                                                пЈҙ
                                                пЈҙ
                                                пЈҙ
                                                пЈҙ  1               if k 6= i and l = j
                                                пЈҙ
                                                пЈІвҲ’1                if k = j and l 6= i
                                                пЈҙ
                                                пЈҙ
                                   T
                         (ei вҲ’ ej ) (ek вҲ’ el ) = вҲ’1                if k 6= j and l = i    ,       (16)
                                                пЈҙ
                                                пЈҙ
                                                пЈҙ 2
                                                пЈҙ                  if k = i and l = j
                                                пЈҙ
                                                пЈҙ
                                                пЈҙ
                                                пЈҙ
                                                пЈҙ вҲ’2               if k = j and l = i
                                                пЈі
                                                   0               otherwise
and applying the fact that О»kl (t) = 0 if (k, l) 6вҲҲ E(t), we can expand Eq. 15 as:
                         X
                                              +                     +
                    2=       О»il (t) eT                       T
                                       i Оӣ(t) (ei вҲ’ ej ) вҲ’ el Оӣ(t) (ei вҲ’ ej )
                              l6=j
                                 X
                                                       +                    +
                             +          О»kj (t) eT                    T
                                                 k Оӣ(t) (ei вҲ’ ej ) вҲ’ ej Оӣ(t) (ei вҲ’ ej )
                                 k6=i
                                 X
                                                       +                    +
                             вҲ’          О»jl (t) eT                    T
                                                 j Оӣ(t) (ei вҲ’ ej ) вҲ’ el Оӣ(t) (ei вҲ’ ej )           (17)
                                 l6=i
                                 X
                                                       +                    +
                             вҲ’          О»ki (t) eT                    T
                                                 k Оӣ(t) (ei вҲ’ ej ) вҲ’ ei Оӣ(t) (ei вҲ’ ej )
                                 k6=j

                             + 2О»ij (t)(ei вҲ’ ej )T Оӣ(t)+ (ei вҲ’ ej )
                             вҲ’ 2О»ji (t)(ej вҲ’ ei )T Оӣ(t)+ (ei вҲ’ ej ) .
Using Lemma D.4, the facts that О»ji (t) вүҘ 0 and Оӣ(t)+ is positive semi-definite, all the terms in Eq.
17 are positive, giving:
                             2О»ij (t)(ei вҲ’ ej )T Оӣ(t)+ (ei вҲ’ ej ) вүӨ 2                            (18)


Next, we set ОҪ = Вө2 such that:
                          1                                 L
                            kвҲҮF (x) вҲ’ вҲҮF (y)k2 вүӨ dF (x, y) вүӨ kx вҲ’ yk2 ,
                         2L                                 2
and
                             ОҪ                         1
                               kx вҲ’ yk2 вүӨ dF (x, y) вүӨ    kвҲҮF (x) вҲ’ вҲҮF (y)k2 ,
                             2                        2ОҪ
and we remind that:
                                         EОҫ dF (.,Оҫ) (x, y) = dEОҫ F (.,Оҫ) (x, y) .                (19)

D.2    P ROOF OF THE L EMMA 3.1

Proof of Lemma 3.1. First, we note that Оӣ(t) is symmetric and has a non-negative spectrum, as:
                                           X
                             xT Оӣ(t)x =           О»ij (t)kxi вҲ’ xj k2 .
                                                    (ij)вҲҲE(t)

From this, we also clearly see that ПҮ1 (t) = +вҲһ iff the graph is disconnected. Next, assuming that
the graph is connected, 0 is an eigenvalue of Оӣ(t) with multiplicity 1 and by definition of ПҮ1 (t), we
have TrОӣ(t) вүҘ ПҮnвҲ’1
                 1 (t)
                       . As we also have:
                 X
                          О»ij (t)(ei вҲ’ ej )T Оӣ+ (t)(ei вҲ’ ej ) = Tr(Оӣ+ (t)Оӣ(t)) = n вҲ’ 1 ,
                (i,j)вҲҲE(t)

we can write:                                          X
                               n вҲ’ 1 вүӨ 2ПҮ2 (t)                   О»ij (t) = ПҮ2 (t)TrОӣ(t)
                                                    (i,j)вҲҲE(t)


                                                           15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


         nвҲ’1
and get TrОӣ(t) вүӨ min(ПҮ1 (t), ПҮ2 (t)). Finally, for any (i, j) вҲҲ E(t), using Lemma D.5, we get that:

                                           О»ij (t)(ei вҲ’ ej )T Оӣ+ (t)(ei вҲ’ ej ) вүӨ 1 .
Thus,
                                        inf        О»ij (t) (ei вҲ’ ej )T Оӣ+ (t)(ei вҲ’ ej ) вүӨ 1 ,
                                     (i,j)вҲҲE(t)
leading to:
                                                                         1
                                                   2ПҮ2 (t) вүӨ
                                                               inf (i,j)вҲҲE(t) О»ij (t)
.

D.3     P ROOF OF T HEOREM 3.2 AND C OROLLARY 3.2.1

Proof of Theorem 3.2. Because ОҰ is smooth and E(t) is constant on intervals, we get via ItoвҖҷs for-
mula (Last & Penrose, 2017) applied to the semi-martingale (Xt , Yt ), gluing intervals where E(t) is
constant (as well as the weights О»ij (t)), that:
                                                                               !
                                         Z T                           1
       ОҰ(t, Xt , Yt ) = ОҰ(0, X0 , Y0 ) +      hвҲҮОҰ(t, Xt , Yt ), a1 (Xt , Yt ) idt
                                           0                     a2 (Xt , Yt )
                        Xn Z T

                      +           ОҰ(t, Xt + bi1 (Xt ), Yt ) вҲ’ ОҰ(t, Xt , Yt ) dt
                                i=1    0

                                  X           Z T

                           +                         ОҰ(t, Xt , Yt + bij
                                                                     2 (Yt )) вҲ’ ОҰ(t, Xt , Yt ) О»ij (t)dt + ОҳT ,
                                (i,j)вҲҲE(t)     0

where:
              n Z T
              X
      ОҳT ,                 ОҰ(t, XtвҲ’ , YtвҲ’ + bi1 (XtвҲ’ )) вҲ’ ОҰ(u, XtвҲ’ , YtвҲ’ ) (dNi (t) вҲ’ dt)
              i=1    0

                X          Z T

         +                         ОҰ(t, XtвҲ’ + bij
                                               2 (XtвҲ’ ), YtвҲ’ ) вҲ’ ОҰ(t, XtвҲ’ , YtвҲ’ ) (dMij (t) вҲ’ О»ij (t)dt) .
              (i,j)вҲҲE(t)    0

We will use the following technical Lemma, which is also difficult to prove and whose proof is
deferred to Appendix D.4:
Lemma D.6. There exists some parameters ОҪ, О·Мғ, О·, Оі, ОіМғ, Оұ, ОұМғ, Оё, Оҙ, ОҙМғ, ОІ, ОІМғ and c > 0 such that:
                                          !
                                 1
         hвҲҮОҰ(t, Xt , Yt ), a1 (Xt , Yt ) i + ОҰ(t, Xt + b1 (Xt ), Yt ) вҲ’ ОҰ(t, Xt , Yt )
                            a2 (Xt , Yt )
                 X
            +            О»ij (t) ОҰ(t, Xt , Yt + bij
                                                 2 (Yt )) вҲ’ ОҰ(t, Xt , Yt ) вүӨ 0 a.s. ,
                         (i,j)вҲҲE(t)
               pВө
with AвҖІt = c        L At , with A0 = 1.

Following the lemma above, we get that:
                          0 вүӨ E[ОҰ(t, Xt , Yt )] вүӨ E[ОҰ(0, X0 , Y0 )] .
                         вҲҡВө
We thus know that At = ec L , which implies that:
                                           E[At dF (xt , xвҲ— )] вүӨ E[ОҰ(0, X0 , Y0 )] ,
and we will obtain the conclusion of our theorem by expliciting all the constants in the following.
We note that the expected number of activated edges between [0, T ] is by use of the Poisson Process
RT
 0
    Tr(Оӣ(t) dt, and given the gradient fire at rate 1, the expected number of gradients computed is
nT .


                                                                  16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Proof of Corollary 3.2.1. We remind the SGD version of our Lemma:
Lemma D.7. There exists some parameters ОҪ, О·Мғ, О·, Оі, ОіМғ, Оұ, ОұМғ, Оё, Оҙ, ОҙМғ, ОІ, ОІМғ and c > 0, C > 0 such
that:
                                         !
                                1
        hвҲҮОҰ(t, Xt , Yt ), a1 (Xt , Yt ) i + ОҰ(t, Xt + b1 (Xt ), Yt ) вҲ’ ОҰ(t, Xt , Yt )
                           a2 (Xt , Yt )
                X                                                                    1
           +            О»ij (t) ОҰ(t, Xt , Yt + bij
                                                2 (Yt )) вҲ’ ОҰ(t, Xt , Yt ) вүӨ CAt        a.s. ,    (20)
                                                                                     L
                    (i,j)вҲҲE(t)
               pВө
with AвҖІt = c     L At , with A0 = 1.

The proof follows the same path, except that we have an extra term that writes for any T > 0:
                                        Z T
                                             At       1
                                                вүӨ вҲҡ                                           (21)
                                          0   L    c ВөL
which leads to the conclusion following an identical path. The constants will be explicited in the
next Lemma.

D.4   P ROOF OF THE L EMMA D.6 AND L EMMA D.7

We first state a couple of inequalities that we will combine to obtain a bound on our Lyapunov
function.
Proposition D.8. First:
        ПҶA , At (dF (x+ , xвҲ— ) вҲ’ dF (x, xвҲ— )) + AМғt (kxМғ+ вҲ’ xвҲ— k2 вҲ’ kxМғ вҲ’ xвҲ— k2 )
            + О·At hxМғ вҲ’ x, вҲҮF (x) вҲ’ вҲҮF (xвҲ— )i + 2О·Мғ AМғt hx вҲ’ xМғ, xМғ вҲ’ xвҲ— i                            (22)

                                  LОі 2
            вүӨ kвҲҮF (x) вҲ’ yМғk2 At        вҲ’ At Оі + AМғt ОіМғ 2
                                    2
            + At ОіhвҲҮF (x) вҲ’ yМғ, y вҲ— вҲ’ yМғi + 2ОіМғ AМғt hyМғ вҲ’ y вҲ— , xМғ вҲ’ xвҲ— i                             (23)
                                 вҲ—         вҲ—
            вҲ’ 2ОіМғ AМғt (dF (xМғ, x ) + dF (x , x) вҲ’ dF (xМғ, x))
            вҲ’ О·At (dF (xМғ, x) + dF (x, xвҲ— ) вҲ’ dF (xМғ, xвҲ— )) вҲ’ AМғt О·МғkxМғ вҲ’ xвҲ— k2 + AМғt О·Мғkx вҲ’ xвҲ— k2

Proof. First, we have to use optimality conditions and smoothness:
               dF (x+ , xвҲ— ) вҲ’ dF (x, xвҲ— ) = dF (x+ , x) вҲ’ hx+ вҲ’ x, вҲҮF (xвҲ— ) вҲ’ вҲҮF (x)i                (24)
                                             L
                                           вүӨ kx+ вҲ’ xk2 вҲ’ hx+ вҲ’ x, вҲҮF (xвҲ— ) вҲ’ вҲҮF (x)i                  (25)
                                              2
                                             LОі 2
                                           =      kyМғ вҲ’ вҲҮF (x)k2 вҲ’ ОіkвҲҮF (x) вҲ’ yМғk2
                                                2
                                           + ОіhвҲҮF (x) вҲ’ yМғ, y вҲ— вҲ’ yМғi                                 (26)
Next, we note that, again using optimality conditions:
          kxМғ+ вҲ’ xвҲ— k2 вҲ’ kxМғ+ вҲ’ xвҲ— k2 = 2hxМғ+ вҲ’ xМғ, xМғ вҲ’ xвҲ— i + kxМғ+ вҲ’ xМғk2                           (27)
                                                                            вҲ—    2                2
                                          = вҲ’2ОіМғhвҲҮF (x) вҲ’ yМғ, xМғ вҲ’ x i + ОіМғ kвҲҮF (x) вҲ’ yМғk             (28)
                                          = вҲ’2ОіМғhвҲҮF (x) вҲ’ вҲҮF (xвҲ— ), xМғ вҲ’ xвҲ— i
                                            + 2ОіМғhyМғ вҲ’ y вҲ— , xМғ вҲ’ xвҲ— i + ОіМғ 2 kвҲҮF (x) вҲ’ yМғk2          (29)
                                          = вҲ’2ОіМғ(dF (xМғ, xвҲ— ) + dF (xвҲ— , x) вҲ’ dF (xМғ, x))
                                               + 2ОіМғhyМғ вҲ’ y вҲ— , xМғ вҲ’ xвҲ— i + ОіМғ 2 kвҲҮF (x) вҲ’ yМғk2       (30)
Momentum in x associated with the term dF (x, xвҲ— ) gives:
               О·hxМғ вҲ’ x, вҲҮF (x) вҲ’ вҲҮF (xвҲ— )i = вҲ’О·(dF (xМғ, x) + dF (x, xвҲ— ) вҲ’ dF (xМғ, xвҲ— ))             (31)


                                                      17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


and momentum in xМғ associated with kxМғ вҲ’ xвҲ— k2 leads to:
 2О·Мғhx вҲ’ xМғ, xМғ вҲ’ xвҲ— i = вҲ’2О·МғkxМғ вҲ’ xвҲ— k2 + 2О·Мғhx вҲ’ xвҲ— , xМғ вҲ’ xвҲ— i вүӨ вҲ’О·МғkxМғ вҲ’ xвҲ— k2 + О·Мғkx вҲ’ xвҲ— k2 (32)


Corollary D.8.1. Under Assumption 3.4, we have:

             ПҶМғA , EОҫ [At (dF (x+ , xвҲ— ) вҲ’ dF (x, xвҲ— )) + AМғt (kxМғ+ вҲ’ xвҲ— k2 вҲ’ kxМғ вҲ’ xвҲ— k2 )
                    + О·At hxМғ вҲ’ x, вҲҮF (x) вҲ’ вҲҮF (xвҲ— )i + 2О·Мғ AМғt hx вҲ’ xМғ, xМғ вҲ’ xвҲ— i]                 (33)
                                      2
                                   LОі
                 вүӨ ПҶA + Пғ 2 (At       вҲ’ At Оі + AМғt ОіМғ)                                              (34)
                                    2

Proof. Using the same computations and the Eq. 36, we next note that:
               EОҫ [kвҲҮF (x, Оҫ) вҲ’ yk2 ] = EОҫ [kвҲҮF (x, Оҫ)k2 вҲ’ 2hвҲҮF (x, Оҫ), yi + kyk2 ]                 (35)
                                                            2       2
                                          вүӨ kвҲҮF (x) вҲ’ yk + Пғ                                        (36)


Proposition D.9. Next, we show that if ОұBt = 2Оҙ BМғt :

             ПҶB , Bt (ky + вҲ’ y вҲ— k2 вҲ’ ky вҲ’ y вҲ— k2 ) + BМғt (kyМғ + вҲ’ y вҲ— k2 вҲ’ kyМғ вҲ’ y вҲ— k2 )
                   + 2ОұBt hy вҲ’ y вҲ— , yМғ вҲ’ yi вҲ’ 2ОёBМғt hy + z + ОҪ xМғ, yМғ вҲ’ y вҲ— i
                   + 2ОұCt hyМғ вҲ’ y, z + y вҲ’ y вҲ— вҲ’ z вҲ— i                                              (37)
                     Оҙ                   Оҙ
                 вүӨ вҲ’ BМғt kyМғ вҲ’ y вҲ— k2 вҲ’ BМғt ky вҲ’ y вҲ— k2 вҲ’ 2ОҙМғ BМғt hвҲҮF (x) вҲ’ yМғ, y вҲ— вҲ’ yМғi
                     2                   2
                    + Оҙ BМғt kвҲҮF (x) вҲ’ вҲҮF (xвҲ— )k2 + (Оҙ + ОҙМғ)2 вҲ’ Оҙ BМғt kвҲҮF (x) вҲ’ yk2
                    вҲ’ 2ОёBМғt hy + z вҲ’ y вҲ— вҲ’ z вҲ— , yМғ вҲ’ y вҲ— i вҲ’ 2ОёОҪ BМғt hxМғ вҲ’ xвҲ— , yМғ вҲ’ y вҲ— i
                    + 2ОұCt hyМғ вҲ’ y, z + y вҲ’ y вҲ— вҲ’ z вҲ— i                                             (38)

Proof. Using optimality conditions:
         kyМғ + вҲ’ y вҲ— k2 вҲ’ kyМғ вҲ’ y вҲ— k2 = 2hyМғ вҲ’ y вҲ— , yМғ + вҲ’ yМғi + kyМғ + вҲ’ yМғk2                     (39)
                                       = 2ОҙhвҲҮF (x) вҲ’ yМғ, yМғ вҲ’ y вҲ— i + 2ОҙМғhвҲҮF (x) вҲ’ yМғ, yМғ вҲ’ y вҲ— i
                                          (Оҙ + ОҙМғ)2 kвҲҮF (x) вҲ’ yМғk2                                  (40)
                                                                вҲ—
                                       = вҲ’2ОҙМғhвҲҮF (x) вҲ’ yМғ, y вҲ’ yМғi
                                          + ОҙkвҲҮF (x) вҲ’ вҲҮF (xвҲ— )k2 вҲ’ ОҙkyМғ вҲ’ y вҲ— k2

                                            (Оҙ + ОҙМғ)2 вҲ’ Оҙ kвҲҮF (x) вҲ’ yМғk2                            (41)

The momentum in yМғ associated with the term kyМғ вҲ’ y вҲ— k2 gives:

                 вҲ’2ОёBМғt hy + z + ОҪ xМғ, yМғ вҲ’ y вҲ— i = вҲ’ 2ОёBМғt hy + z вҲ’ y вҲ— вҲ’ z вҲ— , yМғ вҲ’ y вҲ— i
                                                     вҲ’ 2ОёОҪ BМғt hxМғ вҲ’ xвҲ— , yМғ вҲ’ y вҲ— i                (42)

The momentum in y associated with the term ky вҲ’ y вҲ— k2 gives:
            2ОұBt hyМғ вҲ’ y, y вҲ’ y вҲ— i = вҲ’ОұBt ky вҲ’ y вҲ— k2 вҲ’ ОұBt kyМғ вҲ’ yk2 + ОұBt kyМғ вҲ’ y вҲ— k2           (43)

and the one associated with ky + z вҲ’ y вҲ— вҲ’ z вҲ— k2 :
                                     2ОұCt hyМғ вҲ’ y, z + y вҲ’ y вҲ— вҲ’ z вҲ— i                              (44)



                                                     18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Corollary D.9.1. Under Assumption 3.4, we have:

              ПҶМғB , EОҫ [BМғt (ky + вҲ’ y вҲ— k2 вҲ’ ky вҲ’ y вҲ— k2 ) + BМғt (kyМғ + вҲ’ y вҲ— k2 вҲ’ kyМғ вҲ’ y вҲ— k2 )
                       + 2ОұBt hy вҲ’ y вҲ— , yМғ вҲ’ yi вҲ’ 2ОёBМғt hy + z + ОҪ xМғ, yМғ вҲ’ y вҲ— i]                             (45)
                                   2   2             2
                    вүӨ ПҶB + Пғ ((Оҙ + (Оҙ + ОҙМғ) )BМғt )                                                              (46)



Proof. Exactly as above.



Proposition D.10. Finally, assuming ОёBМғt = ОІМғ CМғt = ОұCt , letting 1 вүҘ П„Мғ > 0,
 +                                         +
zij = ОІ(ei вҲ’ ej )(ei вҲ’ ej )T (y + z) and zМғij = ОІМғ(ei вҲ’ ej )(ei вҲ’ ej )T (y + z), then:

   ПҶC +ПҶD вҲ’ 2ОёBМғt hy + z вҲ’ y вҲ— вҲ’ z вҲ— , yМғ вҲ’ y вҲ— i ,
         X
                               +
            О»ij (t)Ct ky + zij   вҲ’ y вҲ— вҲ’ z вҲ— k2 вҲ’ ky + z вҲ’ y вҲ— вҲ’ z вҲ— k2
              ij
             X
                                 +
         +         О»ij (t)CМғt kzМғij вҲ’ z вҲ— k2 вҲ’ kzМғ вҲ’ z вҲ— k2 + 2ОұМғCМғt hz вҲ’ zМғ, zМғ вҲ’ z вҲ— iОӣ(t)+                   (47)
              ij

         + 2ОұCt hzМғ + yМғ вҲ’ z вҲ— вҲ’ y вҲ— , z + y вҲ’ y вҲ— вҲ’ z вҲ— i вҲ’ 2ОёBМғt hy + z вҲ’ y вҲ— вҲ’ z вҲ— , yМғ вҲ’ y вҲ— i
                                                         X
         вүӨ вҲ’2ОІМғ CМғt hzМғ вҲ’ z вҲ— , ПҖ(y + z)i + ОІМғ 2 ПҮвҲ—2 CМғt       О»ij (t)k(ei вҲ’ ej )(ei вҲ’ ej )T (y + z)k2
                                                             (i,j)вҲҲE(t)
           ОІ                                               X
         вҲ’ вҲ— Ct kПҖ(y + z)k2 + ОІ(ОІ вҲ’ 1)Ct                              О»ij (t)k(ei вҲ’ ej )(ei вҲ’ ej )T (y + z)k2
          ПҮ1
                                                         (i,j)вҲҲE(t)
                                  вҲ—     вҲ— 2
         вҲ’ ОұCt ky + z вҲ’ y вҲ’ z k               + ОұМғПҮвҲ—1 CМғt kz вҲ’ z вҲ— k2 вҲ’ ОұМғCМғt kzМғ вҲ’ z вҲ— k2Оӣ(t)+
             1 ОҪ                      ОҪ 2ОұОё
         вҲ’ П„Мғ ОІМғ CМғt kz вҲ’ z вҲ— k2 + П„Мғ       Bt ky вҲ’ y вҲ— k2                                                      (48)
             2 L                      L Оҙ



Proof. Having in mind that ПҖ(y вҲ— + z вҲ— ) = 0 and Оӣ(t)+ Оӣ(t) = ПҖ, we get, using Lemma D.1 and
Lemma D.3 on the inequality 52:
                   X
                                     +
    вҲҶzМғ ,                 О»ij (t) kzМғij вҲ’ z вҲ— k2Оӣ(t)+ вҲ’ kzМғ вҲ’ z вҲ— k2Оӣ(t)+                                       (49)
             (i,j)вҲҲE(t)
                   X
                                                +                  +
        =                 О»ij (t)2hzМғ вҲ’ z вҲ— , zМғij вҲ’ zМғiОӣ(t)+ + kzМғij вҲ’ zМғk2Оӣ(t)+                               (50)
             (i,j)вҲҲE(t)
                       X
        = вҲ’2ОІМғ                   О»ij (t)hzМғ вҲ’ z вҲ— , (ei вҲ’ ej )(ei вҲ’ ej )T (y + z вҲ’ y вҲ— вҲ’ z вҲ— )iОӣ(t)+
                    (i,j)вҲҲE(t)
                   X
             +                О»ij (t)ОІМғ 2 k(ei вҲ’ ej )(ei вҲ’ ej )T (y + z)k2Оӣ(t)+                                 (51)
                 (i,j)вҲҲE(t)

        вүӨ вҲ’2ОІМғhzМғ вҲ’ z вҲ— , Оӣ(t)+ Оӣ(t)(y + z)i
                     X
          + ПҮвҲ—2 ОІМғ 2         О»ij (t)k(ei вҲ’ ej )(ei вҲ’ ej )T (y + z)k2                                            (52)
                       (i,j)вҲҲE(t)
                                                         X
        = вҲ’2ОІМғhzМғ вҲ’ z вҲ— , ПҖ(y + z)i + ПҮвҲ—2 ОІМғ 2                     О»ij (t)k(ei вҲ’ ej )(ei вҲ’ ej )T (y + z)k2      (53)
                                                      (i,j)вҲҲE(t)



                                                            19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


We also have, as y + = y and using Lemma D.2:
              X
                                     +
     вҲҶz ,            О»ij (t)(ky + + zij вҲ’ y вҲ— вҲ’ z вҲ— k2 вҲ’ ky + z вҲ’ y вҲ— вҲ’ z вҲ— k2 )                       (54)
              (i,j)вҲҲE(t)
                    X
                                         +
          =2                О»ij (t)hy + zij вҲ’ y вҲ’ z, y + z вҲ’ y вҲ— вҲ’ z вҲ— i
               (i,j)вҲҲE(t)
                    X
                                            +
              +                О»ij (t)ky + zij вҲ’ y вҲ’ zk2                                               (55)
                  (i,j)вҲҲE(t)
                      X
          = вҲ’2                  ОІО»ij (t)h(ei вҲ’ ej )(ei вҲ’ ej )T (y + z), y + z вҲ’ y вҲ— вҲ’ z вҲ— i
                   (i,j)вҲҲE(t)
                    X
              +                ОІ 2 О»ij (t)k(ei вҲ’ ej )(ei вҲ’ ej )T (y + z)k2                             (56)
                  (i,j)вҲҲE(t)
                  X
          =                О»ij (t) вҲ’ ОІk(ei вҲ’ ej )(ei вҲ’ ej )T (y + z)k2 вҲ’ ОІkПҖ(y + z)k2
              (i,j)вҲҲE(t)

            + ОІk(ei вҲ’ ej )(ei вҲ’ ej )T (y + z) вҲ’ ПҖ(y + z)k2

            + ОІ 2 k(ei вҲ’ ej )(ei вҲ’ ej )T (y + z)k2                                                     (57)
              ОІ                                X
          вүӨ вҲ’ вҲ— kПҖ(y + z)k2 + ОІ(ОІ вҲ’ 1)               О»ij (t)k(ei вҲ’ ej )(ei вҲ’ ej )T (y + z)k2           (58)
              ПҮ1
                                                    (i,j)вҲҲE(t)



The momentum in zМғ associated with kzМғ вҲ’ z вҲ— k2Оӣ(t)+ gives:

                  2ОұМғCМғt hz вҲ’ zМғ, zМғ вҲ’ z вҲ— iОӣ(t)+ вүӨ ОұМғПҮвҲ—1 CМғt kz вҲ’ z вҲ— k2 вҲ’ ОұМғCМғt kzМғ вҲ’ z вҲ— k2Оӣ(t)+    (59)

And the one in z associated with ky + z вҲ’ y вҲ— вҲ’ z вҲ— k2 gives:

                                          2ОұCt hzМғ вҲ’ z, z + y вҲ’ y вҲ— вҲ’ z вҲ— i                            (60)

Then, assuming that ОёBМғt = ОІМғ CМғt = ОұCt , we have:

                   2ОұCt hyМғ вҲ’ y, z + y вҲ’ y вҲ— вҲ’ z вҲ— i вҲ’ 2ОІМғ CМғt hzМғ вҲ’ z вҲ— , y + z вҲ’ y вҲ— вҲ’ z вҲ— i
                   вҲ’ 2ОёBМғt hy + z вҲ’ y вҲ— вҲ’ z вҲ— , yМғ вҲ’ y вҲ— i + 2ОұCt hzМғ вҲ’ z, z + y вҲ’ y вҲ— вҲ’ z вҲ— i         (61)
                                             вҲ—      вҲ— 2
                   = вҲ’2ОұCt ky + z вҲ’ y вҲ’ z k                                                            (62)

At this stage, we split the negative term 62 in two halves, upper-bounding one of the halves by
remembering that LОҪ вүӨ 1 and introducing 1 вүҘ П„Мғ > 0:
                                                    ОҪ
          вҲ’ОұCt ky + z вҲ’ y вҲ— вҲ’ z вҲ— k2 вүӨ вҲ’ П„Мғ            ОұCt ky + z вҲ’ y вҲ— вҲ’ z вҲ— k2                       (63)
                                                    L
                                                         ОҪ
                                                 = вҲ’П„Мғ ОІМғ CМғt ky + z вҲ’ y вҲ— вҲ’ z вҲ— k2                    (64)
                                                         L
                                                       1 ОҪ                        ОҪ
                                                 вүӨ вҲ’П„Мғ ОІМғ CМғt kz вҲ’ z вҲ— k2 + П„Мғ ОІМғ CМғt ky вҲ’ y вҲ— k2      (65)
                                                       2 L                       L
                                                       1 ОҪ                      ОҪ 2ОұОё
                                                 = вҲ’П„Мғ ОІМғ CМғt kz вҲ’ z вҲ— k2 + П„Мғ        Bt ky вҲ’ y вҲ— k2   (66)
                                                       2 L                     L Оҙ


Keeping in mind that ОёBМғt = ОІМғ CМғt = ОұCt and 2Оҙ BМғt = ОұBt , we put everything together. Defining
ОЁ = ПҶA + ПҶB + ПҶC + ПҶD , we have:


                                                          20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                 2  LОі 2
          ОЁ вүӨ kвҲҮF (x) вҲ’ yМғk At           вҲ’ At Оі + AМғt ОіМғ 2 + (Оҙ + ОҙМғ)2 вҲ’ Оҙ BМғt                (67)
                                      2

            + kzМғ вҲ’ z вҲ— k2Оӣ(t)+ вҲ’ОұМғCМғt + CМғtвҖІ                                                 (68)
                                    Оҙ
              + kyМғ вҲ’ y вҲ— k2 (BМғtвҖІ вҲ’ BМғt )                                                    (69)
                                    2
                        вҲ— 2               ОҪ ОіМғ
              + kx вҲ’ x k (AМғt О·Мғ вҲ’ AМғt )                                                      (70)
                                            2
              + kxМғ вҲ’ xвҲ— k2 (AМғвҖІt вҲ’ AМғt О·Мғ)                                                   (71)
                                                ОіМғ
              + kвҲҮF (x) вҲ’ вҲҮF (xвҲ— )k2 (Оҙ BМғt вҲ’      AМғt )                                      (72)
                                               2L
                                               ОІ
              + kПҖ(y + z) вҲ’ ПҖ(y вҲ— + z вҲ— )k2 (вҲ’ вҲ— Ct )                                         (73)
                                              ПҮ1
                  X
              +         О»ij (t)k(ei вҲ’ ej )(ei вҲ’ ej )T (y + z)k2 ПҮвҲ—2 ОІМғ 2 CМғt + ОІ(ОІ вҲ’ 1)Ct     (74)
                  (i,j)вҲҲE(t)
                                        1 ОҪ
              + kz вҲ’ z вҲ— k2 (ПҮвҲ—1 ОұМғ вҲ’ П„Мғ ОІМғ )CМғt                                              (75)
                                        2 L
                                           ОҪ 2Оё
              + ky вҲ’ y вҲ— k(BtвҖІ вҲ’ (1 вҲ’ П„Мғ        )ОұBt )                                        (76)
                                           L Оҙ
              + ky + z вҲ’ y вҲ— вҲ’ z вҲ— k2 (CtвҖІ вҲ’ ОұCt )                                            (77)
              + dF (x, xвҲ— )(AвҖІt вҲ’ О·At )                                                       (78)
              + dF (xМғ, x)(вҲ’At О· + 2ОіМғ AМғt )                                                  (79)
                           вҲ—
              + dF (xМғ, x )(At О· вҲ’ 2ОіМғ AМғt )                                                  (80)
                                 вҲ—
              + hвҲҮF (x) вҲ’ yМғ, y вҲ’ yМғi(вҲ’2ОҙМғ BМғt + ОіAt )                                        (81)

              + hyМғ вҲ’ y вҲ— , xМғ вҲ’ xвҲ— i 2ОіМғ AМғt вҲ’ 2ОёОҪ BМғt                                       (82)


Resolution GD


Proof of Lemma D.6. Our goal is to put to zero all of the terms appearing next to scalar products
and make the factors of positive quantities (norms or divergences) less or equal to zero. Given our
relations, we guess that each exponential has the same rate. Thus, with П„ > 0, we fix 2Оҙ = О·Мғ = О· =
       p
ОұМғ = П„ LОҪ , which leads to ОіМғ = вҲҡ2П„
                                  ОҪL
                                     using Eq. 70. Also, from Eq. 80:


                                                  4AМғt = ОҪAt .

Next, from Eq. 72 and Eq. 82, itвҖҷs necessary that:

                                                  2LОҙ = ОёОҪ ,

              q
                  L
thus Оё = 4П„       ОҪ . From Eq. 82, we get:



                                                 AМғt = 2LОҪ BМғt .


                                                       21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Combining this previous equation with Eq. 81, as 4AМғt = ОҪAt , we have ОҙМғ = 4LОі. Next, Eq. 67
gives, with the equations above:

              LОі 2                                          LОі 2          ОҪ
       At (        вҲ’ Оі) + AМғt ОіМғ 2 + (Оҙ + ОҙМғ)2 вҲ’ Оҙ BМғt = At       вҲ’ At Оі + ОіМғ 2 At
               2                                              2            4
                                                                          A
                                                              2    2         t
                                                         + Оҙ + ОҙМғ + Оҙ
                                                              2           8L
                                                               LОі         ОҪ 4П„ 2
                                                       = At         вҲ’Оі+
                                                                2         4 ОҪL
                                                                  r
                                                                     ОҪ         ОҪ            1
                                                         + At (2П„      + 4П„ 2 + 16L2 Оі 2 )
                                                                     L        L            8L
                                                                               2
                                                                                   вҲҡ
                                                                5         5 П„        2 П„
                                                       вүӨ At (Оі 2 L вҲ’ Оі +         +       )
                                                                2         4L        8 L
                  1
We thus pick Оі = 4L and П„ = 81 , so that ОҙМғ = 1. Via Eq. 76, we fix П„Мғ = 18 < 1. With Eq. 75, we
then get:
                                                   r
                                                 вҲ—   L
                                          ОІМғ = 2ПҮ1
                                                     ОҪ
                       pОҪ
We also put Оұ = 2П„        L and only one last equation, Eq. 74, needs to be satisfied, for which we pick
ОІ = 21 :
                                                                       1
                                 ПҮвҲ—2 ОІМғ 2 CМғt + ОІ(ОІ вҲ’ 1)Ct = (ПҮвҲ—2 ОІМғОұ вҲ’ )Ct
                                                                       4
This implies that ПҮвҲ—2 ПҮвҲ—1 вүӨ 12 . Finally, itвҖҷs clear that all the equations are satisfied if we consider
                                                                 вҲҡОҪ
At , AМғt , Bt , BМғt , Ct , CМғt as exponentials proportional to eП„ L . LetвҖҷs pick A0 = 1.
Now, we remark that:

ОҰ(0, X0 , Y0 ) = A0 dF (x0 , xвҲ— )+AМғ0 kxМғ0 вҲ’xвҲ— k2 +B0 ky0 вҲ’y вҲ— k2 +BМғ0 kyМғ0 вҲ’y вҲ— k2 +C0 kz0 +y0 вҲ’z вҲ— вҲ’y вҲ— k2 +CМғ0 kzМғ0 вҲ’z вҲ— kОӣ(t)+

If xМғ0 = x0 , y0 = yМғ0 = вҲҮf (x0 ) and z0 = zМғ0 = вҲ’ПҖвҲҮf (x0 ), then, given the linear relation between
At , AМғt , Bt , BМғt , Ct , CМғt , the L smoothness and the fact ПҖ is an orthogonal projection, we get:
                                       ОҪ              1                1              1
   ОҰ(0, X0 , Y0 ) вүӨ dF (x0 , xвҲ— ) +      kx0 вҲ’ xвҲ— k2 + dF (x0 , xвҲ— ) + dF (x0 , xвҲ— ) + dF (x0 , xвҲ— )
                                       4              8               16              4
                                                                                                  (83)
                        1 ПҮ1 (0) ОҪ
                   +               dF (x0 , xвҲ— ) .                                                     (84)
                       32 ПҮвҲ—1 L


Now, we use that ОҪ = Вө2 вүӨ L and as ПҮ1 (0) вүӨ ПҮвҲ—1 , we get:
                                                                   Вө
                               ОҰ(0, X0 , Y0 ) вүӨ 2dF (x0 , xвҲ— ) +     kx0 вҲ’ xвҲ— k2 .
                                                                   8


Given that dF (x, xвҲ— ) = f (x) вҲ’ f (xвҲ— ), this implies in particular that:
                                                                 Вө              tвҲҡОҪ
                       E[f (xt )] вҲ’ f (xвҲ— ) вүӨ 2dF (x0 , xвҲ— ) +     kx0 вҲ’ xвҲ— k2 eвҲ’ 8 L
                                                                 8


Resolution SGD


                                                      22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Proof of Lemma D.7. All the previous computations hold, except that the term in front of Пғ 2 is given
by:
                                           LОі 2                                       At
             (Оҙ 2 + (Оҙ + ОҙМғ)2 )BМғt + (At        вҲ’ At Оі + AМғt ОіМғ) = (Оҙ 2 + (Оҙ + ОҙМғ)2 )
                                            2                                         8L
                                                                        LОі 2             At
                                                                 + (At       вҲ’ At Оі + ОҪ ОіМғ)            (85)
                                                                         2               4
                                                                    5
                                                                вүӨ      At                              (86)
                                                                   8L

Thus, we obtain, by integration of the potential that:
                                                                         Z t
                                                                              5
                           ОҰ(t, Xt , Yt ) вүӨ ОҰ(0, X0 , Y0 ) + Пғ 2                Au du                  (87)
                                                                           0 8L
Now with At , AМғt , Bt , BМғt , Ct , CМғt as above and all the constants as above, we get the result, since:
Rt 5
     A du вүӨ вҲҡ5LВө .
 0 8L u


E    P HYSICAL INTERPRETATION

To gain more insight on the condition 2ПҮвҲ—1 [Оӣ]ПҮвҲ—2 [Оӣ] вүӨ 1, we can write Оӣ(t) as the product of two
more interpretable quantities:

                                                  X                    2Оӣ(t)
                                    Оӣ(t) =                  О»ij (t)           .                        (88)
                                                                      Tr Оӣ(t)
                                              (ij)вҲҲE(t)               | {z }
                                              |        {z        }     ,ОӣМғ(t)
                                                      ,О»(t)

In this setting, О»(t) is the instantaneous expected rate of communication over the whole graph at
time t, while ОӣМғ(t) can be interpreted as the Laplacian of E(t) with each edge weighted with its
probability of having spiked at this instant given an edge fired at time t.
Being normalized, ОӣМғ(t) only contains the information about the graphвҖҷs connectivity at time t while
О»(t) is the global rate of communication. We have:

                                         ПҮ1 [ОӣМғ(t)]                             ПҮ2 [ОӣМғ(t)]
                           ПҮ1 [Оӣ(t)] =                  ;     ПҮ2 [Оӣ(t)] =                  .           (89)
                                           О»(t)                                   О»(t)
If we make the following assumptions,
Assumption E.1. There is a О»вҲ— > 0 such that, at all time t, О»(t) вүҘ О»вҲ— .
Assumption E.2. There are ПҮМғвҲ—1 > 0, ПҮМғвҲ—2 > 0 such that, for all t, ПҮ1 [ОӣМғ(t)] вүӨ ПҮМғвҲ—1 and ПҮ2 [ОӣМғ(t)] вүӨ ПҮМғвҲ—2 .

meaning we assume bounds on the worst rate of communication and on the worst graph connectivity,
                                   ПҮМғвҲ—                     ПҮМғвҲ—             ПҮМғвҲ—           ПҮМғвҲ—
we immediately have ПҮ1 [Оӣ(t)] вүӨ О»вҲ—1 and ПҮ2 [Оӣ(t)] вүӨ О»вҲ—2 , leading to ПҮвҲ—1 вүӨ О»вҲ—1 and ПҮвҲ—2 вүӨ О»вҲ—2 . Then,
if the following condition on the worst rate of communication is met
                                           p
                                              2ПҮМғвҲ—1 ПҮМғвҲ—2 вүӨ О»вҲ— ,                                 (90)
meaning that the instantaneous global communication rate is always larger than some spectral quan-
tity quantifying the graphвҖҷs connectivity, it directly implies 2ПҮвҲ—1 [Оӣ]ПҮвҲ—2 [Оӣ] вүӨ 1 and the convergence
of our method.

F    C OMPARISON WITH OTHER WORKS

We now explain the results of Sec. 4.1.


                                                        23
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


F.1   C OMPARISON WITH ADOM+

Using the notations of Kovalev et al. (2021a), we know that gossip matrices satisfy, for q вҲҲ N:
                                                                1
                                   kW (q)x вҲ’ xk2 вүӨ (1 вҲ’           )kxk2 ,
                                                                ПҮ
for some ПҮ вүҘ 1. It implies that:
                                                         r
                                                                    1
                                   sp(W (q)) вҠӮ [1 вҲ’            1вҲ’     , 2] ,
                                                                    ПҮ
                              q
and for ПҮ large enough, 1 вҲ’    1 вҲ’ ПҮ1 вүҲ 2ПҮ
                                         1
                                           . Consequently, up to a renormalization factor, we have
ПҮвҲ—1 [W ] вүҲ 2ПҮ and:
                                          Tr(W (q)) вүӨ 2n .

F.2   ACCELERATION OF THE CONTINUIZED FRAMEWORK
                                                                                              вҖІ
Under the notation of Even et al. (2021a), we noteвҲҡthat, an additional simplification holds: ОёARG =
                              T
ОёARG . We remind that L = AA and that Aevw = Pvw (ev вҲ’ ew ). Next, we note that by definition:

                                Rvw   eT A+ Aevw
                                    , vw                                                          (91)
                                Pvw       Pvw
                                           +
                                      eT  A  (ev вҲ’ ew )
                                    = vw вҲҡ                                                        (92)
                                             Pvw
                                      (A+T evw )T (ev вҲ’ ew )
                                    =         вҲҡ                                                   (93)
                                                Pvw
                                      ((AAT )+T Aevw )T (ev вҲ’ ew )
                                    =            вҲҡ                                                (94)
                                                   Pvw
                                                T +
                                    = (ev вҲ’ ew ) L (ev вҲ’ ew ) ,                                   (95)

so we can directly relate their bounds to ours. Next, as LL+ = I вҲ’ ПҖ, we observe that:
                              n вҲ’ 1 = Tr(LL+ )                                                    (96)
                                       X
                                    =      Pij (ei вҲ’ ej )T L+ (ei вҲ’ ej )                          (97)
                                       (ij)вҲҲE
                                                 X
                                    вүӨ 2ПҮ2 [L]            Pij                                      (98)
                                                (ij)вҲҲE

                                    = ПҮ2 [L]TrL ,                                                 (99)

which, together with the fact that ПҮ1 [L] вүҘ nвҲ’1
                                            TrL (see Lemma 3.1), leads to:
                                                q
                                       n вҲ’ 1 вүӨ 2 ПҮвҲ—1 [L]ПҮвҲ—2 [L]

in the setting of Even et al. (2021a) where Tr L = 2.

F.3   C OMPARISON WITH METHODS THAT USE THE SPECTRAL GAP
               вҲҡ              вҲҡ p                                      sup(i,j)вҲҲE(t) О»ij (t)
We note that: ПҒвҲ— |E(t)| = ПҮ1 kОӣ(t)k|E(t)|. Further, we assume inf (i,j)вҲҲE(t)        О»ij (t) = O(1) as n
grows. This condition can be understood as a way to prevent degenerated behaviors in the networkвҖҷs
connectivity: the worst case communication rate should always be greater than some fraction of the
largest rate, with a fraction value not growing with the networkвҖҷs size. This condition is always met
if we assume there are both a lower and upper bound on the communication rate of the channels
linking the nodes, which seems reasonable in a physical setting. Then, using Lemma 3.1, recalling


                                                   24
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023



                    P
that Tr(Оӣ(t)) = 2       (ij)вҲҲE(t) О»ij (t) вүӨ 2|E(t)| sup(i,j)вҲҲE(t) О»ij (t) and Tr(Оӣ(t)) вүӨ (n вҲ’ 1)kОӣ(t)k,
we obtain:
             вҲҡ                             1            p            p
                 ПҮ2 Tr(Оӣ(t)) вүӨ p                            TrОӣ(t)  TrОӣ(t)                        (100)
                               2 inf (i,j)вҲҲE(t) О»ij (t)
             вҲҡ                            1             r                     p
               ПҮ2 Tr(Оӣ(t)) вүӨ p                            2|E(t)| sup О»ij (t) TrОӣ(t)              (101)
                               2 inf (i,j)вҲҲE(t) О»ij (t)          (i,j)вҲҲE(t)
                             s
                               sup(i,j)вҲҲE(t) О»ij (t) p         p
                           вүӨ                             |E(t)| (n вҲ’ 1)kОӣ(t)k                     (102)
                               inf (i,j)вҲҲE(t) О»ij (t)
                             s
                               sup(i,j)вҲҲE(t) О»ij (t)        p
                           вүӨ                          |E(t)| kОӣ(t)k                               (103)
                               inf (i,j)вҲҲE(t) О»ij (t)

G     F URTHER EXPERIMENTS

In this section, we present additional numerical results comparing our method DADAO to ADOM+
(Kovalev et al., 2021a) in the time-varying setting and report our results using SGD.

G.1    T IME -VARYING SETTING

In this section, we study the effect of the parameter ПҮвҲ—1 on the convergence speed of ADOM+
(Kovalev et al., 2021a) and DADAO by varying it between ПҮвҲ—1 вҲҲ {3, 33, 180, 233} for random geo-
metric graphs of size n = 20 on the decentralized linear regression task with time-varying topology.
To visualize the difference in connectivity these changes in ПҮвҲ—1 represent, we plot four graphs of the
said types with varying values of ПҮвҲ—1 in Fig. 3. In Fig. 4, we show the different convergence speeds
it entails.


Figure 3: Examples of random geometric graphs of size n = 20 with ПҮвҲ—1 taking values in, from left
to right, ПҮвҲ—1 вҲҲ {3, 33, 180, 233}.

As expected, we observe in Fig. 4 that varying ПҮвҲ—1 does not affect the number of gradient computa-
tions of both ADOM+ M.-C and DADAO, but the smaller the ПҮвҲ—1 , the better the slope for ADOM+
in terms of gradient steps. We also confirm for all three methods that the smaller ПҮвҲ—1 , the less com-
munication is needed to reach an З«-precision.

G.2    S TOCHASTIC G RADIENT D ESCENT WITH DADAO

In the SGD setting, we randomly sample a mini-batch of size B data points on each worker and
compute the losses and stochastic gradients вҲҮfi (xi , Оҫ) w.r.t. these samples. To study the effect of
the quadratic error Пғ 2 of our gradients on the resulting biases of our parameters, we fix both the data
(for linear regression) and the communication network (graph star of size n = 20) and try different
values of B. To monitor our results, we plot the mean distance to xвҲ— of the running average over
time of our local parameters. Then, taking the notations introduced in Sec. 4.2, we can write:
                                                                 2
                                          n      ik
                                      1X 1 X        (i)
                                                   x вҲ’ xвҲ—            ,
                                      n i=1 ki j=1 j

where ki designates a local event counter. We report our results in Fig. 5.


                                                   25
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                   $YHUDJH GLVWDQFH WR RSWLPDO YDOXH                                                                         $YHUDJH GLVWDQFH WR RSWLPDO YDOXH                                                                  $YHUDJH GLVWDQFH WR RSWLPDO YDOXH                                                                 $YHUDJH GLVWDQFH WR RSWLPDO YDOXH


          вҖ– 2


                                                                                                                                                     вҖ– 2


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         вҖ– 2


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            вҖ– 2


          вҖ–


                                                                                                                                                     вҖ–


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         вҖ–


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            вҖ–
           x


                                                                                                                                                      x


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          x


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             x
                                Гӯ                                                                                                                                        Гӯ                                                                                                                                 Гӯ                                                                                                                                Гӯ


    вҲ‘вҖ– вҲ’


                                                                                                                                                 вҲ‘вҖ– вҲ’


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     вҲ‘вҖ– вҲ’


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        вҲ‘вҖ– вҲ’


           xi


                                                                                                                                                      xi


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          xi


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             xi
                                Гӯ                                                                                                                                        Гӯ                                                                                                                                 Гӯ                                                                                                                                Гӯ


                =1


                                                                                                                                                           =1


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               =1


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  =1


      n


                                                                                                                                                 n


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     n


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        n
                    i


                                                                                                                                                               i


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   i


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      i
          1
                n


                                                                                                                                                     1
                                                                                                                                                           n


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               n


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  n
                                Гӯ                                                                                                                                        Гӯ                                                                                                                                 Гӯ                                                                                                                                Гӯ



                               Гӯ                                                                                                                                       Гӯ                                                                                                                                Гӯ                                                                                                                               Гӯ



                                                           7RWDO QXPEHU RI JUDGLHQWV                                                                                         7RWDO QXPEHU RI JUDGLHQWV                                                                                  7RWDO QXPEHU RI JUDGLHQWV                                                                                 7RWDO QXPEHU RI JUDGLHQWV


                                                   $YHUDJH GLVWDQFH WR RSWLPDO YDOXH                                                                         $YHUDJH GLVWDQFH WR RSWLPDO YDOXH                                                                  $YHUDJH GLVWDQFH WR RSWLPDO YDOXH                                                                 $YHUDJH GLVWDQFH WR RSWLPDO YDOXH


          вҖ– 2


                                                                                                                                                     вҖ– 2


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         вҖ– 2


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            вҖ– 2

          вҖ–


                                                                                                                                                     вҖ–


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         вҖ–


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            вҖ–
           x


                                                                                                                                                      x


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          x


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             x
                                Гӯ                                                                       $'20  0  &                                            Гӯ                                                                                                                                 Гӯ                                                                                                                                Гӯ
    вҲ‘вҖ– вҲ’


                                                                                                                                                 вҲ‘вҖ– вҲ’


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     вҲ‘вҖ– вҲ’


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        вҲ‘вҖ– вҲ’

                                                                                                          $'20
           xi


                                                                                                                                                      xi


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          xi


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             xi
                                Гӯ                                                                       2XUV                                                         Гӯ                                                                                                                                 Гӯ                                                                                                                                Гӯ
                =1


                                                                                                                                                           =1


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               =1


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  =1

      n


                                                                                                                                                 n


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     n


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        n
                    i


                                                                                                                                                               i


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   i


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      i
          1
                n


                                                                                                                                                     1
                                                                                                                                                           n


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               n


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  n
                                Гӯ                                                                                                                                        Гӯ                                                                                                                                 Гӯ                                                                                                                                Гӯ



                               Гӯ                                                                                                                                       Гӯ                                                                                                                                Гӯ                                                                                                                               Гӯ



                                                    7RWDO QXPEHU RI FRPPXQLFDWLRQV                    H                                                       7RWDO QXPEHU RI FRPPXQLFDWLRQV             H                                                       7RWDO QXPEHU RI FRPPXQLFDWLRQV             H                                                      7RWDO QXPEHU RI FRPPXQLFDWLRQV             H


                                                   $YHUDJH GLVWDQFH WR RSWLPDO YDOXH                                                                         $YHUDJH GLVWDQFH WR RSWLPDO YDOXH                                                                  $YHUDJH GLVWDQFH WR RSWLPDO YDOXH                                                                 $YHUDJH GLVWDQFH WR RSWLPDO YDOXH


          вҖ– 2


                                                                                                                                                     вҖ– 2


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         вҖ– 2


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            вҖ– 2

          вҖ–


                                                                                                                                                     вҖ–


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         вҖ–


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            вҖ–
           x


                                                                                                                                                      x


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          x


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             x
                                Гӯ                                                                                                                                        Гӯ                                                                                                                                 Гӯ                                                                                                                                Гӯ
    вҲ‘вҖ– вҲ’


                                                                                                                                                 вҲ‘вҖ– вҲ’


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     вҲ‘вҖ– вҲ’


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        вҲ‘вҖ– вҲ’

           xi


                                                                                                                                                      xi


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          xi


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             xi
                                Гӯ                                                                                                                                        Гӯ                                                                                                                                 Гӯ                                                                                                                                Гӯ
                =1


                                                                                                                                                           =1


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               =1


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  =1

      n


                                                                                                                                                 n


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     n


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        n
                    i


                                                                                                                                                               i


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   i


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      i
          1
                n


                                                                                                                                                     1
                                                                                                                                                           n


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               n


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  n
                                Гӯ                                                                                                                                        Гӯ                                                                                                                                 Гӯ                                                                                                                                Гӯ



                               Гӯ                                                                                                                                       Гӯ                                                                                                                                Гӯ                                                                                                                               Гӯ



                                                    7RWDO QXPEHU RI FRPPXQLFDWLRQV                                                                               7RWDO QXPEHU RI FRPPXQLFDWLRQV                                                                        7RWDO QXPEHU RI FRPPXQLFDWLRQV                                                                       7RWDO QXPEHU RI FRPPXQLFDWLRQV


Figure 4: Comparison between ADOM+ (Kovalev et al., 2021a) and DADAO, using the same data
for linear regression on n = 20 workers and the same sequence of random connected graphs with
varying topology and ПҮвҲ—1 taking values in, from the left to the right column, ПҮвҲ—1 вҲҲ {3, 33, 180, 233}.


                                                                                                                                                                                                     $YHUDJH GLVWDQFH WR RSWLPDO YDOXH


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  %


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  %
                                                                                         x*


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  %
                                                                                                 'LVWDQFH WR


                                                                                                                                      Гӯ


                                                                                                                                                                                              7RWDO QXPEHU RI VWRFKDVWLF JUDGLHQWV


Figure 5: Effect of the batch size B on the convergence of our method DADAO. Recall that the full
batch size m equals 100.


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Pk i                 (i)
We confirm that the less variance on our stochastic gradients, the less our estimates k1i                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    j=1 xj
are biased.



G.3                      C OMPARISON BETWEEN DADAO AND MSDA ON THE STAR GRAPH

For star graphs of size n вҲҲ {10, 20, 70, 200, 300, 1000, 2000}, we ran DADAO and MSDA on the
task of distributed linear regression. We considered the evolution of the average distance to the
optimal with the number of gradient steps and commmunication steps in log scale for each run, and
computed the slope of each line. For each graph size, we report in Fig. 6 the rate between the slope
for MSDA and the slope for DADAO. We remark that the rate between the gradient complexities


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                26
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                      Rate between the lope of MSDA and DADAO in log cale for tar graph of ize n.

                                Computation rate                                Communication rate
                 20                                                    5
                                                        mea ure                                          mea ure
                                                        14             4                                 14n вҲ’1/2
                 15
                                                                       3
                 10
                                                                       2
                  5
                                                                       1

                  0                                                    0
                      0       500     1000      1500        2000           0   500     1000      1500         2000
                             size n of the tar graph.                          ize n of the tar graph.



Figure 6: Rate between the slopes of MSDA and DADAO for star graphs of size n вҲҲ
{10, 20, 70, 200, 300, 1000, 2000}.


of DADAO
   вҲҡ     and MSDA is indeed a O(1) (with a constant value of вүғ 14) while MSDA is indeed
O( n) worse than DADAO for communications on the star graph, as stated in Tab. 2.


H     P RACTICAL I MPLEMENTATION

In this section, we describe in more detail the implementation of our algorithm. As we did not
physically execute our method on a compute network but carried it out on a single machine, all the
asynchronous computations and communications had to be simulated. Thus, we will first discuss the
method we followed to simulate our asynchronous framework before detailing the practical steps of
our algorithm through a pseudo-code.

H.1   S IMULATING THE P OISSON P OINT P ROCESSES

To emulate the asynchronous setting, before running our algorithm, we generate 2 independent
sequences of jump times at the graphвҖҷs scale: one for the computations and one for the communi-
cations. As we considered independent P.P.Ps, the time increments follow a Poisson distribution.
At the graphвҖҷs scale, each node spiking at a rate of 1, the Poisson parameter for the gradient steps
process is n. Following the experimental setting of the Continuized framework (Even et al., 2021a),
we considered that all edges in E(t) had the same probability of spiking between t and t + dt.
Thus, given the sequence of graphs E(t) and L(t) their corresponding Laplacians, we computed the
parameter О»вҲ— of the communication process as such:
                                  s
                             вҲ—                  L(t)              L(t)
                            О» = 2 sup ПҮ1                sup ПҮ2            .                   (104)
                                       t       |E(t)| t          |E(t)|

Having generated the 2 sequences of spiking times at the graphвҖҷs scale, we run our algorithm
playing the events in order of appearance, attributing the location of the events by sampling
uniformly one node if the event is a gradient step or sampling uniformly an edge in E(t) if it is a
communication.



H.2   P SEUDO C ODE

We keep the notations introduced in Eq. 3 and recall the following constant values specified in
Appendix D.4:
            p                         p            p                                q
     О· = 18 LОҪ Оі = 4L    1
                                Оҙ = 14 LОҪ Оұ = 14 LОҪ ОІ = 21                   Оё = 21 LОҪ
            p                                      p                  q
     О·Мғ = 81 LОҪ ОіМғ = 4вҲҡ1ОҪL ОҙМғ = 1           ОұМғ = 81 LОҪ ОІМғ = 2ПҮвҲ—1 [Оӣ] LОҪ ОҪ = Вө2


                                                                  27
  Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


  For the sake of completeness, we also specify the matrix A describing the linear ODE 6:
                                   пЈ«                                  пЈ¶
                                     вҲ’О·      О·      0    0   0     0
                                   пЈ¬ О·Мғ     вҲ’О·Мғ     0    0   0     0 пЈ·
                                   пЈ¬                                  пЈ·
                                   пЈ¬ 0       0     вҲ’Оұ Оұ 0          0 пЈ·
                              A=пЈ¬                                                                     (105)
                                   пЈ¬ 0 вҲ’ОёОҪ вҲ’Оё 0 вҲ’Оё                 0 пЈ·пЈ·
                                   пЈӯ 0       0      0    0 вҲ’Оұ Оұ пЈё
                                      0      0      0    0 ОұМғ вҲ’ОұМғ
  As described in Appendix H.1, we call PPPspikes the process mentioned above, returning the
  ordered sequence of events and time of spikes of the two P.P.Ps. Then, we can write the pseudo-
  code of our implementation of the DADAO optimizer in Algorithm 2.

   Algorithm 2: Pseudo-code of our implementation of DADAO on a single machine.
   Input: On each machine i вҲҲ {1, ..., n}, an oracle able to evaluate вҲҮfi , Parameters
            Вө, L, ПҮвҲ—1 , tmax , n, О»вҲ— .
              The sequence of time-varying graphs E(t).
 1 Initialize on each machine i вҲҲ {1, ..., n}:

 2     Set X (i) = (xi , xМғi , yМғi ) and Y (i) = (yi , zi , zМғi ) to 0 ;
 3     Set constants ОҪ, О·Мғ, О·, Оі, Оұ, ОұМғ, Оё, Оҙ, ОҙМғ, ОІ, ОІМғ using Вө, L, ПҮвҲ—1 ;
 4     Set A;
 5     T (i) вҶҗ 0 ;
                                                                    вҲ—
 6 ListEvents, ListTimes вҶҗ PPPspikes(n, О» , tmax ) ;
 7 nevents вҶҗ |ListEvents| ;
 8 for k вҲҲ [[1, nevents ]] do
 9     if ListEvents[k] is to take a gradient step then
10          i вҲј U ([[1,
                       n]]) ;
                 (i)                                                   X (i)
               X                                              (i)
11                      вҶҗ   exp   (ListTimes[k]        вҲ’   T      )A             ;
               Y (i)                                                     Y (i)
12          xi вҶҗ xi вҲ’ Оі (вҲҮfi (xi ) вҲ’ ОҪxi вҲ’ yМғi );
13          xМғi вҶҗ xМғi вҲ’ ОіМғ (вҲҮfi (xi ) вҲ’ ОҪxi вҲ’ yМғi );
14          yМғi вҶҗ yМғi + (Оҙ + ОҙМғ) (вҲҮfi (xi ) вҲ’ ОҪxi вҲ’ yМғi );
15          T (i) вҶҗ ListTimes[k] ;
16     else if ListEvents[k] is to take a communication step then
17          (i, j) вҲј  U (E(ListTimes[k])) ;

               X (i)                                          (i)
                                                                       X (i)
18               (i)    вҶҗ exp (ListTimes[k] вҲ’ T )A                         (i)   ;
              Y (j)                                                      Y (j)
               X                                                        X
19               (j)    вҶҗ exp (ListTimes[k] вҲ’ T (j) )A                            ;
               Y                                                         Y (j)
20          mij вҶҗ (yi + zi вҲ’ yj вҲ’ zj );                                            // Message exchanged.
21          zi вҶҗ zi вҲ’ ОІmij ;
22          zМғi вҶҗ zМғi вҲ’ ОІМғmij ;
23          zj вҶҗ zj + ОІmij ;
24          zМғj вҶҗ zМғj + ОІМғmij ;
25          T (i) вҶҗ ListTimes[k];
26          T (j) вҶҗ ListTimes[k];
                                              вҲ—
27 return (xi )1вүӨiвүӨn , the estimate of x on each worker i.


                                                      28
